 TITLE I
 General Provisions
Article
 1 Short title and definitions (§§ 1--2-b.)
 2 Dignity for all students (§§ 10-18.)
 3 Education department (§§ 101-187.)
 Part I - General provisions (§§ 101-140.)
 Part IV - Scientific and historic places (§ 174.)
 Part V - Education department optional retirement program
 (§§ 180-187.)
 5 University of the state of New York (§§ 201-292.)
 Part I - General organization (§§ 201-239.)
 Part 1-A - Cody center for autism and developmental
 disabilities (§§ 240-243)
 Part II - Libraries (§§ 245-285.)
 Part III - Federal funds for vocational education
 (§§ 290-292.)
 6 Enacted without article heading. (§§ 293-297.)
 7 Commissioner of education (§§ 301-318.)
 7-A Standardized testing (§§ 340-348.)
 8 State University and state financial assistance for higher
 education (§§ 350-365.)
 8-A State university construction fund (§§ 370-384.)
 8-B State university optional retirement program (§§ 390-397.)
 8-C Special annuity (§§ 398--399-A.)
 9 School buildings and sites (§§ 401-420.)
 10 New York city educational construction fund (§§ 450-471.)
 10-B City of Yonkers educational construction fund (§§ 475-495.)
 10-C Winter sports education trust fund (§ 495-a.)
 10-D Regional college cooperative services board (§§ 496-500.)
 11 State teachers' retirement system for public school teachers
 (§§ 501-539.)
 12 Health and safety grants for nonpublic school children
 (§§ 549-553.)
 12-A Arthur O. Eve Elementary and secondary education opportunity
 program (§§ 559-563.)
 13 Higher education student financial aid programs
 (§§ 601--609-a.)
 13-A Liberty scholarships (§§ 610-612.)
 13-B Student lending accountability, transparency and enforcement
 act (§§ 620-632.)
 14 New York state higher education services corporation
 (§§ 651-689.)
 Part I - Corporate structure (§§ 651-660.)
 Part II - Student financial aid (§§ 661--679-e.)
 Subpart I - General provisions (§§ 661--665-a.)
 Subpart II - General awards (§§ 667--669-g.)
 Subpart III - Academic performance awards (§§ 670-679.)
 Subpart IV - Other awards (§§ 679-a--679-e.)
 Part III - Student loans (§§ 680--683-b.)
 Part IV - Miscellaneous provisions (§§ 686-689.)
 Part V - The New York higher education loan program
 (§§ 690-694-b.)
 14-A New York state college choice tuition savings program
 (§§ 695--695-g.)
 15 Text-books (§§ 701-705.)
 15-A School library materials (§§ 711-712.)
 15-B Higher education textbooks (§ 715.)
 16 Computer technology (§§ 751-755.)
 17 Instruction in certain subjects (§§ 801-816.)
 19 Medical and health service (§§ 901-918.)
 21 Vocational rehabilitation (§§ 1001-1009.)
 23 Career education in counties (§§ 1101-1116.)
 Part I - Vocational education and extension boards
 (§§ 1101-1107.)
 Part II - County commission for special education in
 Westchester County (§§ 1110-1116.)
 23-A Service centers for independent living (§§ 1120-1124.)
 23-B Child abuse in an educational setting (§§ 1125-1133.)
 24 New York state rural education research program act
 (§§ 1201-1207.)
 ARTICLE I
 SHORT TITLE AND DEFINITIONS
Section 1. Short title.
 2. Definitions.
 2-a. Release of directory information; access to institutions.
 2-b. Use of student social security numbers restricted.
 2-c. Release of student information to certain entities.
 2-d. Unauthorized release of personally identifiable
 information.
 Section 1. Short title. This chapter shall be known as the "Education
Law".
 § 2. Definitions. Wherever used in this chapter, the following terms
shall have the respective meanings hereinafter set forth or indicated:
 1. Academy. The term "academy" means an incorporated institution for
instruction in secondary education, and such high schools, academic
departments in union free school districts and similar unincorporated
schools as are admitted by the regents to the university as of academic
grade.
 2. College. The term "college" includes universities and other
institutions for higher education authorized to confer degrees.
 3. University. The term "university" means The University of the State
of New York.
 4. Regents. The term "regents" means board of regents of The
University of the State of New York.
 5. Commissioner. The term "commissioner" means commissioner of
education of the state of New York.
 6. Department. The term "department" means education department of the
state of New York.
 7. Secondary education. The term "secondary education" means
instruction of academic grade, between the elementary grades and the
college or university.
 8. Higher education. The term "higher education" means education in
advance of secondary education, and includes the work of colleges,
universities, professional and technical schools, and educational work
connected with libraries, museums, university and educational extension
courses and similar agencies.
 9. Trustee. The term "trustees," when not used in reference to a
school district, includes directors, managers or other similar members
of the governing board of an educational institution. The terms
"trustee" and "trustees", respectively, when used in reference to a
school district, shall include the plural or singular meaning, as the
case may be, unless otherwise specified.
 10. Parental relation. The term "persons in parental relation" to a
child includes the parents, guardians or other persons, whether one or
more, lawfully having the care, custody or control of such child,
including persons who have been designated pursuant to title fifteen-A
of article five of the general obligations law as persons in parental
relation to the child.
 11. Compulsory school ages. The term "child of compulsory school age"
means any child between six and sixteen years of age lawfully required
to attend upon instruction.
 12. School authorities. The term "school authorities" means the
trustees, or board of education, or corresponding officers, whether one
or more, and by whatever name known, of a city school district, or other
school district however created.
 13. School officer. The term "school officer" means a clerk,
collector, or treasurer of any school district; a trustee; a member of a
board of education or other body in control of the schools by whatever
name known in a union free school district, central school district,
central high school district, or in a city school district; a
superintendent of schools; a district superintendent; a supervisor of
attendance or attendance officer; or other elective or appointive
officer in a school district whose duties generally relate to the
administration of affairs connected with the public school system.
 14. Board of education. The term "board of education" shall include by
whatever name known the governing body charged with the general control,
management and responsibility of the schools of a union free school
district, central school district, central high school district, or of a
city school district.
 15. School year. The term "school year" means the period commencing on
the first day of July in each year and ending on the thirtieth day of
June next following.
 16. City school district. a. The following school districts are hereby
designated and declared to be city school districts: (1) Any school
district coterminous with a city on January first, nineteen hundred
fifty; (2) any school district part of which was without and part of
which was within a city on January first, nineteen hundred fifty, and
which then contained the whole or the greater portion of the children of
the city between birth and eighteen years of age, as shown by the school
census; and (3) any school district wholly within, but not coterminous
with, a city on January first, nineteen hundred fifty, and which then
contained the greater portion of the children of the city between birth
and eighteen years of age, as shown by the school census.
 b. Whenever a city shall be created after January first, nineteen
hundred fifty, that school district shall be and become a city school
district which, on the effective date of the incorporation of such city,
is: (1) coterminous with the city; (2) partly without and partly within
the city and then contains the whole or the greater portion of the
children of the city between birth and eighteen years of age, as shown
by the school census; or (3) wholly within but not coterminous with the
city and then contains the greater portion of the children of the city
between birth and eighteen years of age, as shown by the school census.
 c. The corporate existence of any school district, which, by virtue of
the provisions of this subdivision, shall be and become a city school
district, shall continue, and any such school district thereafter shall
be governed by the provisions of this chapter applicable to city school
districts.
 * 17. State university. The term "state university" means the state
university of New York, as created by article eight of this chapter.
 * NB There are 2 sub 17's
 * 17. City. The term "city" means the city school district of such
city where the context clearly so indicates.
 * NB There are 2 sub 17's
 18. Minor or infant. The term "minor" or "infant" means a person who
has not attained the age of eighteen years.
 19. Expenditures. For purposes of computing aid to public school
districts, boards of cooperative educational services, nonpublic
elementary and secondary schools, public and cooperative library systems
or public and free association libraries pursuant to this chapter or any
other law, such aid shall be computed using state aid worksheets
developed pursuant to regulations of the commissioner, designed to
reflect use of the state comptroller's definition of expenditures to the
extent possible. Such worksheet definitions of expenditures shall be
used notwithstanding the fact that this chapter or other applicable law
may use terms such as cash expenditures, expenses, costs, paid,
payments, or other such terms.
 24. Career education. The term "career education" means organized
educational programs offering a sequence of courses which are directly
related to the preparation of individuals in paid or unpaid employment
in current or emerging occupations requiring other than a baccalaureate
or advanced degrees, and shall include vocational and occupational
education. Such programs shall include competency-based applied learning
which contributes to an individual's academic knowledge, higher-order
reasoning, and problem solving skills, work activities, general
employability skills, and the skills necessary for economic independence
as a productive and contributing member of society. Such term also
includes applied technology education. Except where the intent indicates
otherwise, the terms "vocational education" and "occupational education"
shall mean "career education."
 § 2-a. Release of directory information; access to institutions.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, if a
trustee, president, principal, or officer of any institution belonging
to the University of the State of New York, or a board of education of
any public school, in any city, union free, common or central school
district or the administrator of any non-public school of secondary
education receiving state funds permits the release of directory
information relating to pupils or permits access to school buildings,
school grounds or other school property to persons who inform pupils of
educational, occupational or career opportunities, such trustee,
president, principal, officer, board or administrator shall provide
access to directory information relating to pupils and access to such
school property on the same basis for official representatives of the
state militia and the armed forces of the United States for the purpose
of informing pupils of educational, occupational or career opportunities
within the state militia or armed forces of the United States. Pursuant
to this section, access provided to school property or directory
information shall not be used for purposes other than informing students
of educational, occupational or career opportunities.
 § 2-b. Use of student social security numbers restricted. No public or
private elementary or secondary school or college as defined in section
two of this article shall display any student's social security number
to identify such student for posting or public listing of grades, on
class rosters or other lists provided to teachers, on student
identification cards, in student directories or similar listings, or,
unless specifically authorized or required by law, for any public
identification purpose.
 § 2-c. Release of student information to certain entities. 1.
Definitions. As used in this section the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
 a. "Student information" shall mean personally identifiable
information and biometric records as such terms are defined in section
99.3 of title 34 of the code of federal regulations implementing the
Family Education Rights and Privacy Act, as such federal law and
regulations are from time to time amended, or any other individual
student records and shall also include de-identifiable information which
means a collection of data or information that has been altered with the
goal of making the student or students associated with such data or
information permanently unknowable.
 b. "Personally identifiable information" shall mean personally
identifiable information as defined in section 99.3 of title 34 of the
code of federal regulations implementing the Family Education Rights and
Privacy Act, section 1232-g of title 20 of the United States code, as
such federal law and regulations are from time to time amended.
 c. "Shared learning infrastructure service provider" or "SLISP" shall
mean any entity that collects, stores, organizes, or aggregates student
information and contracts with or enters into an agreement with the
department for the purposes of providing student information to a data
dashboard operator for use in a data dashboard. Provided that the term
SLISP shall not include boards of cooperative educational services or
regional information centers operated by boards of cooperative
educational services or other public entities.
 d. "Data dashboard" shall mean an electronic data system or hosted
software application or applications that is designed to utilize data
and information collected, stored, organized or aggregated by a SLISP
and that is designed to provide, through a contract between a New York
school district and a data dashboard operator, end users such as
educators, students and their families with access to customized student
information with the goal of supporting instruction and student
learning.
 e. "Data dashboard operator" shall mean any third party contractor
owning or operating a data dashboard that contracts or otherwise enters
into an agreement to utilize data and information from a SLISP.
 f. "Educational agency" shall mean any public school district, board
of cooperative educational services, special act school district, public
school kindergarten program, universal pre-kindergarten programs
authorized pursuant to section thirty-six hundred two-e of this chapter,
publicly funded pre-kindergarten programs, approved preschool special
education programs pursuant to section forty-four hundred ten of this
chapter, approved private school for the education of students with
disabilities and a state supported or state operated school subject to
the provisions of article eighty-five, eighty-seven or eighty-eight of
this chapter.
 g. "Student" shall mean any person attending an educational agency
identified in paragraph f of this subdivision.
 2. An educational agency may opt out of providing personally
identifiable information to a SLISP or data dashboard operator for the
purpose of creating data dashboards. An educational agency may at any
time request that any personally identifiable information associated
with such agency not be shared or provided to a SLISP or data dashboard
operator. Such request shall be made to the department and upon receipt
of such request, the department shall take all actions necessary to
prevent and prohibit the sharing or providing of such information to any
SLISP or data dashboard operator and that upon receipt of such request,
the department shall take actions to immediately ensure that any
personally identifiable information provided to any SLISP or data
dashboard operator is deleted from such SLISP or operator and destroyed
in a secure manner.
 3. The commissioner and the department are hereby prohibited from
providing any student information to a SLISP and the commissioner and
department shall take actions to immediately ensure that any student
information provided to any SLISP shall be deleted from such SLISP and
destroyed in a secure manner.
 § 2-d. Unauthorized release of personally identifiable information. 1.
Definitions. As used in this section the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
 a. "Building principal" means a building principal subject to annual
performance evaluation review under the provisions of section three
thousand twelve-c, section three thousand twelve-d, or section three
thousand twelve-e of this chapter.
 b. "Classroom teacher" means a teacher subject to annual performance
evaluation review under the provisions of section three thousand
twelve-c, section three thousand twelve-d, or section three thousand
twelve-e of this chapter.
 c. "Educational agency" means a school district, board of cooperative
educational services, school, or the education department.
 d. "Personally identifiable information," as applied to student data,
means personally identifiable information as defined in section 99.3 of
title thirty-four of the code of federal regulations implementing the
family educational rights and privacy act, section twelve hundred
thirty-two-g of title twenty of the United States code, and, as applied
to teacher or principal data, means "personally identifying information"
as such term is used in subdivision ten of section three thousand
twelve-c of this chapter.
 e. "School" means any public elementary or secondary school, universal
pre-kindergarten program authorized pursuant to section thirty-six
hundred two-e of this chapter, an approved provider of preschool special
education, any other publicly funded pre-kindergarten program, a school
serving children in a special act school district as defined in section
four thousand one of this chapter, an approved private school for the
education of students with disabilities, a state-supported school
subject to the provisions of article eighty-five of this chapter, or a
state-operated school subject to the provisions of article eighty-seven
or eight-eight of this chapter.
 f. "Student" means any person attending or seeking to enroll in an
educational agency.
 g. "Eligible student" means a student eighteen years or older.
 h. "Parent" means a parent, legal guardian, or person in parental
relation to a student.
 i. "Student data" means personally identifiable information from
student records of an educational agency.
 j. "Teacher or principal data" means personally identifiable
information from the records of an educational agency relating to the
annual professional performance reviews of classroom teachers or
principals that is confidential and not subject to release under the
provisions of section three thousand twelve-c of this chapter.
 k. "Third party contractor" shall mean any person or entity, other
than an educational agency, that receives student data or teacher or
principal data from an educational agency pursuant to a contract or
other written agreement for purposes of providing services to such
educational agency, including but not limited to data management or
storage services, conducting studies for or on behalf of such
educational agency, or audit or evaluation of publicly funded programs.
Such term shall include an educational partnership organization that
receives student and/or teacher or principal data from a school district
to carry out its responsibilities pursuant to section two hundred
eleven-e of this title and is not an educational agency as defined in
paragraph c of this subdivision, and a not-for-profit corporation or
other non-profit organization, other than an educational agency.
 2. Chief privacy officer. a. The commissioner shall appoint a chief
privacy officer within the department for a term of three years, which
may be renewed for three-year terms thereafter. The chief privacy
officer shall be qualified by training or experience in state and
federal education privacy laws and regulations, civil liberties,
information technology, and information security. The chief privacy
officer shall report to the commissioner on matters affecting privacy
and the security of student, teacher, and principal data.
 b. The functions of the chief privacy officer shall include, but not
be limited to:
 (1) promoting the implementation of sound information practices for
privacy and security of student data or teacher or principal data;
 (2) assisting the commissioner in handling instances of data breaches
as well as assisting the commissioner in due process proceedings
regarding any alleged breaches of student data or teacher or principal
data;
 (3) providing assistance to educational agencies within the state on
minimum standards and best practices associated with privacy and the
security of student data or teacher or principal data;
 (4) formulating a procedure within the department whereby parents,
students, teachers, superintendents, school board members, principals,
and other persons or entities the chief privacy officer determines is
appropriate, may request information pertaining to student data or
teacher or principal data in a timely and efficient manner;
 (5) assisting the commissioner in establishing a protocol for the
submission of complaints of possible breaches of student data or teacher
or principal data;
 (6) making recommendations as needed regarding privacy and the
security of student data on behalf of the department to the governor,
the speaker of the assembly, the temporary president of the senate, and
the chairs of the senate and assembly education committees; and
 (7) issuing an annual report on data privacy and security activities
and progress, the number and disposition of reported breaches, if any,
and a summary of any complaint submitted pursuant to subparagraph five
of this paragraph.
 c. The chief privacy officer shall have the power to:
 (1) access all records, reports, audits, reviews, documents, papers,
recommendations, and other materials maintained by an educational agency
that relate to student data or teacher or principal data;
 (2) to review and comment upon any department program, proposal,
grant, or contract that involves the processing of student data or
teacher or principal data before the commissioner begins or awards the
program, proposal, grant, or contract; and
 (3) any other powers that the commissioner shall deem appropriate.
 3. Parents bill of rights for data privacy and security. a. A parents
bill of rights for data privacy and security shall be published on the
website of each educational agency and shall be included with every
contract an educational agency enters into with a third party contractor
where the third party contractor receives student data or teacher or
principal data.
 b. The parents bill of rights for data privacy and security shall
state in clear and plain English terms that:
 (1) A student's personally identifiable information cannot be sold or
released for any commercial purposes;
 (2) Parents have the right to inspect and review the complete contents
of their child's education record;
 (3) State and federal laws protect the confidentiality of personally
identifiable information, and safeguards associated with industry
standards and best practices, including but not limited to, encryption,
firewalls, and password protection, must be in place when data is stored
or transferred;
 (4) A complete list of all student data elements collected by the
State is available for public review at (insert website address here) or
by writing to (insert mailing address here); and
 (5) Parents have the right to have complaints about possible breaches
of student data addressed. Complaints should be directed to (insert
phone number, email and mailing address here).
 c. The parents bill of rights for data privacy and security shall
include supplemental information for each contract an educational agency
enters into with a third party contractor where the third party
contractor receives student data or teacher or principal data. Such
supplemental information shall be developed by the educational agency
and shall include:
 (1) the exclusive purposes for which the student data or teacher or
principal data will be used;
 (2) how the third party contractor will ensure that the
subcontractors, persons or entities that the third party contractor will
share the student data or teacher or principal data with, if any, will
abide by data protection and security requirements;
 (3) when the agreement expires and what happens to the student data or
teacher or principal data upon expiration of the agreement;
 (4) if and how a parent, student, eligible student, teacher or
principal may challenge the accuracy of the student data or teacher or
principal data that is collected; and
 (5) where the student data or teacher or principal data will be stored
(described in such a manner as to protect data security), and the
security protections taken to ensure such data will be protected,
including whether such data will be encrypted.
 d. The chief privacy officer, with input from parents and other
education and expert stakeholders, shall develop additional elements of
the parents bill of rights for data privacy and security. The
commissioner shall promulgate regulations for a comment period whereby
parents and other members of the public may submit comments and
suggestions to the chief privacy officer to be considered for inclusion.
The parents bill of rights for data privacy and security shall be
completed within one hundred twenty days after the effective date of
this section.
 4. Data collection transparency and restrictions. a. The department
shall promote the least intrusive data collection policies practicable
that advance the goals of improving academic achievement, empowering
parents with information and advancing efficient and effective school
operations while minimizing the collection and transmission of
personally identifiable information.
 b. The chief privacy officer shall develop, regularly update and make
publicly available on the department's website and through such
additional methods as may facilitate accessibility an inventory and
understandable description of the student, teacher and principal data
elements collected with an explanation and/or legal or regulatory
authority outlining the reasons such data elements are collected and the
intended uses and disclosure of the data.
 c. Except as otherwise specifically authorized by law, the department
shall only collect personally identifiable information relating to an
educational purpose.
 d. The department may only require districts to submit personally
identifiable information, including data on disability status and
student suspensions, where such release is required by law or otherwise
authorized under the family educational rights and privacy act, 20
U.S.C. section 1232g, and the personal privacy protection law.
 e. Except as required by law or in the case of educational enrollment
data, school districts shall not report to the department the following
student data elements:
 (1) juvenile delinquency records;
 (2) criminal records;
 (3) medical and health records; and
 (4) student biometric information.
 f. Personally identifiable information maintained by educational
agencies, including data provided to third-party contractors and their
assignees, shall not be sold or used for marketing purposes.
 g. Parents shall have the right to inspect and review their child's
educational record including any student data stored or maintained by an
educational agency. The department shall develop policies for school
districts that:
 (1) provide for annual notification to parents of their right to
request student data;
 (2) ensure security when providing student data to parents, including
that only authorized individuals receive such data; and
 (3) specify a reasonable amount of time in which school districts
should respond to such requests.
 5. Data security and privacy standards. a. The commissioner, in
consultation with the chief privacy officer, shall promulgate
regulations establishing standards for educational agency data security
and privacy policies and shall develop one or more model policies for
use by educational agencies. The commissioner shall seek the input of
experts, including those from security, cyber-security and fields in
addition to education that have experience with personal data
protection, in developing such standards and policies.
 b. The standards for data security and privacy policies shall include,
but not be limited to:
 (1) data privacy protections, including criteria for determining
whether a proposed use of personally identifiable information would
benefit students and educational agencies, and processes to ensure that
personally identifiable information is not included in public reports or
other public documents;
 (2) data security protections, including data systems monitoring, data
encryption, incident response plans, limitations on access to personally
identifiable information, safeguards to ensure personally identifiable
information is not accessed by unauthorized persons when transmitted
over communication networks, and destruction of personally identifiable
information when no longer needed; and
 (3) application of all such restrictions, requirements and safeguards
to third-party contractors.
 c. Following promulgation of regulations by the commissioner pursuant
to paragraph a of this subdivision each educational agency shall ensure
that it has a policy on data security and privacy in place that is
consistent with applicable state and federal laws and applied to student
data and, where applicable, to teacher or principal data. Such policy
shall be published on the educational agency's website, if it exists,
and notice of such policy shall be provided to all officers and
employees of the educational agency.
 d. As applied to student data, such policy shall provide all
protections afforded to parents and persons in parental relationships,
or students where applicable, required under the family educational
rights and privacy act, 20 U.S.C. section 1232g, where applicable the
individuals with disabilities education act, sections fourteen hundred,
et seq. of title twenty of the United States code, and the federal
regulations implementing such statutes. Each educational agency shall
ensure that it has in place provisions in its contracts with third party
contractors or in separate data sharing and confidentiality agreements
that require that confidentiality of the shared student data or teacher
or principal data be maintained in accordance with federal and state law
and the educational agency's policy on data security and privacy.
 e. Each educational agency that enters into a contract or other
written agreement with a third party contractor under which the third
party contractor will receive student data or teacher or principal data
shall ensure that such contract or agreement includes a data security
and privacy plan that outlines how all state, federal, and local data
security and privacy contract requirements will be implemented over the
life of the contract, consistent with the educational agency's policy on
data security and privacy. Such plan shall include, but shall not be
limited to, a signed copy of the parents bill of rights for data privacy
and security, and a requirement that any officers or employees of the
third party contractor and its assignees who have access to student data
or teacher or principal data have received or will receive training on
the federal and state law governing confidentiality of such data prior
to receiving access.
 f. Each third party contractor that enters into a contract or other
written agreement with an educational agency under which the third party
contractor will receive student data or teacher or principal data shall:
 (1) limit internal access to education records to those individuals
that are determined to have legitimate educational interests;
 (2) not use the education records for any other purposes than those
explicitly authorized in its contract;
 (3) except for authorized representatives of the third party
contractor to the extent they are carrying out the contract, not
disclose any personally identifiable information to any other party:
 (i) without the prior written consent of the parent or eligible
student; or
 (ii) unless required by statute or court order and the party provides
a notice of the disclosure to the department, district board of
education, or institution that provided the information no later than
the time the information is disclosed, unless providing notice of the
disclosure is expressly prohibited by the statute or court order;
 (4) maintain reasonable administrative, technical and physical
safeguards to protect the security, confidentiality and integrity of
personally identifiable student information in its custody;
 (5) uses encryption technology to protect data while in motion or in
its custody from unauthorized disclosure using a technology or
methodology specified by the secretary of the United States department
of health and human services in guidance issued under Section
13402(H)(2) of Public Law 111-5.
 6. Breach and unauthorized release of personally identifiable
information. a. Each third party contractor that receives student data
or teacher or principal data pursuant to a contract or other written
agreement with an educational agency shall be required to notify such
educational agency of any breach of security resulting in an
unauthorized release of such data by the third party contractor or its
assignees in violation of applicable state or federal law, the parents
bill of rights for student data privacy and security, the data privacy
and security policies of the educational agency and/or binding
contractual obligations relating to data privacy and security, in the
most expedient way possible and without unreasonable delay. The
educational agency shall, upon notification by the third party
contractor, be required to report to the chief privacy officer any such
breach of security and unauthorized release of such data. The chief
privacy officer shall, upon belief that such breach and unauthorized
release constitutes criminal conduct, report such breach and
unauthorized release to law enforcement in the most expedient way
possible and without unreasonable delay.
 b. In the case of an unauthorized release of student data, the
educational agency shall notify the parent or eligible student of the
unauthorized release of student data that includes personally
identifiable information from the student records of such student in the
most expedient way possible and without unreasonable delay. In the case
of an unauthorized release of teacher or principal data, the educational
agency shall notify each affected teacher or principal of the
unauthorized release of data that includes personally identifiable
information from the teacher or principal's annual professional
performance review in the most expedient way possible and without
unreasonable delay.
 c. In the case of notification to a parent, eligible student, teacher
or principal under paragraph b of this subdivision due to the
unauthorized release of student data by a third-party contractor or its
assignee, the third-party contractor shall promptly reimburse the
educational agency for the full cost of such notification.
 d. Each violation of a third party contractor pursuant to paragraph a
of this subdivision shall be punishable by a civil penalty of the
greater of five thousand dollars or up to ten dollars per student,
teacher, and principal whose data was released, provided that the latter
amount shall not exceed the maximum penalty under paragraph (a) of
subdivision six of section eight hundred ninety-nine-aa of the general
business law.
 e. If the chief privacy officer determines that a third party
contractor or its assignee, in violation of applicable state or federal
law, the data privacy and security policies of the educational agency
provided by such educational agency to the third party contractor and/or
binding contractual obligations relating to data privacy and security,
has released any student data or teacher or principal data received from
an educational agency to any person or entity not authorized by law to
receive such data pursuant to a lawful subpoena or otherwise, the chief
privacy officer, after affording the third party contractor with notice
and an opportunity to be heard, shall be authorized to:
 (1) order that the third party contractor be precluded from accessing
student data or teacher or principal data, as applicable, from the
educational agency from which the contractor obtained the data that was
improperly disclosed for a fixed period of up to five years; and/or
 (2) order that a third party contractor or assignee who knowingly or
recklessly allowed for the unauthorized release of student data or
teacher or principal data be precluded from accessing student data or
teacher or principal data from any educational agency in the state for a
fixed period of up to five years; and/or
 (3) order that a third party contractor or assignee who knowingly or
recklessly allowed for the unauthorized release of student data or
teacher or principal data shall not be deemed a responsible bidder or
offerer on any contract with an educational agency that involves the
sharing of student data or teacher or principal data, as applicable for
purposes of the provisions of section one hundred three of the general
municipal law or paragraph c of subdivision ten of section one hundred
sixty-three of the state finance law, as applicable, for a fixed period
of up to five years; and/or
 (4) require the third party contractor to provide training at the
contractor's expense on the federal and state law governing
confidentiality of student data and/or teacher or principal data and the
provisions of this section to all its officers and employees with access
to such data, prior to being permitted to receive subsequent access to
such data from the educational agency from which the contractor obtained
the data that was improperly disclosed or from any educational agency;
and/or
 (5) if it is determined that the unauthorized release of student data
or teacher or principal data on the part of the third party contractor
or assignee was inadvertent and done without intent, knowledge,
recklessness or gross negligence, the commissioner may determine that no
penalty be issued upon the third party contractor.
 7. Implementation and enforcement. a. The commissioner, in
consultation with the chief privacy officer, shall promulgate
regulations establishing procedures to implement the provisions of this
section, including but not limited to procedures for the submission of
complaints from parents and/or persons in parental relation to students,
classroom teachers or building principals, or other staff of an
educational agency, making allegations of improper disclosure of student
data and/or teacher or principal data by a third party contractor or its
officers, employees or assignees that may be subject to the sanctions
set forth in subdivision six of this section. Upon receipt of a
complaint or other information indicating that such an improper
disclosure by a third party contractor may have occurred, the chief
privacy officer shall be authorized to investigate, visit, examine and
inspect the third party contractor's facilities and records and obtain
documentation from, or require the testimony of, any party relating to
the alleged improper disclosure of student data or teacher or principal
data.
 b. Except as provided under paragraph d of subdivision six of this
section, each violation of any provision of this section by a third
party contractor or its assignee shall be punishable by a civil penalty
of up to one thousand dollars; a second violation by the same third
party contractor involving the same student data or teacher or principal
data shall be punishable by a civil penalty of up to five thousand
dollars; any subsequent violation by the same third party contractor
involving the same student date or teacher or principal data shall be
punishable by a civil penalty of up to ten thousand dollars. Each
violation of this subdivision shall be considered a separate violation
for purposes of civil penalties and the total penalty shall not exceed
the maximum penalty under paragraph (a) of subdivision six of section
eight hundred ninety-nine-aa of the general business law.
 c. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as creating a
private right of action against the department or an educational agency.
 d. Nothing in this section shall limit the administrative use of
student data or teacher or principal data by a person acting exclusively
in the person's capacity as an employee of an educational agency or of
the state or any of its political subdivisions, any court or the federal
government that is otherwise required by law.
 ARTICLE 2
 DIGNITY FOR ALL STUDENTS
Section 10. Legislative intent.
 11. Definitions.
 12. Discrimination and harassment prohibited.
 13. Policies and guidelines.
 14. Commissioner's responsibilities.
 15. Reporting by commissioner.
 16. Protection of people who report harassment, bullying or
 discrimination.
 17. Application.
 18. Severability and construction.
 § 10. Legislative intent. The legislature finds that students' ability
to learn and to meet high academic standards, and a school's ability to
educate its students, are compromised by incidents of discrimination or
harassment including bullying, taunting or intimidation. It is hereby
declared to be the policy of the state to afford all students in public
schools an environment free of discrimination and harassment. The
purpose of this article is to foster civility in public schools and to
prevent and prohibit conduct which is inconsistent with a school's
educational mission.
 § 11. Definitions. For the purposes of this article, the following
terms shall have the following meanings:
 1. "School property" shall mean in or within any building, structure,
athletic playing field, playground, parking lot, or land contained
within the real property boundary line of a public elementary or
secondary school; or in or on a school bus, as defined in section one
hundred forty-two of the vehicle and traffic law.
 2. "School function" shall mean a school-sponsored extra-curricular
event or activity.
 3. "Disability" shall mean disability as defined in subdivision
twenty-one of section two hundred ninety-two of the executive law.
 4. "Employee" shall mean employee as defined in subdivision three of
section eleven hundred twenty-five of this title.
 5. "Sexual orientation" shall mean actual or perceived
heterosexuality, homosexuality or bisexuality.
 6. "Gender" shall mean actual or perceived sex and shall include a
person's gender identity or expression.
 7. "Harassment" and "bullying" shall mean the creation of a hostile
environment by conduct or by threats, intimidation or abuse, including
cyberbullying, that (a) has or would have the effect of unreasonably and
substantially interfering with a student's educational performance,
opportunities or benefits, or mental, emotional or physical well-being;
or (b) reasonably causes or would reasonably be expected to cause a
student to fear for his or her physical safety; or (c) reasonably causes
or would reasonably be expected to cause physical injury or emotional
harm to a student; or (d) occurs off school property and creates or
would foreseeably create a risk of substantial disruption within the
school environment, where it is foreseeable that the conduct, threats,
intimidation or abuse might reach school property. Acts of harassment
and bullying shall include, but not be limited to, those acts based on a
person's actual or perceived race, color, weight, national origin,
ethnic group, religion, religious practice, disability, sexual
orientation, gender or sex. For the purposes of this definition the term
"threats, intimidation or abuse" shall include verbal and non-verbal
actions.
 8. "Cyberbullying" shall mean harassment or bullying as defined in
subdivision seven of this section, including paragraphs (a), (b), (c)
and (d) of such subdivision, where such harassment or bullying occurs
through any form of electronic communication.
 9. "Race" shall, for the purposes of this article include traits
historically associated with race, including but not limited to, hair
texture and protective hairstyles.
 10. "Protective hairstyles" shall include, but not be limited to, such
hairstyles as braids, locks, and twists.
 § 12. Discrimination and harassment prohibited. 1. No student shall be
subjected to harassment or bullying by employees or students on school
property or at a school function; nor shall any student be subjected to
discrimination based on a person's actual or perceived race, color,
weight, national origin, ethnic group, religion, religious practice,
disability, sexual orientation, gender, or sex by school employees or
students on school property or at a school function. Nothing in this
subdivision shall be construed to prohibit a denial of admission into,
or exclusion from, a course of instruction based on a person's gender
that would be permissible under section thirty-two hundred one-a or
paragraph (a) of subdivision two of section twenty-eight hundred
fifty-four of this chapter and title IX of the Education Amendments of
1972 (20 U.S.C. section 1681, et. seq.), or to prohibit, as
discrimination based on disability, actions that would be permissible
under section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.
 2. An age-appropriate version of the policy outlined in subdivision
one of this section, written in plain-language, shall be included in the
code of conduct adopted by boards of education and the trustees or sole
trustee pursuant to section twenty-eight hundred one of this chapter and
a summary of such policy shall be included in any summaries required by
such section twenty-eight hundred one.
 § 13. Policies and guidelines. The board of education and the trustees
or sole trustee of every school district shall create policies,
procedures and guidelines that shall include, but not be limited to:
 1. Policies and procedures intended to create a school environment
that is free from harassment, bullying and discrimination, that include
but are not limited to provisions which:
 a. identify the principal, superintendent or the principal's or
superintendent's designee as the school employee charged with receiving
reports of harassment, bullying and discrimination;
 b. enable students and parents to make an oral or written report of
harassment, bullying or discrimination to teachers, administrators and
other school personnel that the school district deems appropriate;
 c. require school employees who witness harassment, bullying or
discrimination, or receive an oral or written report of harassment,
bullying or discrimination, to promptly orally notify the principal,
superintendent or the principal's or superintendent's designee not later
than one school day after such school employee witnesses or receives a
report of harassment, bullying or discrimination, and to file a written
report with the principal, superintendent or the principal or
superintendent's designee not later than two school days after making
such oral report;
 d. require the principal, superintendent or the principal's or
superintendent's designee to lead or supervise the thorough
investigation of all reports of harassment, bullying and discrimination,
and to ensure that such investigation is completed promptly after
receipt of any written reports made under this section;
 e. require the school, when an investigation reveals any such verified
harassment, bullying or discrimination, to take prompt actions
reasonably calculated to end the harassment, bullying or discrimination,
eliminate any hostile environment, create a more positive school culture
and climate, prevent recurrence of the behavior, and ensure the safety
of the student or students against whom such harassment, bullying or
discrimination was directed. Such actions shall be consistent with the
guidelines created pursuant to subdivision four of this section;
 f. prohibit retaliation against any individual who, in good faith,
reports, or assists in the investigation of, harassment, bullying or
discrimination;
 g. include a school strategy to prevent harassment, bullying and
discrimination;
 h. require the principal to make a regular report on data and trends
related to harassment, bullying and discrimination to the
superintendent;
 i. require the principal, superintendent or the principal's or
superintendent's designee, to notify promptly the appropriate local law
enforcement agency when such principal, superintendent or the
principal's or superintendent's designee, believes that any harassment,
bullying or discrimination constitutes criminal conduct;
 j. include appropriate references to the provisions of the school
district's code of conduct adopted pursuant to section twenty-eight
hundred one of this chapter that are relevant to harassment, bullying
and discrimination;
 k. require each school, at least once during each school year, to
provide all school employees, students and parents with a written or
electronic copy of the school district's policies created pursuant to
this section, or a plain-language summary thereof, including
notification of the process by which students, parents and school
employees may report harassment, bullying and discrimination. This
subdivision shall not be construed to require additional distribution of
such policies and guidelines if they are otherwise distributed to school
employees, students and parents;
 l. maintain current versions of the school district's policies created
pursuant to this section on the school district's internet website, if
one exists;
 2. Guidelines to be used in school training programs to discourage the
development of harassment, bullying and discrimination, and to make
school employees aware of the effects of harassment, bullying,
cyberbullying and discrimination on students and that are designed:
 a. to raise the awareness and sensitivity of school employees to
potential harassment, bullying and discrimination, and
 b. to enable employees to prevent and respond to harassment, bullying
and discrimination; and
 3. Guidelines relating to the development of nondiscriminatory
instructional and counseling methods, and requiring that at least one
staff member at every school be thoroughly trained to handle human
relations in the areas of race, color, weight, national origin, ethnic
group, religion, religious practice, disability, sexual orientation,
gender, and sex; and
 4. Guidelines relating to the development of measured, balanced and
age-appropriate responses to instances of harassment, bullying or
discrimination by students, with remedies and procedures following a
progressive model that make appropriate use of intervention, discipline
and education, vary in method according to the nature of the behavior,
the developmental age of the student and the student's history of
problem behaviors, and are consistent with the district's code of
conduct; and
 5. Training required by this section shall address the social patterns
of harassment, bullying and discrimination, as defined in section eleven
of this article, including but not limited to those acts based on a
person's actual or perceived race, color, weight, national origin,
ethnic group, religion, religious practice, disability, sexual
orientation, gender or sex, the identification and mitigation of
harassment, bullying and discrimination, and strategies for effectively
addressing problems of exclusion, bias and aggression in educational
settings.
 § 14. Commissioner's responsibilities. The commissioner shall:
 1. Provide direction, which may include development of model policies
and, to the extent possible, direct services, to school districts
related to preventing harassment, bullying and discrimination and to
fostering an environment in every school where all children can learn
free of manifestations of bias;
 2. Provide grants, from funds appropriated for such purpose, to local
school districts to assist them in implementing the guidelines set forth
in this section;
 3. Promulgate regulations to assist school districts in implementing
this article including, but not limited to, regulations to assist school
districts in developing measured, balanced, and age-appropriate
responses to violations of this policy, with remedies and procedures
following a progressive model that make appropriate use of intervention,
discipline and education and provide guidance related to the application
of regulations; and
 4. Provide guidance and educational materials to school districts
related to best practices in addressing cyberbullying and helping
families and communities work cooperatively with schools in addressing
cyberbullying, whether on or off school property or at or away from a
school function.
 5. The commissioner shall prescribe regulations that school
professionals applying on or after December thirty-first, two thousand
thirteen for a certificate or license, including but not limited to a
certificate or license valid for service as a classroom teacher, school
counselor, school psychologist, school social worker, school
administrator or supervisor or superintendent of schools shall, in
addition to all other certification or licensing requirements, have
completed training on the social patterns of harassment, bullying and
discrimination, as defined in section eleven of this article, including
but not limited to those acts based on a person's actual or perceived
race, color, weight, national origin, ethnic group, religion, religious
practice, disability, sexual orientation, gender or sex, the
identification and mitigation of harassment, bullying and
discrimination, and strategies for effectively addressing problems of
exclusion, bias and aggression in educational settings.
 § 15. Reporting by commissioner. The commissioner shall create a
procedure under which material incidents of harassment, bullying and
discrimination on school grounds or at a school function are reported to
the department at least on an annual basis. Such procedure shall provide
that such reports shall, wherever possible, also delineate the specific
nature of such incidents of harassment, bullying and discrimination,
provided that the commissioner may comply with the requirements of this
section through use of the existing uniform violent incident reporting
system. In addition the department may conduct research or undertake
studies to determine compliance throughout the state with the provisions
of this article.
 § 16. Protection of people who report harassment, bullying or
discrimination. Any person having reasonable cause to suspect that a
student has been subjected to harassment, bullying or discrimination, by
an employee or student, on school grounds or at a school function, who,
acting reasonably and in good faith, reports such information to school
officials, to the commissioner or to law enforcement authorities, acts
in compliance with paragraph e or i of subdivision one of section
thirteen of this article, or otherwise initiates, testifies,
participates or assists in any formal or informal proceedings under this
article, shall have immunity from any civil liability that may arise
from the making of such report or from initiating, testifying,
participating or assisting in such formal or informal proceedings, and
no school district or employee shall take, request or cause a
retaliatory action against any such person who, acting reasonably and in
good faith, either makes such a report or initiates, testifies,
participates or assists in such formal or informal proceedings.
 § 17. Application. Nothing in this article shall:
 1. Apply to private, religious or denominational educational
institutions; or
 2. Preclude or limit any right or cause of action provided under any
local, state or federal ordinance, law or regulation including but not
limited to any remedies or rights available under the Individuals With
Disabilities Education Act, Title VII of the Civil Rights Law of 1964,
section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 or the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990.
 § 18. Severability and construction. The provisions of this article
shall be severable, and if any court of competent jurisdiction declares
any phrase, clause, sentence or provision of this article to be invalid,
or its applicability to any government agency, person or circumstance is
declared invalid, the remainder of this article and its relevant
applicability shall not be affected. The provisions of this article
shall be liberally construed to give effect to the purposes thereof.
 ARTICLE 2-A
 JACK REID LAW: PROTECT ALL STUDENTS ACT
Section 19. Legislative intent.
 20. Definitions.
 21. Bullying and harassment prevention and response.
 22. Applicability.
 23. Severability and construction.
 § 19. Legislative intent. The legislature finds that students' ability
to learn and to meet high academic standards, and a school's ability to
educate its students, are compromised by incidents of harassment
including bullying, taunting or intimidation. It is hereby declared to
be the policy of the state to afford all students in nonpublic schools
an environment free of bullying and harassment. The purpose of this
article is to foster civility in nonpublic schools and to prevent and
prohibit conduct which is inconsistent with a school's educational
mission.
 § 20. Definitions. For the purposes of this article, the following
terms shall have the following meanings:
 1. "School property" shall mean in or within any building, structure,
athletic playing field, playground, parking lot, or land contained
within the real property boundary line of a nonpublic elementary or
secondary school; or in or on a school bus, as defined in section one
hundred forty-two of the vehicle and traffic law.
 2. "School function" shall mean a nonpublic school-sponsored
extra-curricular event or activity.
 3. "Harassment" and "bullying" shall mean the creation of a hostile
environment by conduct or by threats, intimidation or abuse, including
cyberbullying, that (a) has or would have the effect of unreasonably and
substantially interfering with a student's educational performance,
opportunities or benefits, or mental, emotional or physical well-being;
(b) reasonably causes or would reasonably be expected to cause a student
to fear for their physical safety; (c) reasonably causes or would
reasonably be expected to cause physical injury or emotional harm to a
student; or (d) occurs off school property and creates, or would
foreseeably create, a risk of substantial disruption within the school
environment, where it is foreseeable that the conduct, threats,
intimidation or abuse might reach school property. For purposes of this
definition, the term "threats, intimidation or abuse" shall include
verbal and non-verbal actions.
 4. "Cyberbullying" shall mean harassment or bullying as defined in
subdivision three of this section, where such harassment or bullying
occurs through any form of electronic communication.
 5. "School" shall mean any nonpublic elementary or secondary school.
 § 21. Bullying and harassment prevention and response. 1. No student
shall be subjected to harassment or bullying, including cyberbullying,
by other students on school property or at a school function.
 2. Every school, subject to this section, shall adopt a written in
plain-language and age-appropriate anti-bullying and harassment policy,
which must be published on the school's website or internal
parent/student portal and shared annually with employees, parents, and
students. Such policy shall include but not be limited to information on
how bullying and harassment is defined, how incidents will be reported,
investigated, and documented, and an age-appropriate process for
notifying the victim about the final outcome of the investigation.
 3. School employees who witness bullying or harassment, or receive an
oral or written report of bullying or harassment, shall promptly notify
the principal or head of school or the principal's or head of school's
designee, orally not later than one school day after such school
employee witnesses or receives a report of bullying and harassment, and
must file a written report with the principal or head of school's
designee not later than two school days after making the initial oral
report.
 4. Upon a report of bullying, harassment, or retaliation, the
principal or head of school, or the principal or head of school's
designee, must investigate promptly, communicate their findings with the
victim and take immediate steps and appropriate follow-up action
reasonably calculated to ensure that such conduct has stopped and ensure
the safety of the student or students including retaliation against any
individual who in good faith reports such bullying or assists in the
investigation.
 § 22. Applicability. Nothing in this section is intended to infringe
upon any right to exercise free expression or the free exercise of
religion or religiously based views protected under the First Amendment
to the United States Constitution, section eight of article I of the New
York State Constitution, sections three hundred thirteen and thirty-two
hundred one of this chapter, and subdivision eleven of section two
hundred ninety-six of the executive law.
 § 23. Severability and construction. The provisions of this article
shall be severable, and if any court of competent jurisdiction declares
any phrase, clause, sentence or provision of this article to be invalid,
or its applicability to any government agency, person or circumstance is
declared invalid, the remainder of this article and its relevant
applicability shall not be affected. The provisions of this article
shall be liberally construed to give effect to the purposes thereof.
 ARTICLE 3
 EDUCATION DEPARTMENT
 PART I
 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 101. Education department; regents of the university.
 101-a. Promulgation of rules and regulations of commissioner
 relating to the supervision of services for the public
 good conducted under supervision of school districts.
 101-b. Paperwork reduction.
 102. Associate and assistant commissioners.
 103. Divisions of department.
 104. Other officers and employees.
 105. Removals and suspensions.
 106. Joint seal.
 107. Compact for education.
 108. State education building.
 109. (Enacted without section heading).
 110. Refunds.
 111. Indian affairs.
 112. Children in care; responsibility for education.
 112-a. Students confined in certain facilities; responsibility
 for issuance of diplomas.
 113. Leaves of absence to professional members of the
 department.
 114. Reduction of salaries for investment in custodial
 accounts.
 140. Historical documentary heritage grants and aid.
 PART IV
 SCIENTIFIC AND HISTORIC PLACES
Section 174. Powers formerly exercised by the state board of geographic
 names.
 PART V
 EDUCATION DEPARTMENT OPTIONAL RETIREMENT PROGRAM
Section 180. Definitions.
 181. Education department optional retirement program
 established.
 182. Rates of contribution.
 183. Election.
 184. Survivor's benefits.
 185. Social security.
 186. State not liable for payment of benefits.
 187. Inconsistent provisions of other acts superseded.
 PART I
 GENERAL PROVISIONS
 § 101. Education department; regents of the university. There shall
continue to be in the state government an education department. The
department is charged with the general management and supervision of all
public schools and all of the educational work of the state, including
the operations of The University of the State of New York and the
exercise of all the functions of the education department, of The
University of the State of New York, of the regents of the university
and of the commissioner of education and the performance of all their
powers and duties, which were transferred to the education department by
section three hundred twelve of the state departments law or shall have
been prescribed by law before March sixteenth, nineteen hundred
twenty-seven, whether in terms vested in such department or university
or in any sub-department, division or bureau thereof or in such
commissioner, board or officer, and such functions, powers and duties
shall continue to be vested in the education department continued by
this chapter and shall continue to be exercised and performed therein by
or through the appropriate officer, sub-department, division or bureau
thereof, together with such functions, powers and duties as hereafter
may be conferred or imposed upon such department by law. All the
provisions of this chapter, in so far as they are not inconsistent with
the provisions of this chapter as hereby amended or may be made
applicable, shall apply to the education department continued by this
chapter as hereby amended and to The University of the State of New
York, the board of regents of the university, the commissioner of
education and to the divisions, bureaus and officers in such department.
The head of the department shall continue to be the regents of The
University of the State of New York, who shall appoint, and at pleasure
may remove, the commissioner of education. The commissioner shall
continue to be the chief administrative officer of the department. The
regents also may appoint and, at pleasure, remove a deputy commissioner
of education, who shall perform such duties as the regents may assign to
him by rule and who, in the absence or disability of the commissioner or
when a vacancy exists in the office of commissioner, shall exercise and
perform the functions, powers and duties conferred or imposed on the
commissioner by this chapter. The regents of The University of the
State of New York shall continue to constitute a board and The
University of the State of New York, which was continued under such name
by section two of article eleven of the constitution, shall continue to
be governed and all its corporate powers to be exercised by such board.
 § 101-a. Promulgation of rules and regulations of commissioner
relating to the supervision of services for the public good conducted
under supervision of school districts. The commissioner of education
shall promulgate rules and regulations for the supervision, by school
districts, of programs of performing services for the public good by
certain infants pursuant to the provisions of sections seven hundred
fifty-eight-a and 353.6 of the family court act. Such rules and
regulations, shall include, but not be limited to, provisions (a)
assuring that the conditions of work, including wages, meet the
standards therefor prescribed pursuant to the labor law; (b) affording
coverage to the child under the workers' compensation law; (c) assuring
that the entity receiving such services shall not utilize the same to
replace its regular employees; and (d) providing for reports to the
family court not less frequently than every six months, unless the
family court orders otherwise.
 § 101-b. Paperwork reduction. 1. The commissioner shall be authorized
to receive and accept reports, plans, applications and all other
information required to be reported by statute or regulation through
electronic means. The commissioner shall accept hard copy non-electronic
filings or submissions if the school district is able to demonstrate
that complying with electronic submission requirements would create
undue hardship for the school district or some other good cause exists
that would make electronic submission extremely impractical for the
school district.
 2. It shall be the duty of the commissioner to review all existing
reports and plans that school districts and boards of cooperative
educational services are required to submit and by November first, two
thousand ten, the commissioner shall submit to the board of regents, the
governor, the speaker of the assembly, the temporary president of the
senate, the director of the budget and the chairs of the respective
fiscal and education committees of the senate and assembly specific
recommendations to eliminate unnecessary or duplicative reporting
requirements; and where possible, recommendations to consolidate
reports, plans and other information required to be submitted to the
commissioner including which recommendations could be implemented
administratively and which would require statutory authorization.
 § 102. Associate and assistant commissioners. The commissioner of
education shall appoint, subject to the approval of the regents, such
associate and assistant commissioners as he shall deem necessary for the
proper organization and general classification of the work of the
department, and assign to such associate and assistant commissioners the
work which shall be under their respective supervision.
 § 103. Divisions of department. By action of the regents upon the
recommendation of the commissioner of education the department may be
divided into divisions and bureaus. By like action new divisions and
bureaus may be created and divisions and bureaus may be consolidated or
abolished, and the administrative work of the department assigned to the
several divisions and bureaus.
 § 104. Other officers and employees. The commissioner of education,
subject to the approval of the regents, shall have power, in conformity
with their rules, to appoint all other needed officers and employees and
fix their titles, duties and salaries.
 § 105. Removals and suspensions. With the approval of the regents,
the commissioner of education may, at his pleasure, remove from office
any assistant commissioner, or other appointive officer or employee;
and, when the regents are not in session, the commissioner may, during
his pleasure, suspend, without salary, any such officer or employee, but
not longer than till the adjournment of the succeeding meeting of the
regents.
 § 106. Joint seal. The regents of the university upon the
recommendation of the commissioner of education shall adopt, and may
modify at any time, a seal, which shall be used in common as the seal of
the education department and of the university; and copies of all
records thereof and of all acts, orders, decrees and decisions made by
the regents or by the commissioner of education, and of their official
papers, and of the drafts or machine copies of any of the foregoing, may
be authenticated under the said seal and shall then be evidence equally
with and in like manner as the originals.
 § 107. Compact for education. 1. The compact for education is hereby
entered into and enacted into law with all jurisdictions legally joining
therein, in the form substantially as follows:
 COMPACT FOR EDUCATION PREAMBLE
 WHEREAS, the proper education of all citizens is one of the most
important responsibilities of the states to preserve a free and open
society in the United States; and,
 WHEREAS, the increasing demands of our whole national life for
improving and expanding educational services require a broad exchange of
research data and information concerning the problems and practices of
education; and,
 WHEREAS, there is a vital need for strengthening the voices of the
states in the formulation of alternative nationwide educational
policies,
 THE STATES AFFIRM the need for close and continuing consultation among
our several states on all matters of education, and do hereby establish
this compact for education.
 Article I. Purpose and Policy.
 A. It is the purpose of this compact to:
 1. Establish and maintain close cooperation and understanding among
executive, legislative, professional educational and lay leadership on a
nationwide basis at the state and local levels.
 2. Provide a forum for the discussion, development, crystallization
and recommendation of public policy alternatives in the field of
education.
 3. Provide a clearing house of information on matters relating to
educational problems and how they are being met in different places
throughout the nation, so that the executive and legislative branches of
state government and of local communities may have ready access to the
experience and record of the entire country, and so that both lay and
professional groups in the field of education may have additional
avenues for the sharing of experience and the interchange of ideas in
the formation of public policy in education.
 4. Facilitate the improvement of state and local educational systems
so that all of them will be able to meet adequate and desirable goals in
a society which requires continuous qualitative and quantitative advance
in educational opportunities, methods and facilities.
 B. It is the policy of this compact to encourage and promote local and
state initiative in the development, maintenance, improvement and
administration of educational systems and institutions in a manner which
will accord with the needs and advantages of diversity among localities
and states.
 C. The party states recognize that each of them has an interest in the
quality and quantity of education furnished in each of the other states,
as well as in the excellence of its own educational systems and
institutions, because of the highly mobile character of individuals
within the nation, and because the products and services contributing to
the health, welfare and economic advancement of each state are supplied
in significant part by persons educated in other states.
 Article II. State Defined.
 As used in this compact, "state" means a state, territory, or
possession of the United States, the District of Columbia, or the
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
 Article III. The Commission.
 A. The educational commission of the states, hereinafter called "the
commission", is hereby established. The commission shall consist of
seven members representing each party state. One of such members shall
be the governor; two shall be members of the state legislature selected
by its respective houses and serving in such manner as the legislature
may determine; and four shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure
of the governor, unless the laws of the state otherwise provide. If the
laws of a state prevent legislators from serving on the commission, six
members shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the governor,
unless the laws of the state otherwise provide. In addition to any other
principles or requirements which a state may establish for the
appointment and service of its members of the commission, the guiding
principle for the composition of the membership on the commission from
each party state shall be that the members representing such state
shall, by virtue of their training, experience, knowledge or
affiliations be in a position collectively to reflect broadly the
interests of the state government, higher education, the state education
system, local education, lay and professional, public and non-public
educational leadership. Of those appointees, one shall be the head of a
state agency or institution, designated by the governor, having
responsibility for one or more programs of public education. In addition
to the members of the commission representing the party states, there
may be not to exceed ten non-voting commissioners selected by the
steering committee for terms of one year. Such commissioners shall
represent leading national organizations of professional educators or
persons concerned with educational administration.
 B. The members of the commission shall be entitled to one vote each on
the commission. No action of the commission shall be binding unless
taken at a meeting at which a majority of the total number of votes on
the commission are cast in favor thereof. Action of the commission shall
be only at a meeting at which a majority of the commissioners are
present. The commission shall meet at least once a year. In its bylaws,
and subject to such directions and limitations as may be contained
therein, the commission may delegate the exercise of any of its powers
to the steering committee or the executive director, except for the
power to approve budgets or requests for appropriations, the power to
make policy recommendations pursuant to article V and adoption of the
annual report pursuant to article III (j).
 C. The commission shall have a seal.
 D. The commission shall elect annually, from among its members, a
chairman, who shall be a governor, a vice chairman and a treasurer. The
commission shall provide for the appointment of an executive director.
Such executive director shall serve at the pleasure of the commission,
and together with the treasurer and such other personnel as the
commission may deem appropriate shall be bonded in such amount as the
commission shall determine. The executive director shall be secretary.
 E. Irrespective of the civil service, personnel or other merit system
laws of any of the party states, the executive director subject to the
approval of the steering committee shall appoint, remove or discharge
such personnel as may be necessary for the performance of the functions
of the commission, and shall fix the duties and compensation of such
personnel. The commission in its bylaws shall provide for the personnel
policies and programs of the commission.
 F. The commission may borrow, accept or contract for the services of
personnel from any party jurisdiction, the United States, or any
subdivision or agency of the aforementioned governments, or from any
agency of two or more of the party jurisdictions or their subdivisions.
 G. The commission may accept for any of its purposes and functions
under this compact any and all donations, and grants of money,
equipment, supplies, materials and services, conditional or otherwise,
from any state, the United States, or any other governmental agency, or
from any person, firm, association, foundation, or corporation, and may
receive, utilize and dispose of the same. Any donation or grant accepted
by the commission pursuant to this paragraph or services borrowed
pursuant to paragraph (f) of this article shall be reported in the
annual report of the commission. Such report shall include the nature,
amount and conditions, if any, of the donation, grant, or services
borrowed, and the identity of the donor or lender.
 H. The commission may establish and maintain such facilities as may be
necessary for the transacting of its business. The commission may
acquire, hold, and convey real and personal property and any interest
therein.
 I. The commission shall adopt bylaws for the conduct of its business
and shall have the power to amend and rescind these bylaws. The
commission shall publish its bylaws in convenient form and shall file a
copy thereof and a copy of any amendment thereto, with the appropriate
agency or officer in each of the party states.
 J. The commission annually shall make to the governor and legislature
of each party state a report covering the activities of the commission
for the preceding year. The commission may make such additional reports
as it may deem desirable.
 Article IV. Powers.
 In addition to authority conferred on the commission by other
provisions of the compact, the commission shall have authority to:
 1. Collect, correlate, analyze and interpret information and data
concerning educational needs and resources.
 2. Encourage and foster research in all aspects of education, but with
special reference to the desirable scope of instruction, organization,
administration, and instructional methods and standards employed or
suitable for employment in public educational systems.
 3. Develop proposals for adequate financing of education as a whole
and at each of its many levels.
 4. Conduct or participate in research of the types referred to in this
article in any instance where the commission finds that such research is
necessary for the advancement of the purposes and policies of this
compact, utilizing fully the resources of national associations,
regional compact organizations for higher education, and other agencies
and institutions, both public and private.
 5. Formulate suggested policies and plans for the improvement of
public education as a whole, or for any segment thereof, and make
recommendations with respect thereto available to the appropriate
governmental units, agencies and public officials.
 6. Do such other things as may be necessary or incidental to the
administration of any of its authority or functions pursuant to this
compact.
 Article V. Cooperation With Federal Government.
 A. If the laws of the United States specifically so provide, or if
administrative provision is made therefor within the federal government,
the United States may be represented on the commission by not to exceed
ten representatives. Any such representative or representatives of the
United States shall be appointed and serve in such manner as may be
provided by or pursuant to federal law, and may be drawn from any one or
more branches of the federal government, but no such representatives
shall have a vote on the commission.
 B. The commission may provide information and make recommendations to
any executive or legislative agency or officer of the federal government
concerning the common educational policies of the states, and may advise
with any such agencies or officers concerning any matter of mutual
interest.
 Article VI. Committees.
 A. To assist in the expeditious conduct of its business when the full
commission is not meeting, the commission shall elect a steering
committee of thirty members which, subject to the provisions of this
compact and consistent with the policies of the commission, shall be
constituted and function as provided in the bylaws of the commission.
One-third of the voting membership of the steering committee shall
consist of governors, and the remainder shall consist of other members
of the commission. A federal representative on the commission may serve
with the steering committee, but without vote. The voting members of the
steering committee shall serve for terms of two years, except that
members elected to the first steering committee of the commission shall
be elected as follows: fifteen for one year and fifteen for two years.
The chairman, vice chairman, and treasurer of the commission shall be
members of the steering committee and, anything in this paragraph to the
contrary notwithstanding, shall serve during their continuance in these
offices. Vacancies in the steering committee shall not affect its
authority to act, but the commission at its next regularly ensuing
meeting following the occurrence of any vacancy shall fill it for the
unexpired term. No person shall serve more than two terms as a member of
the steering committee: provided that service for a partial term of one
year or less shall not be counted toward the two term limitation.
 B. The commission may establish advisory and technical committees
composed of state, local, and federal officials, and private persons to
advise it with respect to any one or more of its functions. Any advisory
or technical committee may, on request of the state concerned, be
established to consider any matter of special concern to two or more of
the party states.
 C. The commission may establish such additional committees as its
bylaws may provide.
 Article VII. Finance.
 A. The commission shall advise the governor or designated officer or
officers of each party state of its budget and estimated expenditures
for such period as may be required by the laws of that party state. Each
of the commission's budgets of estimated expenditures shall contain
specific recommendations of the amount or amounts to be appropriated by
each of the party states.
 B. The total amount of appropriation requests under any budget shall
be apportioned among the party states. In making such apportionment, the
commission shall devise and employ a formula which takes equitable
account of the populations and per capita income levels of the party
states.
 C. The commission shall not pledge the credit of any party states. The
commission may meet any of its obligations in whole or in part with
funds available to it pursuant to article III (g) of this compact,
provided that the commission takes specific action setting aside such
funds prior to incurring an obligation to be met in whole or in part in
such manner. Except where the commission makes use of funds available to
it pursuant to article III (g) thereof, the commission shall not incur
any obligation prior to the allotment of funds by the party states
adequate to meet the same.
 D. The commission shall keep accurate accounts of all receipts and
disbursements. The receipts and disbursements of the commission shall be
subject to the audit and accounting procedures established by its
bylaws. However, all receipts and disbursements of funds handled by the
commission shall be audited yearly by a qualified public accountant, and
the report of the audit shall be included in and become part of the
annual reports of the commission.
 E. The accounts of the commission shall be open at any reasonable time
for inspection by duly constituted officers of the party states and by
any persons authorized by the commission.
 F. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent commission
compliance with laws relating to audit or inspection of accounts by or
on behalf of any government contributing to the support of the
commission.
 Article VIII. Eligible Parties; Entry Into and Withdrawal.
 A. This compact shall have as eligible parties all states,
territories, and possessions of the United States, the District of
Columbia, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. In respect of any such
jurisdiction not having a governor, the term "governor", as used in this
compact, shall mean the closest equivalent official of such
jurisdiction.
 B. Any state or other eligible jurisdiction may enter into this
compact and it shall become binding thereon when it has adopted the
same: provided that in order to enter into initial effect, adoption by
at least ten eligible party jurisdictions shall be required.
 C. Adoption of the compact may be either by enactment thereof or by
adherence thereto by the governor; provided that in the absence of
enactment, adherence by the governor shall be sufficient to make his
state a party only until December thirty-one, nineteen hundred
sixty-seven. During any period when a state is participating in this
compact through gubernatorial action, the governor shall appoint those
persons who, in addition to himself, shall serve as the members of the
commission from his state, and shall provide to the commission an
equitable share of the financial support of the commission from any
source available to him.
 D. Except for a withdrawal effective on December thirty-one, nineteen
hundred sixty-seven in accordance with paragraph C of this article, any
party state may withdraw from this compact by enacting a statute
repealing the same, but no such withdrawal shall take effect until one
year after the governor of the withdrawing state has given notice in
writing of the withdrawal to the governors of all other party states. No
withdrawal shall affect any liability already incurred by or chargeable
to a party state prior to the time of such withdrawal.
 Article IX. Construction and Severability.
 This compact shall be liberally construed so as to effectuate the
purposes thereof. 1. The provisions of this compact shall be severable
and if any phrase, clause, sentence or provision of this compact is
declared to be contrary to the constitution of any state or of the
United States, or the applicability thereof to any government, agency,
person or circumstances is held invalid, the validity of the remainder
of this compact and the applicability thereof to any government, agency,
person or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. If this compact
shall be held contrary to the constitution of any state participating
therein, the compact shall remain in full force and effect as to the
state affected as to all severable matters.
 2. Of the seven members of the educational commission of the states
representing this state, one shall be the governor, one shall be
appointed by the temporary president of the senate from among the
members of that body, one shall be appointed by the speaker of the
assembly from among the members of that body, one shall be the
commissioner of education, and three shall be appointed by and serve at
the pleasure of the governor. The members of the commission representing
this state shall receive no compensation for their services but shall be
allowed their actual and necessary expenses in performance of their
duties hereunder.
 3. Pursuant to article III (i) of the compact, the commission shall
file a copy of its bylaws and any amendment thereto with the governor.
 § 108. State education building. The state education building shall
be occupied exclusively by the education department, including the
university, with the state library, the state museum, and its other
divisions and bureaus, together with such other work with which the
commissioner of education and the regents have official relations, as
the regents may, in their discretion, provide for therein, and such
building and the offices of such department shall be maintained at state
expense under the charge and care of such department.
 § 109. Any person, association, organization or corporation may be
permitted to use the auditorium in the state education building at
Albany for such purposes as may be authorized by regulations of the
commissioner of education upon payment of such fee as may be required
pursuant to a schedule for such purpose adopted by the commissioner of
education and approved by the director of the division of the budget.
 § 110. Refunds. 1. Moneys received by the state education department
pursuant to this chapter prior to July first, nineteen hundred
forty-two, may be refunded: (a) Where such moneys were not required by
law or regents' rule. (b) Where such moneys were in excess of the
amounts required by law or regents' rule. (c) Where fees are paid by
applicants who are not permitted to enter examinations for which such
fees are paid. Any such moneys received after July first, nineteen
hundred forty-two shall not be so refunded unless application for such
refund has been made within two years after its receipt by the state
education department, except that applicants for professional licenses
may make an application for a refund within two years of the withdrawal
or denial of the application, whichever occurs first.
 2. Applicants for professional licenses not receiving such licenses
may be granted partial refunds not exceeding fifty percent of the fee
paid to the department unless they have failed the examinations for
such licenses, in which case such applicants may not receive a refund.
Each applicant for a professional license who has at any time received a
partial refund of an initial license application fee shall pay all
required fees upon submitting any subsequent application for initial
licensure.
 § 111. Indian affairs. The education department, by or through the
appropriate division, bureau or officer thereof, shall exercise and
perform the functions, powers and duties conferred or imposed by law in
relation to the education of children upon the Indian reservations.
 § 112. Children in care; responsibility for education. 1. The
department shall establish and enforce standards of instruction,
personnel qualifications and other requirements for education services
or programs, as determined by rules of the regents and regulations of
the commissioner, with respect to the individual requirements of
children who are in full-time residential care in facilities or homes
operated or supervised by any state department or agency or political
subdivision. The department shall cooperate with the office of children
and family services, the department of mental hygiene and local
departments of social services with respect to educational and
vocational training programs for children placed with, committed to or
under the supervision of such agencies. The department shall promulgate
regulations requiring the cooperation of local school districts in
facilitating the prompt enrollment of children who are released or
conditionally released from residential facilities operated by or under
contract with the office of children and family services, the department
of mental hygiene and local departments of social services and in
implementing plans for release or conditional release submitted to the
family court pursuant to paragraph (c) of subdivision seven of section
353.3 of the family court act and the educational components of
permanency hearing reports submitted pursuant to section one thousand
eighty-nine of the family court act. Such regulations regarding the
educational components of permanency hearing reports submitted pursuant
to section one thousand eighty-nine of the family court act shall be
developed in conjunction with the office of children and family
services. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to apply to
responsibility for the provision or payment of care, maintenance or
other services subject to the provisions of the executive law, mental
hygiene law, social services law or any other law.
 2. The commissioner shall prepare a report and submit it to the
governor, the speaker of the assembly and the temporary president of the
senate by December thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-six and on
December thirty-first of each successive year. Such report shall
contain, for each facility operated by or under contract with the office
of children and family services that provides educational programs, an
assessment of each facility's compliance with the rules of the board of
regents, the regulations of the commissioner, and this chapter. Such
report shall include, but not be limited to: the number of youth
receiving services under article eighty-nine of this chapter; the
office's activities undertaken as required by subdivisions one, two,
four and eight of section forty-four hundred three of this chapter; the
number of youth receiving bilingual education services; the number of
youth eligible to receive limited English proficient services;
interviews with facility residents conducted during site visits; library
services; the ratio of teachers to students; the curriculum; the length
of stay of each youth and the number of hours of instruction provided;
instructional technology utilized; the educational services provided
following the release and conditional release of the youth, including,
but not limited to, the implementation of requirements for the
enrollment of such youth in school contained in plans for release and
conditional release submitted to the family court pursuant to paragraph
(c) of subdivision seven of section 353.3 of the family court act and in
the educational components of permanency hearing reports submitted
pursuant to section one thousand eighty-nine of the family court act and
the compliance by local school districts with the regulations
promulgated pursuant to subdivision one of this section; and any
recommendations to ensure compliance with the rules of regents,
regulations of the commissioner, and this chapter.
 3. The department shall conduct site visits every four years, with at
least one day's notice, of each facility operated by the office of
children and family services that provides educational programs to
ensure compliance with rules of the board of regents, regulations of the
commissioner, and this chapter. Such site visits shall include personal
interviews with facility residents.
 * 4. The commissioner shall establish procedures for administrative
appeals to resolve interagency disputes between school districts and
state departments or agencies or political subdivisions over
responsibility for provision of, or payment for, special education
programs or services to children with disabilities in full-time
residential care in facilities or homes operated or supervised by such
state departments or agencies or political subdivisions. During the
pendency of any such appeal, the state department or agency responsible
for developing the student's individualized education program, or the
school district responsible for developing the student's individualized
education program where there is no state department or agency so
responsible, shall provide and pay for the special education programs
and services on the student's individualized education program and may
seek reimbursement in the appeal. The commissioner shall be authorized
to make all orders that in the commissioner's judgment are proper or
necessary to give effect to the decision in the appeal. Upon a
determination that a public agency has failed to provide or pay for such
special education programs and services, the commissioner shall certify
the amount of such costs to the state comptroller and the state
comptroller to deduct such amount from any state funds that become due
to such public agency.
 * NB Repealed June 30, 2027
 § 112-a. Students confined in certain facilities; responsibility for
issuance of diplomas. 1. A person under twenty-one years of age who has
not received a high school diploma and who is placed with, committed to,
under the supervision of, detained or otherwise confined in any facility
operated or administered by a state department or agency or political
subdivision of the state which provides educational programs pursuant to
section one hundred twelve of this article, or who is confined in a
correctional facility, as defined in subdivision four of section two of
the correction law, and who participates in an educational program
provided by such facility, shall be issued a high school diploma by the
school district of location except when credit bearing educational
programming is provided by another school district. When credit bearing
educational programming is provided by another school district, that
district shall be responsible for issuing the high school diploma. The
school district responsible for issuing the diploma must determine if
such person has completed the minimum New York state diploma
requirements as set forth in the regulations of the commissioner while
placed with, committed to, under the supervision of, detained or
confined in such facility.
 2. For purposes of this section the term "school district of location"
means the school district in which the facility where such youth is
placed, committed, supervised, detained or confined is located.
 § 113. Leaves of absence to professional members of the department.
The department, subject to such regulations as the commissioner may
promulgate, may grant any professional member of the staff of the
department an extended leave of absence for advanced study, research,
professional writing or other experience of recognized professional
value, for not to exceed one year in seven at the rate of not to exceed
one-half the regular salary paid, or for not to exceed six months with
salary at full rate for such leave. The balance of salaries
appropriated for such persons, or so much thereof as may be necessary,
may be applied during the period of such absence for the purpose of the
salaries of substitutes to take the place of the persons thus on leave.
Not more than five such leaves of absence shall be granted during any
one fiscal year.
 § 114. Reduction of salaries for investment in custodial accounts. 1.
The department, in its discretion, may enter into a written agreement
with any employee to reduce the annual salary otherwise payable by law
to such employee for the purpose of investing in a custodial account, as
permitted by paragraph seven of subdivision (b) of section four hundred
three of the United States internal revenue code, as amended, or in a
tax deferred annuity, as permitted by subdivision (b) of section four
hundred three of the United States internal revenue code, as amended,
for such employee. Any such agreement shall be subject to approval and
filing by the comptroller, and shall specify the amount of such
reduction and the effective date thereof. Any such agreement may be
terminated at any time upon written notice by either such employee or
the department. Such termination shall take effect at the beginning of
the payroll period the first day of which is nearest to the thirtieth
day following the day on which such notification of termination was (a)
received by the department, in the event such termination is initiated
by the employee, or (b) sent to the employee, in the event such
termination is initiated by the department. No more than one such
agreement shall be entered into in any period of twelve successive
calendar months.
 2. Upon approval and filing by the comptroller of any such agreement
the comptroller shall reduce an employee's salary pursuant to said
agreement and pay an amount equal to the amount agreed upon for such
salary reduction as an employer contribution to the designated custodian
of the employee's account or the issuer of the employee's annuity.
Notwithstanding the reductions of salary authorized by this section, (a)
the amount of employer and employee contributions otherwise required on
behalf of an employee electing the optional retirement program pursuant
to part five of this article shall continue to be made on the basis of
the salary of such employee without regard to such reduction, or (b) in
the event a member of a public retirement system in this state agrees to
a reduction of salary pursuant to this section, such agreement shall not
cause the employee to lose any benefits under such public retirement
system to which such employee would otherwise be entitled had he or she
not agreed to a reduction in salary for the purpose of establishing a
custodial account or purchasing a tax-deferred annuity, and any required
employer and employee contributions shall continue to be made on the
basis of the salary of such employee without regard to such reduction.
Any survivor's benefit payable pursuant to sections one hundred
fifty-four and one hundred fifty-four-a of the civil service law shall
be based upon the salary of such employee without regard to the
reduction authorized by this section.
 3. Any payroll deduction, other than income tax withholdings as
required by law, which may be required or authorized pursuant to law,
contract, agreement, or any other instrument, the amount of which is
determined in relation to an employee's earnings, shall be based on the
salary of such employee without regard to reduction thereof pursuant to
any agreement authorized by this section.
 4. Payments for custodial accounts or tax deferred annuities shall be
made by the comptroller to the designated custodian or custodians of
such accounts or the issuers of such annuities out of moneys otherwise
available in accordance with law for salaries of the employees who have
entered into agreements pursuant to this section.
 5. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to diminish or
impair any benefits to which such employee or his legal representatives
or beneficiaries would be otherwise entitled had such salary reduction
agreement not been entered into in accordance with the provisions of
this section.
 * § 115. Use of artificial intelligence systems and automated
decision-making tools by the state university of New York, the city
university of New York, or community colleges. 1. The use of artificial
intelligence systems as defined by section one hundred three-e of the
state technology law and automated decision-making tools as defined by
section five hundred one of the state technology law shall not affect
(a) the existing rights of employees pursuant to an existing collective
bargaining agreement, or (b) the existing representational relationships
among employee organizations or the bargaining relationships between the
employer and an employee organization.
 2. The use of such artificial intelligence systems and automated
decision-making tools shall not result in the: (a) discharge,
displacement or loss of position, including partial displacement such as
a reduction in the hours of non-overtime work, wages, or employment
benefits, or result in the impairment of existing collective bargaining
agreements; or (b) transfer of existing duties and functions currently
performed by employees of the state or any agency or public authority
thereof to an artificial intelligence system or automated
decision-making tool.
 3. The use of such artificial intelligence system or automated
decision-making tool shall not alter the rights or benefits, and
privileges, including but not limited to terms and conditions of
employment, civil service status, and collective bargaining unit
membership status of all existing employees of the state university of
New York, the city university of New York, or community colleges shall
be preserved and protected.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2028
 § 140. Historical documentary heritage grants and aid. 1. Short title.
This section shall be known and may be cited as the "New York
documentary heritage act".
 2. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall
mean:
 a. "Historical records". Records that contain significant information
that is of enduring value and are therefore worthy of long-term
retention and systematic management. Historical records may include
diaries, journals, ledgers, minutes, reports, photographs, maps,
drawings, blueprints, agreements, memoranda, deeds, case files, and
other material. They may take any of several physical forms: parchment,
paper, microfilm, cassette tape, film, videotape, computer tapes, discs,
and other "machine readable" formats.
 b. "Historical records program". Any deliberate, organized program to
collect, hold, care for, and make available historical records,
including identifying, appraising, arranging, describing, and
referencing them and using them in exhibitions and other public and
educational programs.
 c. "Institutions eligible for historical records program grants".
Chartered or incorporated nonprofit archives, libraries, historical
societies and museums and other nonprofit institutions in New York state
which operate historical records programs and which meet standards to be
established by the commissioner pursuant to regulations adopted for such
purposes. Institutions operated by state or federal government agencies,
and local government archives shall not be eligible for historical
records project grants, except that an institution of the state
university of New York or the city university of New York may apply for
historical records project grants with regard to records other than
internal records generated by the institution after July first, nineteen
hundred forty-eight if it is a component of the state university of New
York or after July first, nineteen hundred seventy-nine if it is a
component of the city university of New York or after the subsequent
date on which the institution became a component of such university.
 d. "Historical records program project". A project to carry out one or
more of the activities described in subdivision three of this section.
 e. "Cooperative project". A collaborative effort undertaken by two or
more historical records programs, to meet shared needs or to accomplish
a common purpose, or a project undertaken by a service provider to
address the historical records needs of more than one historical records
program.
 f. "Regional advisory and assistance agency". A reference and research
library resources system, or an alternate public or nonprofit agency or
organization willing to provide historical records program development
advice and assistance services covering a reference and research library
resources system region which is acceptable to the commissioner.
 g. "Historical records program development advice and assistance".
Advice and assistance on the development and strengthening of historical
records programs, promotion of cooperation, coordinated documentation
planning, training in historical records management techniques, advice
and assistance in reporting of information concerning historical records
to statewide and national data bases where appropriate, and initiatives
to increase public awareness of the values and uses of historical
records.
 h. "Service provider". A nonprofit professional or other association,
local government, college or university, historical service agency, or
other nonprofit institution or system which provides services to
historical records programs.
 i. "Cost sharing". Local funds, local in-kind services, and other
funds and support from other than state sources.
 j. "Program year". The annual period from July first through June
thirtieth.
 3. Scope of activities to be supported. The commissioner is authorized
to provide grants and advice to institutions eligible for historical
records programs and cooperative projects, and aid to regional advisory
and assistance agencies, the central administration of the state
university of New York and the central administration of the city
university of New York. Grants shall be used to support the development
and administration of historical records programs; the surveying,
appraisal, identification, collection, duplication, arrangement,
description, and making available of historical records; public and
educational programming relating to historical records; projects to
improve archival techniques; and projects to promote the research use of
historical records. Aid to regional advisory and assistance agencies
shall be used to promote and assist the development of historical
records programs. Aid to the central administrations of the state
university of New York and the city university of New York shall be used
to develop guidelines, policies and procedures, training, technical
assistance, materials, oversight, retention and disposition schedules
for university records, and to promote, guide and direct the component
institutions of such universities in the sound administration of
archival records.
 4. Distribution of funds. a. Historical documentary heritage funds
shall be distributed as follows: (1) Grants. (i) individual historical
records program projects shall be eligible for at least thirty-five
percent of the amount available;
 (ii) cooperative projects shall be eligible for up to twenty percent
of the amount available.
 (2) Aid. (i) regional advisory and assistance agencies shall be
eligible for forty percent of the amount available;
 (ii) the central administration of the state university of New York
shall be eligible for two and one-half percent of the total amount
available;
 (iii) the central administration of the city university of New York
shall be eligible for two and one-half percent of the total amount
available.
 b. Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraphs one and two of
paragraph a of this subdivision, the commissioner, taking into account
the recommendations of the New York state historical records advisory
board, may distribute funds designated for one purpose to address the
needs of another purpose, provided that the commissioner determines that
the significance of the contributions to be realized from the proposals
in one category outweighs the significance of the contributions to be
realized from the proposals in another category.
 5. Cost-sharing. The commissioner shall determine the amount of
cost-sharing required from historical records programs, including
cooperative programs. For individual historical records program projects
involving arrangement, description, and other work relating directly to
the administration of historical records held by a program, the amount
of such cost-sharing shall be at least fifty percent.
 6. Applications for historical records program projects. a. Filing. By
dates determined by the commissioner each year, an eligible institution
may file an application, in a form prescribed by the commissioner, for a
grant to support the approved costs of a proposed historical records
project.
 b. Content. Such application shall include, but need not be limited
to:
 (1) a statement describing the applicant's need for the funding
requested;
 (2) collection statements and policies used by the institution to
guide its acquisition efforts;
 (3) a summary description of the records included in the historical
records program of the institution;
 (4) the status of finding aids and published guides for the historical
records held by the institution;
 (5) the current and/or anticipated level of use and audience for the
historical records;
 (6) the importance of the historical records for documenting life in
New York;
 (7) the expected impact of the grant upon the historical records
program;
 (8) the plan of work for the activities for which the funding is
sought;
 (9) the proposed project budget, including cost-sharing which would be
committed to the project; and
 (10) the staff and other resources devoted to the institution's
historical records program on an ongoing basis.
 c. Approval. In approving any application pursuant to this
subdivision, the commissioner shall consider:
 (1) information in the proposal as set forth in paragraph b of this
subdivision;
 (2) the capacity of the institution to make the historical records
known and accessible for research, education, public programs, improved
policy making and other public benefits;
 (3) the potential for improving the documentation of the heritage of
any racial and ethnic group; and
 (4) the potential for improving the documentation of under documented
subjects, institutions, or activities.
 7. Application for cooperative projects. a. Filing. By dates to be
established by the commissioner each year, a service provider or an
eligible institution acting as fiscal agent on behalf of a group of
eligible institutions, may file an application, in a form prescribed by
the commissioner. A group of cooperating institutions may be formed
because of a common purpose, rather than because of geographical
proximity.
 b. Content. Such application shall include, but need not be limited
to:
 (1) a statement describing the applicant's need for the funding
requested;
 (2) a description of the issue, problem, or need that the project will
address;
 (3) a description of the historical records programs to be served and
how the effort to be undertaken in a cooperative project relates to and
will strengthen these programs;
 (4) description of the plan of work for the project;
 (5) outcome or product of the project and how it will improve the
identification and administration of historical records or contribute to
the strengthening of historical records programs; and
 (6) the proposed budget, including cost-sharing that would be
contributed to the project.
 c. Approval. In approving any application pursuant to this
subdivision, the commissioner shall consider:
 (1) information in the proposal as set forth in paragraph b of this
subdivision;
 (2) the importance of the records involved for the documentation of
life in New York state;
 (3) the importance of the project and the intended outcome or product
in terms of strengthening the programs of the cooperating institutions
and promoting improved historical records management;
 (4) the capacities of the cooperating institutions or service
providers for carrying out the project, including prior experience with
cooperative or service projects; and
 (5) the potential for cooperating institutions to sustain an ongoing
productive cooperative relationship as a result of the project.
 8. Aid for regional advisory and assistance agencies. a. Coordination.
The commissioner shall establish statewide priorities for regional
advisory and assistance agencies and shall assist and coordinate their
efforts.
 b. Historical records program advice and assistance plans. To be
eligible to receive aid annually, each participating regional advisory
and assistance agency shall submit an annual workplan acceptable to the
commissioner, and, after the first year of receiving aid, a report on
activities of the prior year and a five-year plan, by dates designated
by the commissioner. The five-year plan shall outline goals and
objectives to be accomplished in the region during the five-year period.
The annual workplan shall describe the activities to be carried out
during the year and the program advice and assistance to be provided.
The five-year plans and the annual workplans shall reflect regional
priorities and shall be consistent with statewide priorities established
by the commissioner.
 c. Aid. The commissioner shall each year determine the distribution of
aid among eligible regional advisory and assistance agencies. In doing
so, he shall take into account the level of resources needed to provide
the services described in paragraphs f and g of subdivision two of this
section in a satisfactory manner, the extent of the geographical area
served by each agency, and the size of the population served by each
agency, and shall distribute the available funds in such a manner as
will best give effect to this section.
 9. Aid for state university of New York and city university of New
York. To be eligible to receive aid annually, the central
administration of the state university of New York and the central
administration of the city university of New York shall each submit an
annual workplan acceptable to the commissioner, and, after the first
year of receiving aid, a report on activities of the prior year and a
five-year plan.
 11. Regulations. The commissioner shall adopt regulations to implement
the provisions of this section.
 PART IV
 SCIENTIFIC AND HISTORIC PLACES
 § 174. Powers formerly exercised by the state board of geographic
names. The regents, or such bureau, division or officers of the
university or of the education department as may be designated by them
for such purpose, shall 1. Determine and establish the correct
historical and etymological form of the place names in this state and
recommend the adoption of such correct forms for public use.
 2. Determine the form and propriety of new place names proposed for
general use, and no corporation, individual or community shall introduce
such new place names without the consent and approval of this board.
 3. Co-operate with the United States board of geographic names and
with the United States post-office department in establishing a proper,
correct and historically accurate form for all place names proposed as
designations of new post-offices.
 4. No petition or recommendation for the naming of any mountain, lake,
river or other natural object for or in honor of any living person shall
be granted, approved or consented to by the regents of the university or
by the committee on geographic names appointed by it except by unanimous
vote.
 PART V
 EDUCATION DEPARTMENT OPTIONAL RETIREMENT PROGRAM
 § 180. Definitions. Wherever used in this part V of this article:
 1. The term "eligible employee" means each employee of the education
department who occupies a position which is designated by the
commissioner as requiring the rendering of professional services within
the field of supervision of higher education, and who, at the time of
his initial employment with the department or within one year prior
thereto, owns or owned a contract which may legally be continued
pursuant to this part. An eligible employee who has elected to be
covered by the education department optional retirement program shall
not be deemed ineligible by virtue of a subsequent assignment within the
education department to a sphere of responsibility outside of the field
of supervision of higher education. No person receiving a retirement
benefit from any retirement or pension system of New York state or any
political subdivision thereof shall be eligible to elect the education
department optional retirement program.
 2. The term "education department optional retirement program" means
the retirement program established pursuant to part V of this article.
 3. The term "electing employee" means any eligible employee who
exercises his election pursuant to this part V of this article to
participate in the education department optional retirement program.
 4. The term "state salary" means all amounts paid by or for the state
as compensation for services rendered by an eligible employee.
 5. The term "insurer" means a life insurance corporation, or other
corporation, subject to department of financial services supervision.
 § 181. Education department optional retirement program established.
1. There is hereby established an education department optional
retirement program which shall provide for the continuation of contracts
providing retirement and death benefits for or on behalf of electing
employees. Under such program the state and such employees shall
contribute, to the extent authorized or required, towards the
continuation of such contracts, which shall have been issued to and
shall have previously become the property of such employees.
 2. The commissioner shall, in his discretion, designate the insurer or
insurers to which payment of such contributions under this article may
be made and shall approve the form and content of such contracts. In
making such designation and giving such approval the commissioner shall
give due consideration to (i) the nature and extent of the rights and
benefits to be provided by such contracts for electing employees and
their beneficiaries, (ii) the relation of such rights and benefits to
the amount of contributions to be made under this part V of this
article, (iii) the suitability of such rights and benefits to the needs
and interests of electing employees and to the interests of the
department in the employment and retention of eligible employees, and
(iv) the authority and ability of the designated insurer or insurers to
provide rights and benefits under such contracts.
 3. The commissioner is hereby authorized to provide for the
administration of such education department optional retirement program
and to perform or authorize the performance of such functions as may be
necessary for such purposes in accordance with this part V of this
article.
 § 182. Rates of contribution. 1. Employer contributions. In the case
of any electing employee initially appointed on or before June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety-two, the state shall, during
continuance of his employment, make contributions at the rate of nine
percentum of that portion of his state salary upon which contributions
are or may hereafter be paid to the secretary of the treasury of the
United States pursuant to article three of the retirement and social
security law and at the rate of twelve percentum of that portion of his
state salary above said amount, out of moneys which shall be
appropriated to the department for such purpose. In the case of any
electing employee initially appointed on or after July first, nineteen
hundred ninety-two, the state shall, during continuance of his
employment, make contributions at the rate of eight percentum of his
state salary during the first seven years of such employment and at the
rate of ten percentum of his state salary, thereafter, out of moneys
which shall be appropriated to the department for such purpose. For
purposes of this subdivision, that portion of the employee's salary upon
which contributions are paid to the secretary of the treasury of the
United States pursuant to article three of the retirement and social
security law shall not exceed sixteen thousand five hundred dollars.
 2. Employee contributions. In the case of any electing employee,
contributions at the rate of three per centum of his state salary shall
be deducted by the state comptroller as the employee contribution,
provided however, that such employee contribution shall be made by the
state in accordance with subdivision one of this section during such
period as (a) either section seventy-a of the retirement and social
security law or section five hundred twenty-eight of this title provides
that the contribution of each member of the New York state employees'
retirement system or the New York state teachers' retirement system in
the employ of the state shall be reduced by at least eight per centum of
his compensation, or (b) employee contributions to either such system
are no longer required by reason of such system becoming noncontributory
for state employees.
 Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, beginning April first,
two thousand thirteen any electing employee appointed on or after April
first, two thousand twelve, the rate at which each such employee shall
contribute in any current plan year (January first to December
thirty-first) shall be determined by reference to the wages of such
member in the second plan year (January first to December thirty-first)
preceding such current plan year as follows:
 (a) members with wages of forty-five thousand dollars per annum or
less shall contribute three per centum of annual wages;
 (b) members with wages greater than forty-five thousand per annum, but
not more than fifty-five thousand per annum shall contribute three and
one-half per centum of annual wages;
 (c) members with wages greater than fifty-five thousand per annum, but
not more than seventy-five thousand per annum shall contribute four and
one-half per centum of annual wages;
 (d) members with wages greater than seventy-five thousand per annum
but not more than one hundred thousand per annum shall contribute five
and three-quarters per centum of annual wages; and
 (e) members with wages greater than one hundred thousand per annum
shall contribute six per centum of annual wages.
 Notwithstanding the foregoing, during each of the first three plan
years (January first to December thirty-first) in which such member has
established membership in the Education Department Optional Retirement
Program, such employee shall contribute a percent of annual wages in
accordance with the preceding schedule based upon a projection of annual
wages provided by the employer.
 3. Payment of contributions pursuant to subdivisions one and two of
this section shall be made to the designated insurer or insurers upon
audit and warrant of the state comptroller.
 § 183. Election. 1. Election of the education department optional
retirement program. (a) Each eligible employee initially appointed on or
after July first, nineteen hundred sixty-eight, shall, within thirty
days of his entry into service, elect (i) to join either the New York
state teachers' retirement system or the New York state employees'
retirement system in accordance with the provisions of law applicable
thereto or (ii) to elect the education department optional retirement
program established pursuant to this part V of this article. Each
eligible employee employed by the department prior to July first,
nineteen hundred sixty-eight shall make such election on or before
December fourth, nineteen hundred sixty-eight. Any such election shall
be effective as of the date of entry into service with the department,
except that with respect to those eligible employees possessing
contracts which may legally be continued under this part and who
initially entered into service with the department prior to the
effective date of this part, the deferred election shall be effective as
of the effective date of this part.
 (b) In the event an eligible employee fails to make an election as
provided in paragraph (a) of this subdivision, he shall be deemed to
have elected membership in the New York state teachers' retirement
system. Such membership shall be effective as of the date of entry into
service with the department.
 (c) The amount, if any, required to be contributed by any employee in
accordance with an election, a deferred election or a failure to elect
pursuant to paragraph (a) or paragraph (b) of this subdivision shall be
collected by payroll deductions in such manner as may be provided by the
state comptroller for those persons electing the education department
optional retirement program, or in the case of membership in either the
New York state employees' retirement system or the New York state
teachers' retirement system, by such retirement system. Nothing herein
contained shall be construed to authorize or require payment by the
state of contributions on account of services rendered prior to the
effective date of this part by eligible employees who at the time of
their employment with the department chose to continue, on a voluntary
basis, coverage similar to that conferred by this part, but shall be
construed to authorize continuation of such contracts after the
effective date of this part, subject to rules and regulations to be
established by the commissioner.
 2. Ineligibility for retirement system membership. Any employee who
elects the education department optional retirement program shall be
ineligible for membership in either the New York state employees'
retirement system or the New York state teachers' retirement system so
long as he shall remain employed in the department and shall continue in
the education department optional retirement program.
 3. (a) Any eligible employee who is a member of either the New York
state employees' retirement system or the New York state teachers'
retirement system at the time he elects the optional retirement program
established pursuant to this part shall be deemed to be a person who
discontinues service on the effective date of such election, for the
purpose of determining his eligibility for rights and benefits in either
such system; provided, however, that if he does not withdraw his
accumulated contributions (i) his continued service with the education
department while under the optional retirement program shall be deemed
to be member service in either the New York state employees' retirement
system or the New York state teachers' retirement system for the purpose
of determining his eligibility for any vested retirement allowance,
retirement allowance or ordinary death benefit under either such system
dependent upon a specified period of total service or upon attainment of
a specified age while in service or upon death while in service and (ii)
the amount of any such benefit to which he or his estate or person
designated by him may become entitled under either such system shall be
computed only on the basis of service otherwise creditable to him
therein and his compensation during such service.
 (b) Electing employees and their beneficiaries shall not be entitled
to any right or benefit under either the New York state employees'
retirement system or the New York state teachers' retirement system
other than a vested retirement allowance, retirement allowance or
ordinary death benefit to the extent expressly provided for in this
section.
 4. (a) Subdivision two of this section shall not apply to any eligible
employee who has elected the education department optional retirement
program and after June thirtieth, two thousand two, renders service
which is creditable in the New York state teachers' retirement system,
other than service for which a contribution is made to the education
department optional retirement program.
 (b) Subdivision three of this section shall not apply to any member of
the New York state teachers' retirement system who, after joining such
system, elects the education department optional retirement program.
 (c) Anything in subdivision three of this section notwithstanding, any
eligible employee who is a member of the New York state teachers'
retirement system and had elected the education department optional
retirement program prior to July first, two thousand two, may obtain
credit for service, other than service for which a contribution is made
to the education department optional retirement program, which is
creditable in such system, was rendered after such member had elected
the education department optional retirement program, and was rendered
between December first, nineteen hundred ninety-one and June thirtieth,
two thousand two, provided (i) such member has rendered at least five
years of service credited with the New York state teachers' retirement
system at the time such service is credited, and (ii) in the case of
such member subject to the provisions of article fourteen or fifteen of
the retirement and social security law, the member contributes three
percent of the wages earned for such service together with interest at
the rate of five percent per annum compounded annually from the date of
such service until payment is made.
 (d) Anything in this subdivision four notwithstanding, service as an
eligible employee for which a contribution is made to the education
department optional retirement program shall neither entitle any
eligible employee to join or rejoin the New York state teachers'
retirement system nor be creditable in such system.
 § 184. Survivor's benefits. In the case of the death of any electing
employee after the effective date of his election and before retirement,
the value of the death benefits provided by the contract or contracts
continued under the education department optional retirement program
which is attributable to the state's contribution as determined by the
commissioner, shall be deemed to be an ordinary death benefit provided
under a public pension plan within the meaning of section one hundred
fifty-four of the civil service law.
 § 185. Social security. Every electing employee shall have old-age,
survivors, and disability insurance coverage provided by the federal
social security act in accordance with the provisions of article three
of the retirement and social security law.
 § 186. State not liable for payment of benefits. Neither the state
nor the department shall be a party to any contract continued in whole
or in part with contributions made under the education department
optional retirement program established and administered pursuant to
this part V of this article. No retirement, death or other benefits
shall be payable by the state or by the department under such education
department optional retirement program, except as otherwise provided in
section 184. Such benefits shall be paid to electing employees or their
beneficiaries by the designated insurer or insurers in accordance with
the terms of their contracts.
 § 187. Inconsistent provisions of other acts superseded. Insofar as
the provisions of this part V of this article are inconsistent with the
provisions of any other act, general or special, the provisions of this
article shall be controlling.
 ARTICLE 5
 UNIVERSITY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK
 PART I
 GENERAL ORGANIZATION
Section 201. Corporate name and objects.
 202. Regents.
 203. Officers.
 204. Meetings and absences.
 205. Quorum.
 206. Authority to take testimony and conduct hearings.
 207. Legislative power.
 207-a. Disclosure of gifts made to institutions of higher
 education by foreign governments, persons and
 entities.
 207-b. Crisis resources.
 208. General examinations, credentials and degrees.
 208-a. Scheduling of examinations.
 209. Academic examinations; admission and fees.
 209-a. Applications for admission to college.
 210. Registrations.
 210-a. Admission requirements for graduate-level teacher and
 educational leader programs.
 210-b. Graduate-level teacher and educational leadership
 program deregistration and suspension.
 210-c. Interstate reciprocity agreement for post-secondary
 distance education programs.
 211. Review of regents learning standards.
 211-a. Enhanced state accountability system.
 211-b. Consequences for consistent lack of improvement in
 academic performance.
 211-c. Distinguished educators.
 211-d. Contract for excellence.
 211-e. Educational partnership organizations.
 211-f. Takeover and restructuring failing schools.
 212. Fees.
 212-a. Return of deposits for professional and graduate
 schools.
 212-b. Return of tuition for colleges, universities,
 professional, proprietary and graduate schools.
 212-c. Teacher accreditation review fees.
 213. Extension of educational facilities.
 213-b. Unlawful sale of dissertations, theses and term papers.
 214. Institutions in the university.
 215. Visitation and reports.
 215-a. Annual report by regents to governor and legislature.
 215-b. Annual report by commissioner to governor and
 legislature.
 215-c. Promoting cost-effectiveness in public elementary and
 secondary schools.
 215-d. State university of New York report on economic
 development activities.
 216. Charters.
 216-a. Applicability of not-for-profit corporation law.
 216-b. Private foundations, as defined in the United States
 internal revenue code of 1954: provisions included in
 the charter.
 216-c. Special provisions for cutlery and knife museums that
 exhibit automatic knives.
 217. Provisional charters.
 218. Conditions of incorporation.
 219. Change of name or charter.
 220. Distribution of assets.
 221. Dissolution of educational institution by stockholders.
 222. Suspension of operations.
 223. Consolidation of corporations.
 224. Prohibitions.
 224-a. Students unable because of religious beliefs to register
 or attend classes on certain days.
 225. Unlawful acts in respect to examinations and records.
 226. Powers of trustees of institutions.
 227. Colleges may construct water-works and sewer systems.
 228. The Hamilton college sewer district.
 229. County educational institutions.
 230. Municipal training institute.
 231. Town and county officers training school.
 232. Departments and their government.
 233. State Museum; collections made by the staff.
 233-a. Property of the state museum.
 233-aa. Property of other museums.
 233-b. New York state freedom trail commission.
 233-c. Study.
 234. Indian collection.
 235. State science service.
 235-a. New York state biodiversity research institute.
 235-b. New York state biological survey.
 236. Public television and radio.
 237. Regents plan for higher education including approved
 plans of state university and city university of New
 York and plans of independent institutions of higher
 education.
 238. Chair on geriatrics in the state university.
 238-a. Statewide resource centers for geriatric education.
 239. Albert Einstein chairs in science and Albert Schweitzer
 chairs in the humanities.
 239-a. Collection and distribution of student's residual
 consumer goods.
 239-b. Research dogs and cats.
 PART 1-A
 CODY CENTER FOR AUTISM AND DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES
Section 240. The Stony Brook university Cody center for autism and
 developmental disabilities at Stony Brook university.
 241. Purposes of the Cody center.
 242. Site.
 243. Funding and reporting.
 PART II
 LIBRARIES
 245. State library, how constituted.
 246. State medical library.
 247. State law library; legislative reference library.
 248. Manuscript and records "on file".
 249. State library, when open; use of books.
 249-a. Libraries of public institutions of higher education;
 access and use.
 250. Duplicate department.
 251. Transfers from state officers.
 252. Other libraries owned by the state.
 253. Public and association libraries and museums.
 254. Standards of library service.
 255. Establishment of a public library.
 256. Contracts.
 257. Acceptance of conditional gift.
 258. Closing of museum; admission fee during certain hours.
 258-a. Purchases by museums, historical societies, zoological
 gardens, aquariums, botanical gardens and arboreta
 through office of general services.
 259. Library taxes.
 260. Trustees.
 260-a. Meetings of board of trustees.
 260-b. Reduction of salaries for purchase of annuities.
 260-c. Reduction of salaries for tax-deferred annuities.
 260-d. Board of trustees continuing education.
 261. Incorporation.
 262. Use of public and Indian libraries.
 263. Reports.
 264. Injuries to property.
 265. Detention.
 265-a. Defense of lawful detention.
 266. Transfer of libraries.
 267. Local neglect.
 268. Abolition.
 269. Library extension service.
 270. Acceptance of surplus library books or property.
 271. Apportionment of state aid to Indian libraries.
 272. Conditions under which library systems are entitled to
 state aid.
 273. Apportionment of state aid to libraries and library
 systems.
 273-a. State aid for library construction.
 274. Use and care of school library.
 275. Librarians of school libraries.
 276. Existing rules continued in force.
 277. Authority to raise and receive money for school library.
 278. Authority to transfer school library property to a free
 library.
 279. Fees.
 280. Penalty for disobedience to library law, rules or
 orders.
 281. Loans and extensions of credit to infants.
 282. Establishment of school library systems.
 283. Functions of school library systems.
 284. State aid for school library systems.
 285. State aid for cooperation with correctional facilities.
 PART III
 FEDERAL FUNDS FOR VOCATIONAL EDUCATION
 290. Acceptance of law of the United States.
 291. Custodian of funds.
 292. Board of regents to co-operate with federal board.
 PART I
 GENERAL ORGANIZATION
 § 201. Corporate name and objects. The corporation created in the year
seventeen hundred eighty-four under the name of The Regents of the
University of the State of New York, is hereby continued under the name
of The University of the State of New York. Its objects shall be to
encourage and promote education, to visit and inspect its several
institutions and departments, to distribute to or expand or administer
for them such property and funds as the state may appropriate therefor
or as the university may own or hold in trust or otherwise, and to
perform such other duties as may be intrusted to it. The said
corporation shall have power to take, hold and administer real and
personal property and the income thereof in trust for any educational,
scientific, historical or other purpose within the jurisdiction of the
regents of The University of the State of New York.
 § 202. Regents. 1. The University of the State of New York shall be
governed and all its corporate powers exercised by a board of regents
the number of whose members shall at all times be four more than the
number of the then existing judicial districts of the state and shall
not be less than fifteen. The regents in office April first, nineteen
hundred seventy-four shall hold office, in the order of their election,
for such times that the term of one such regent will expire in each year
on the first day of April. Commencing April first, nineteen hundred
seventy-four, each regent shall be elected for a term of seven years,
each such term to expire on the first day of April. Commencing on April
first, nineteen hundred ninety-four, each regent shall be elected for a
term of five years, each such term to expire on the first day of April.
Each regent shall be elected by the legislature by concurrent resolution
in the preceding March, on or before the first Tuesday of such month.
If, however, the legislature fails to agree on such concurrent
resolution by the first Tuesday of such month, then the two houses shall
meet in joint session at noon on the second Tuesday of such month and
proceed to elect such regent by joint ballot.
 2. All vacancies in such office, either for full or unexpired terms,
shall be so filled that there shall always be in the membership of the
board of regents at least one resident of each of the judicial
districts. A vacancy in the office of regent for other cause than
expiration of term of service shall be filled for the unexpired term by
an election at the session of the legislature immediately following such
vacancy in the manner prescribed in the preceding paragraph, unless the
legislature is in session when such vacancy occurs, in which case the
vacancy shall be filled by such legislature in the manner prescribed in
the preceding paragraph, except as hereinafter provided. However, if
such vacancy occurs after the second Tuesday in March and before a
resolution to adjourn sine die has been adopted by either house, then
the vacancy shall be filled by concurrent resolution, unless the
legislature fails to agree on such concurrent resolution within three
legislative days after its passage by one house, in which case the two
houses shall meet in joint session at noon on the next legislative day
and proceed to elect such regent by joint ballots; provided, however,
that if the vacancy occur after the adoption by either house of a
resolution to adjourn sine die, then the vacancy shall be filled at the
next session of the legislature in the manner prescribed in the
preceding paragraph.
 3. There shall be no "ex-officio" members of the board of regents.
 4. No person shall be at the same time a regent of the university and
a trustee, president, principal or any other officer of an institution
belonging to the university.
 5. (a) Every regent, on and after December fifteenth and before the
following January fifteenth, in each year, shall file with the secretary
of the senate and with the clerk of the assembly a written statement of
 (1) each financial interest, direct or indirect of himself or herself,
his or her spouse and his or her unemancipated children under the age of
eighteen years in any activity which is subject to the jurisdiction of
the education department or name of the entity in which the interest is
had and whether such interest is over or under five thousand dollars in
value.
 (2) every office and directorship held by him or her in any
corporation, firm or enterprise which is subject to the jurisdiction of
the education department or which does business with an institution
which is subject to the jurisdiction of the education department,
including the name of such corporation, firm or enterprise.
 (3) any other interest or relationship which he or she determines in
his or her discretion might reasonably be expected to be in the public
interest and should be disclosed.
 (b) On or before January thirty-first in each year the secretary of
the senate and the clerk of the assembly shall jointly prepare a report
containing the statements required to be filed pursuant to paragraph (a)
of this subdivision. Copies of such report shall be open to public
inspection in the office of the secretary of the senate and the clerk of
the assembly. The senate and assembly may jointly adopt rules to
implement the provisions of this subdivision.
 § 203. Officers. The elective officers of the university shall be a
chancellor and a vice-chancellor who shall serve without salary, and
such other officers as are deemed necessary by the regents, all of whom
shall be chosen by ballot by the regents and shall hold office during
their pleasure; but no election, removal or change of salary of an
elective officer shall be made by less than six votes in favor thereof.
Each regent and each elective officer shall, before entering on his
duties, take and file with the secretary of state the oath of office
required of state officers.
 The chancellor shall preside at all convocations and at all meetings
of the regents, and confer all degrees which they shall authorize. In
his absence or inability to act, the vice-chancellor, or if he be also
absent, the senior regent present, shall perform all the duties and have
all the powers of the chancellor.
 § 204. Meetings and absences. 1. (a) The regents may provide for
regular meetings of the board of regents and any committee,
subcommittee, task force, or other subgroups thereof. Notice of time and
place for all regular public meetings of the board of regents and any
committee, subcommittee, task force, or other subgroups thereof shall be
publicly provided at least seven days in advance of such meeting. Such
notice of time, place and agenda shall be distributed via the board's
official internet website and specifically distributed by United States
postal service to all regents at their usual addresses and, if a meeting
of a committee, subcommittee, task force, or other subgroups thereof, by
such means, including but not limited to the United States postal
service or electronic means, as determined by the committee,
subcommittee, task force, or other subgroups thereof. An agenda for a
regular public meeting of the board shall be comprised of a list of all
items to be considered with a description of the subject matter of each
such item and shall be posted at least three days in advance of the
meeting; provided however, that in an instance of a health or public
safety emergency, the board may include additional items to the agenda
with less than three days notice. In an instance of a health or public
safety emergency, the board shall use best efforts to make public any
changes to the agenda prior to the regular meeting. The notice and
agenda shall be considered a public record.
 (b) The chancellor or the commissioner, or any five regents, may at
any time call a special meeting of the board of regents and fix the time
and place therefor. Notice of time, place and agenda for all special
public meetings of the board of regents shall be publicly provided at
least three days in advance of such meeting. Such notice of time, place
and agenda shall be distributed via the board's official internet
website and specifically circulated according to the rules and
regulations of the regents to all regents. The board of regents special
public meeting agenda shall be comprised of a list of all items to be
considered with a description of the subject matter of each such item;
provided however, that in an instance of a health or public safety
emergency, the board may include additional items to the agenda with
less than three days notice. In an instance of a health or public safety
emergency, the board shall use best efforts to make public any changes
to the agenda prior to the special meeting. The notice and agenda shall
be considered a public record.
 2. Any meeting of the board of regents and any committee,
subcommittee, task force, or other subgroups thereof shall be conducted
in accordance with article seven of the public officers law.
 3. A summary of committee reports, any other minutes, and attendance
of the board of regents for either regular or special meetings shall be
electronically available on the board of regents website at the close of
each board meeting and shall be considered a public record. The video
recording of any regular full board meeting shall be posted no later
than five days following the meeting of the board. Any meeting summaries
and actions taken shall be posted on the board of regents website within
five days of approval by the board. Information posted on the board of
regents website shall remain on the site as archived data for a minimum
of ten years.
 4. If any regent shall fail to attend three consecutive meetings,
without excuse accepted as satisfactory by the regents, that regent may
be deemed to have resigned and the regents shall then report the vacancy
to the legislature which shall fill it.
 § 205. Quorum. Seven regents attending shall be a quorum for the
transaction of business.
 § 206. Authority to take testimony and conduct hearings. The regents,
any committee thereof, the commissioner of education, the deputy and any
associate and assistant commissioner of education and the counsel of the
department may take testimony or hear proofs relating to their official
duties, or in any matter which they may lawfully investigate. Hearings
by the regents pursuant to any of the provisions of this chapter may be
given by or before not less than three members of the regents designated
by the regents or by the chancellor of the university to hold such
hearings, but any decision or determination in such proceedings shall be
made by the regents.
 § 207. Legislative power. Subject and in conformity to the
constitution and laws of the state, the regents shall exercise
legislative functions concerning the educational system of the state,
determine its educational policies, and, except, as to the judicial
functions of the commissioner of education, establish rules for carrying
into effect the laws and policies of the state, relating to education,
and the functions, powers, duties and trusts conferred or charged upon
the university and the education department. But no enactment of the
regents shall modify in any degree the freedom of the governing body of
any seminary for the training of priests or clergymen to determine and
regulate the entire course of religious, doctrinal or theological
instruction to be given in such institution. No rule by which more than
a majority vote shall be required for any specified action by the
regents shall be amended, suspended or repealed by a smaller vote than
that required for action thereunder. Rules or regulations, or
amendments or repeals thereof, adopted or prescribed by the commissioner
of education as provided by law shall not be effective unless and until
approved by the regents, except where authority is conferred by the
regents upon the commissioner of education to adopt, prescribe, amend or
repeal such rules or regulations.
 § 207-a. Disclosure of gifts made to institutions of higher education
by foreign governments, persons and entities. 1. As used in this
section: a. The term "foreign government" shall mean any government
other than the United States government or the government of a state or
a political subdivision thereof and shall include an agent of such
government;
 b. The term "foreign legal entity" shall mean (i) any legal entity
created under the laws of a foreign government or (ii) any legal entity
created under the laws of the United States or of any state hereof if a
majority of the ownership of the stock of such legal entity is directly
or indirectly owned legally or beneficially by one or more foreign
governments or one or more foreign persons or one or more legal entities
created under the laws of a foreign government or if a majority of the
membership of any such entity is composed of foreign persons or legal
entities created under the laws of a foreign government and shall
include an agent of such legal entity;
 c. The term "foreign person" shall mean any individual who is not a
citizen or national of the United States or a trust territory or
protectorate thereof and shall include an agent of such individual; and
 d. The term "gift" shall mean any endowment, gift, grant, contract,
award or property of any kind.
 2. Every institution authorized by the legislature or by the regents
of the university of the state of New York to confer academic degrees in
this state shall disclose the amount, terms, restrictions and
requirements attached to or made a part of any gift of a value in excess
of one hundred thousand dollars made to such institution by a foreign
government, foreign legal entity or foreign person in any fiscal year of
the institution. If the foreign government, foreign legal entity or
foreign person makes more than one gift to an institution in any fiscal
year of such institution, and the total value of those gifts in such
fiscal year of the institution exceeds one hundred thousand dollars, the
institution shall report all of such gifts received.
 3. Such information shall be forwarded to the department no later than
thirty days after the final day of the fiscal year of the institution.
The information shall include:
 a. the amount and the date of the making of the gift;
 b. when the gift is conditional, matching or designated for a
particular purpose, full details of the conditions, matching provisions
or designation;
 c. the name of the foreign government in the case of a gift by a
foreign government; the name of the foreign country in which a foreign
entity or foreign person is principally located or resides in the case
of a gift by a foreign entity or foreign person.
 The name of the foreign entity shall be disclosed in the event of a
gift which (i) contains conditions or restrictions regarding the control
of curricula, employment or termination of faculty, admission of
students, student fees or (ii) is contingent upon the agreement of the
institution to take specific public positions or actions or to award
honorary degrees; and
 d. the purpose or purposes for which the gift will be used.
 4. Such information shall be a matter of public record and shall be
made available by the department to the general public for review and
copying during normal business hours.
 § 207-b. Crisis resources. Each degree-granting institution of higher
education shall establish an education campaign to educate students,
faculty, and staff about the 9-8-8 suicide and crisis lifeline and the
crisis text line. Such education campaign shall include, but not be
limited to:
 1. resources describing when to utilize the 9-8-8 suicide and crisis
lifeline and the crisis text line; and
 2. contact information for such services on student identification
cards, or the annual distribution of contact information for such
services at institutions that do not issue student identification cards.
 § 208. General examinations, credentials and degrees. The regents may
confer by diploma under their seal such honorary degrees as they may
deem proper, and may establish examinations as to attainments in
learning, and may award and confer suitable certificates, diplomas and
degrees on persons who satisfactorily meet the requirements prescribed.
 § 208-a. Scheduling of examinations. The department shall make a bona
fide effort to schedule state mandated examinations on days other than
days of religious observation. The commissioner may promulgate
regulations to implement this section.
 § 209. Academic examinations; admission and fees. The regents shall
establish in the secondary institutions of the university, examinations
in studies furnishing a suitable standard of graduation therefrom and of
admission to colleges, and certificates or diplomas shall be conferred
by the regents on students who satisfactorily pass such examinations.
 Any person shall be admitted to these examinations who shall conform
to the rules and pay the fees prescribed by the regents.
 § 209-a. Applications for admission to college. Notwithstanding any
other provision of this chapter to the contrary, no rule or regulation
shall be adopted by the school authorities, school officers or board of
education of a school district which limits the number of requests for
the processing of college applications that may be submitted by the
pupils in a secondary school under their or its jurisdiction. Nothing
contained in this section shall prohibit school authorities, school
officers or boards of education from establishing rules of procedure for
the submission of such requests.
 § 210. Registrations. The regents may register domestic and foreign
institutions in terms of New York standards, and fix the value of
degrees, diplomas and certificates issued by institutions of other
states or countries and presented for entrance to schools, colleges and
the professions in this state.
 § 210-a. Admission requirements for graduate-level teacher and
educational leader programs. Each institution registered by the
department with graduate-level teacher and leader education programs
shall adopt rigorous selection criteria geared to predicting a
candidate's academic success in its program, including but not limited
to, achievement of a cumulative grade point average of 3.0 or higher in
the candidate's undergraduate program. Each program may exempt up to
fifty percent of any incoming class of students from such selection
criteria set forth in this section based on a student's demonstration of
potential to positively contribute to the teaching profession or other
extenuating circumstances pursuant to the regulations of the
commissioner. A program shall report to the department the number of
students admitted pursuant to such exemption and the selection criteria
used for such exemptions.
 § 210-b. Graduate-level teacher and educational leadership program
deregistration and suspension. 1. The department shall suspend a
graduate program's authority to admit new students if for three
consecutive academic years, fewer than fifty percent of its students who
have satisfactorily completed the program pass each examination that
they have taken that is required for certification and shall notify
currently admitted and enrolled students of such suspension. The
graduate program shall be permitted to continue operations for the
length of time it would take all currently admitted and/or enrolled
students, if they were to attend classes on a full-time basis, to
complete the requirements for their degrees. If, at any time during such
period, the commissioner determines that student and/or program
performance has significantly improved, the commissioner may reinstate
the program's ability to admit new students. If the commissioner does
not affirmatively reinstate the program's authority to admit new
students during such time period, the program shall be deregistered. For
purposes of this subdivision, students who have satisfactorily completed
the graduate program shall mean students who have met each educational
requirement of the program, excluding any requirement that the student
pass each required New York State teacher certification examination for
a teaching certificate and/or school building leader examination for a
school building leader certificate in order to complete the program.
Students satisfactorily meeting each educational requirement may include
students who earn a degree or students who complete each educational
requirement without earning a degree. When making such a determination,
the department shall consider the performance on each certification
examination of the cohort of students completing an examination not more
than five years before the end of the academic year in which the program
is completed or not later than the September thirtieth following the end
of such academic year, where academic year is defined as July first
through June thirtieth, and shall consider only the highest score of
individuals taking a test more than once. When making such a
determination the department may adjust its methodology for determining
examination passage rates for one or more certification examinations to
account for sample size and accuracy.
 2. The institution may submit an appeal of a suspension of a graduate
program's ability to admit students or deregistration pursuant to this
section in a manner and timeframe as prescribed by the commissioner in
regulations. However, a program that has had its ability to admit
students suspended shall not admit new students while awaiting the
commissioner's decision on any appeal. An institution with a
deregistered program shall not admit any new students in such program
while awaiting the commissioner's decision on its application for
registration.
 3. The department may also, as prescribed by the commissioner in
regulations, conduct expedited suspension and registration reviews for
graduate programs, pursuant to regulations of the commissioner.
 § 210-c. Interstate reciprocity agreement for post-secondary distance
education programs.
 INTERSTATE RECIPROCITY AGREEMENT FOR THE POST-SECONDARY DISTANCE
 EDUCATION PROGRAMS
 Article I
 Purpose, findings, and policy
 The states party to an interstate agreement desire by common action to
establish comparable standards for the offering of postsecondary
distance-education courses and programs and to facilitate more offerings
of distance education courses to the students in their state.
 Article II
 Definitions
 As used in this section and any agreements and contracts made pursuant
to it, unless the context clearly states otherwise:
 (a)"Accredited" shall mean holding institutional accreditation by name
as a U.S.-based institution from an accreditor recognized by the U.S.
Department of Education.
 (b)"Approve" or "Approval" in the context of an institutional
application to operate under the state authorization reciprocity
agreement (SARA) means: a written statement by a home state that an
institution meets the standards required by SARA and is eligible to
operate under SARA.
 (c)"Complaint" means: a formal assertion in writing that the terms of
this agreement, or of laws, standards or regulations incorporated by
this agreement, are being violated by a person, institution, state,
agency or other organization or entity operating under the terms of this
agreement.
 (d) "Council" means: the National Council for SARA.
 (e)"C-RAC guidelines" and other uses of "C-RAC" refers to the
Interregional Guidelines for the Evaluation of Distance Education
Programs (Online Learning) for best practices in postsecondary distance
education adopted by the Council of Regional Accrediting Commissions
(C-RAC).
 (f) "Distance education" means, for purposes of an interstate
reciprocity agreement under this section: instruction offered by any
means where the student and faculty member are in separate physical
locations. It includes, but is not limited to, online, interactive video
or correspondence courses or programs. It does not include intrastate
distance education activity.
 (g) "Home state" means: a member state where the institution holds its
legal domicile. To operate under SARA an institution must have a single
home state.
 (h) "Institution" means: a degree-granting postsecondary entity.
 (i) "Legal domicile" of an institution for purposes of eligibility in
an interstate agreement means the state in which the institution's
principal campus holds its institutional accreditation and, if
applicable, its federal Office of Postsecondary Education Identifier
(OPEID) number. In the event that the OPEID number is assigned to a
campus that is in a different state than the principal accredited
campus, the SARA committees of the affected regional compacts shall
determine which is the home state for purposes of SARA.
 (j) "Member state" means: any state, district or territory that has
joined SARA.
 (k) "Physical presence" means: a measure by which a state defines the
status of an educational institution's presence within the state. The
distance education activities of an educational institution with a
physical presence within the state are not covered under an interstate
reciprocity agreement under this Act and instead must meet the
requirements of the state.
 (l) "Portal agency" means: the single agency designated by the state
to serve as the interstate point of contact for questions, complaints
and other communications related to the interstate compact and/or any
regional compact.
 (m) "Regional compact" means one of New England Board of Higher
Education, Midwestern Higher Education Compact, Southern Regional
Education Board or Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education,
or another SARA interstate regional compact for the mid-Atlantic states.
 (n) "State authorization reciprocity agreements" or "SARA" means: an
agreement among member states, districts and U.S. territories that
establishes comparable national standards for interstate offering of
post-secondary distance-education courses and programs.
 Article III
 Interstate reciprocity agreements for postsecondary distance education
 (a) The commissioner shall have the authority on behalf of New York to
enter into SARA and/or any regional compacts on behalf of this state
with one or more other states to provide for the reciprocity of
postsecondary distance education and to carry out all activities
necessary to carry out such function.
 (b) Upon entrance into SARA and/or any regional compact, the
department shall:
 (i) be designated as the portal agency and shall be responsible for
the administrative and functional responsibilities of participation in
SARA. The department shall not be responsible for all oversight
activities of providers in the state, but shall be the portal for the
state;
 (ii) consider applications from degree-granting institutions on the
same basis and either:
 (A) approve any institutions that meet the standards of SARA, and
agree to the process and commitments of SARA without differentiating by
sector;
 (B) disapprove any institution that does not meet the standards of
SARA, or does not agree to the process and commitments of SARA; or
 (C) may approve an institution applying for initial participation in
SARA to participate on a provisional status in any of the following
circumstances:
 (I) the institution is on probationary status or the equivalent with
its institutional accrediting body;
 (II) the institution is using a letter of credit or is under a cash
management agreement by the U.S. Department of Education;
 (III) the institution is the subject of a publicly announced
investigation by a government agency, and the investigation is related
to the institution's academic quality, financial stability or student or
consumer protection; or
 (IV) the institution is the subject of a current investigation by its
home state related to the institution's academic quality, financial
stability or student or consumer protection.
 (iii) prescribe state processes for consumer protection and complaints
in regulations of the commissioner, as required by SARA;
 (iv) operate under the processes, procedures and guidelines required
by SARA, including the Interregional Guidelines for the Evaluation of
Distance Education developed by the Council of Regional Accrediting
Commissioners, if required by SARA;
 (v) serve as the default forum for any complaint filed against an
institution approved by the state to participate in the state
authorization reciprocity agreement and the department shall be
responsible for coordinating any such efforts and shall have the
authority to investigate and resolve complaints that originate outside
of the state. All other state agencies and governing boards of such
institutions shall assist as necessary in such investigations and report
as needed to the department;
 (vi) impose as a penalty refunds or other corrective action to resolve
complaints involving residents of other states;
 (vii) maintain written documentation of:
 (A) all formal complaints received;
 (B) complaint notifications provided to institutions and accrediting
agencies;
 (C) actions taken that are commensurate with the severity of
violations; and
 (D) complaint resolutions.
 (viii) report complaints and concerns to the institutions about which
the compliant is lodged, the home state portal agency responsible for
the institution, and, if appropriate, any accrediting bodies; and
 (ix) impose an annual fee on any institution participating in any
interstate agreement, in an amount prescribed by the commissioner in
regulations which shall be consistent with any fees required by the
interstate agreement and any fees required for the state to administer
SARA. Any institution that is removed from eligibility from SARA during
the period of approval receives no fee refund; and
 (x) report any information required by the National Council for SARA.
 Article IV
 Institutional eligibility for admission to SARA
 An institution applying to operate pursuant to SARA under this section
shall:
 (a) have its principal campus or central administrative unit domiciled
in a state that has joined SARA and be authorized to operate in that
state. Only distance education content originating in the United States
or a U.S. territory is eligible to be offered under the agreement;
 (b) be a U.S. degree-granting institution that is accredited by an
accrediting body recognized by the U.S. Secretary of Education;
 (c) agree to be bound by any standards, processes and/or guidelines
required by SARA, including the Interregional Guidelines for the
Evaluation of Distance Education developed by the Council of Regional
Accrediting Commissioners, if required by SARA;
 (d) agree to remain responsible for compliance with the requirements
of SARA and applicable laws, regardless of whether the institution
engages in operations under SARA itself, or through a third-party
provider;
 (e) agree to notify the education department of any negative changes
to its accreditation status;
 (f) agree to provide any data requested by the education department,
to the extent permitted by applicable law, and assist the department in
resolving any complaints arising from its students and to abide by
decisions of the department, in order for the education department to
effectively monitor any activities under the agreement;
 (g) report any information required by SARA and/or this section.
 Article V
 Approved and accepted programs
 Nothing in this section shall be construed to repeal or otherwise
modify any law or regulation of this state relating to the approval of
any other educational programs not covered by this section.
 Article VI
 Effect and withdrawal
 1. This section shall become effective upon this state's execution of
SARA and/or regional compact for distance education.
 2. The duration of any regional compact and/or interstate agreement
and the methods and conditions of withdrawal therefrom shall be those
specified in their terms.
 § 211. Review of regents learning standards. 1. The regents shall
periodically review and evaluate the existing regents learning standards
to determine if they should be strengthened, modified or combined so as
to provide adequate opportunity for students to acquire the skills and
knowledge they need to succeed in employment or postsecondary education
and to function productively as civic participants upon graduation from
high school. Such review and evaluation shall be conducted upon a
schedule adopted by the regents, provided that a review and evaluation
of the English language arts standards shall be completed as soon as
possible, but no later than the end of the two thousand seven--two
thousand eight school year.
 2. In conducting such reviews, the regents shall seek the
recommendations of teachers, school administrators, teacher educators
and others with educational expertise on improvements to the standards
so that they ensure that students are prepared, in appropriate
progression, for post-secondary education or employment.
 § 211-a. Enhanced state accountability system. To more fully implement
the requirements of section one thousand one hundred eleven of the
elementary and secondary education act of nineteen hundred sixty-five,
as amended, and the federal regulations implementing such statute, the
regents shall develop and implement an enhanced state accountability
system that uses growth measures to the extent required by this section.
 1. By the start of the two thousand eight--two thousand nine school
year, the regents shall establish, using existing state assessments, an
interim, modified accountability system for schools and districts that
is based on a growth model, subject to approval of the United States
department of education where required under federal law.
 2. The regents shall proceed with the development of an enhanced
accountability system, with revised or new state assessments, based on
an enhanced growth model that, to the extent feasible and consistent
with federal law, includes a value-added assessment model that employs a
scale-score approach to measure growth of students at all levels. (a) If
the regents establish that the assessment scaling and accountability
methodology employed have been determined by external experts in
educational testing and measurement to be valid and reliable and in
accordance with established standards for educational and psychological
testing, and (b) the approval of the United States department of
education has been obtained where required by federal law, the enhanced
growth model shall be implemented no later than the start of the two
thousand ten--two thousand eleven school year.
 3. In implementing the provisions of subdivisions one and two of this
section, the regents shall by July first, two thousand eight, establish
targets for improvement of schools and school districts based upon
performance on state assessments, graduation rates, and other indicators
of progress, such as student retention rates and college attendance and
completion rates.
 4. As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the
following meanings:
 a. "Growth model" shall mean the assessment of a cohort of students,
or individual students, over time that measures the academic progress
made by those students.
 b. "Value added assessment model" shall mean a form of growth model
that includes an evaluation of the specific effects of programs, and
other relevant factors, on the academic progress of individual students
over time.
 § 211-b. Consequences for consistent lack of improvement in academic
performance. In addition to taking appropriate action pursuant to the
regulations of the commissioner and the requirements of federal law, the
following actions shall be taken to increase school and district
accountability for academic performance:
 1. The regents shall expand the scope and improve the effectiveness of
the schools under registration review (SURR) process in the two thousand
seven--two thousand eight school year and thereafter, so as to ensure
that all schools that meet the criteria for identification as SURR shall
be so identified. The goal of such expansion shall be to identify as
SURR up to a total of five percent of the schools in the state within
four years, and to reorganize or restructure schools so identified in
cases where such action is appropriate.
 2. The regents shall develop a plan for increased support and possible
intervention in schools in improvement, corrective action, or
restructuring status or in SURR status. Notwithstanding any provision of
law to the contrary, the regents shall establish a two-step process as
follows:
 a. The appointment by the commissioner of a school quality review team
to assist any school in school improvement, corrective action,
restructuring status or SURR status in developing and implementing a
school improvement, corrective action, restructuring, or comprehensive
plan for the school. Such team may also conduct resource and program and
planning audits and examine the quality of curriculum, instructional
plans, and teaching in the schools, the learning opportunities and
support services available to students, and the organization and
operations of the school. After such review, the team shall provide
diagnostic recommendations for school improvement, which may include
administrative and operational improvements. The recommendation of such
team shall be advisory. The reasonable and necessary expenses incurred
in the performance of the team's official duties shall be a charge upon
the school district, or charter school, where applicable, that operates
the school.
 b. The appointment by the commissioner of a joint school intervention
team, for schools in (i) restructuring status or (ii) SURR status that
have failed to demonstrate progress as specified in their corrective
action plan or comprehensive education plan. Administrators and
educators from the district or charter school where applicable must be
included on the team, as well as any distinguished educator appointed to
the district pursuant to section two hundred eleven-c of this part. Such
team shall assist the school district in developing, reviewing and
recommending plans for reorganizing or reconfiguring of such schools.
The recommendations of such team should be advisory. The reasonable and
necessary expenses incurred in the performance of the school
intervention team's official duties shall be a charge upon the school
district, or charter school where applicable, that operates the school.
 3. A school district that has been identified as requiring academic
progress, as defined by 100.2(p)(7) of the commissioner's regulations,
or includes one or more schools under registration review, in need of
improvement, in corrective action or restructuring status shall be
required to submit a district improvement plan to the commissioner for
approval. In formulating the district improvement plan, the district
shall consider redirecting resources to programs and activities included
in the menu of options under subdivision three of section two hundred
eleven-d of this part in the schools so identified. If such options are
not adopted in the district improvement plan, the school district shall
provide the commissioner with an explanation of such decision which
shall be considered by the commissioner in determining whether to
approve such plan. The trustees or board of education shall hold a
public hearing before adoption of the district improvement plan and a
transcript of the testimony at such hearing shall be submitted to the
commissioner for review with the district improvement plan.
 4. The commissioner shall develop a plan for intervention in schools
under restructuring or SURR status that fail to demonstrate progress on
established performance measures and may be targeted for closure. Such
plan shall specify criteria for school closure and include processes to
be followed, research based options, and alternatives and strategies to
reorganizing, restructuring or reconfiguring schools. Such plan shall be
developed with input from educators including, but not limited to,
administrators, teachers and individuals identified as distinguished
educators pursuant to section two hundred eleven-c of this part.
 5. (a) The regents shall ensure that all school districts include in
any contract of employment, entered into, amended, or extended with a
superintendent of schools, community superintendent or deputy,
assistant, associate or other superintendent of schools who has been or
will be appointed for a fixed term, a provision requiring that such
contract specify that the superintendent shall be required to cooperate
fully with any distinguished educator appointed by the commissioner
pursuant to section two hundred eleven-c of this part.
 (b) In the case of a superintendent of schools, community
superintendent or deputy, assistant, associate or other superintendent
of schools who is not appointed for a fixed term, the contract
provisions contained in paragraph (a) of this subdivision shall be
deemed to apply to such superintendent immediately.
 (c) In the case of a charter school, the contract of employment of the
principal or headmaster or other chief school officer of the charter
school that is entered into, amended or extended shall also be required
to include the provisions contained in paragraph (a) of this
subdivision. In addition, such contract provisions shall be deemed to
apply immediately to any such person not appointed for a fixed term.
 § 211-c. Distinguished educators. The regents shall establish a
distinguished educator program that recognizes educational leaders who
have agreed to assist in improving the performance of low performing
school districts.
 1. Building principals, superintendents of schools and teachers
including retirees and current employees of school districts, under
whose leadership schools have demonstrated consistent growth in academic
performance and other individuals who have demonstrated educational
expertise, including superior performance in the classroom, shall be
eligible for designation by the regents as distinguished educators.
Provided, however, individuals employed by for-profit entities shall not
be eligible for such recognition.
 2. From the pool of distinguished educators designated by the regents
pursuant to subdivision one of this section, the commissioner shall
appoint distinguished educators who have expressed their willingness to
assist low performing districts in improving their academic performance.
To the extent practicable, the commissioner shall appoint distinguished
educators to assist districts with comparable demographics to the
schools or districts that are or were under such educator's leadership.
 3. The commissioner may appoint a distinguished educator to a school
district;
 a. when such district or a school within such district has failed to
achieve adequate yearly progress for four or more years;
 b. as a member of a joint school intervention team pursuant to
paragraph b of subdivision two of section two hundred eleven-b of this
part.
 4. The school district to which a distinguished educator is appointed
shall cooperate fully with an appointed distinguished educator.
 5. An appointed distinguished educator shall assess the learning
environment of schools in the district, review or provide assistance in
the development and implementation of any district improvement plan
and/or any corrective action, restructuring, or comprehensive plan of
any school within the district to which the distinguished educator is
assigned. Such distinguished educator shall either endorse without
change or make recommendations for modifications to any such plan to the
board of education, trustees, or chancellor, in a school district in a
city of one million or more inhabitants, and the commissioner. Upon
receipt of any recommendations for modification, the board of education,
trustees, or chancellor shall either modify the plans accordingly or
provide a written explanation to the commissioner of its reasons for not
adopting such recommendations. The commissioner shall direct the
district to modify the plans as recommended by the distinguished
educator unless the commissioner finds that the written explanation
provided by the district has compelling merit.
 6. Appointed distinguished educators shall be deemed ex-officio,
non-voting members of the board of education or trustees. In a school
district in a city of one million or more inhabitants, any such
distinguished educator shall be deemed an ex-officio, non-voting member
of the community district education council or the city board, as
applicable.
 7. The reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by the appointed
distinguished educators while performing their official duties shall be
paid by the school district.
 8. If an appointed distinguished educator is employed by a school
district or charter school, it shall be the duty of the board of
education or trustees of such school district, the chancellor of a city
school district in a city of one million or more inhabitants, or the
board of trustees of such charter school to facilitate the efforts of
any such appointed distinguished educators in their employ by granting
reasonable leave requests and otherwise accommodating their efforts, to
the extent such efforts do not substantially interfere with the
educator's performance of his or her regular duties.
 § 211-d. Contract for excellence. 1. a. Every school district that, as
of April first of the base year, has at least one school identified as
in corrective action or restructuring status or as a school requiring
academic progress: year two or above or as a school in need of
improvement: year two shall be required to prepare a contract for
excellence if the school district is estimated to receive an increase in
total foundation aid for the current year compared to the base year in
an amount that equals or exceeds either fifteen million dollars or ten
percent of the amount received in the base year, whichever is less, or
receives a supplemental educational improvement plan grant. In school
year two thousand seven--two thousand eight such increase shall be the
amount of the difference between total foundation aid received for the
current year and the total foundation aid base, as defined in paragraph
j of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter.
 b. In addition to the school districts required to prepare a contract
for excellence under paragraph a of this subdivision, every school
district that filed a contract for excellence in the base year shall
file a contract for excellence in the current year if such district is
estimated to receive a two-year increase, equal to the positive
difference of the total foundation aid apportioned for the current year
less the total foundation aid base, as defined in paragraph j of
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter, for
the base year, in an amount that equals or exceeds either twenty-seven
million five hundred thousand dollars or twenty percent of such total
foundation aid base for the base year; provided however, that this
requirement shall apply only to a school district that, as of April
first of the base year, has at least one school that has been identified
as in corrective action or restructuring status or as a school requiring
academic progress: year two or above or as a school in need of
improvement: year two.
 c. In a city school district located in a city of one million or more
inhabitants, a contract for excellence shall be prepared for the city
school district and each community district that meets criteria
specified in this subdivision.
 d. All computations pursuant to paragraphs a and b of this subdivision
and subdivision two of this section shall be based upon data included in
the computerized school aid run produced by the commissioner in support
of the enacted state budget which established the foundation aid
formulas for the current year. For purposes of this section,
accountability status of schools shall be determined as of April first
of the base year, except that if the commissioner determines that the
accountability data on file for a school as of April first of the base
year was in error and officially adjusts the accountability status of
the school after such date, such adjusted data shall be used for the
purposes of paragraphs a and b of this subdivision and subdivision two
of this section.
 e. Notwithstanding paragraphs a and b of this subdivision, a school
district that submitted a contract for excellence for the two thousand
eight--two thousand nine school year shall submit a contract for
excellence for the two thousand nine--two thousand ten school year in
conformity with the requirements of subparagraph (vi) of paragraph a of
subdivision two of this section unless all schools in the district are
identified as in good standing and provided further that, a school
district that submitted a contract for excellence for the two thousand
nine--two thousand ten school year, unless all schools in the district
are identified as in good standing, shall submit a contract for
excellence for the two thousand eleven--two thousand twelve school year
which shall, notwithstanding the requirements of subparagraph (vi) of
paragraph a of subdivision two of this section, provide for the
expenditure of an amount which shall be not less than the product of the
amount approved by the commissioner in the contract for excellence for
the two thousand nine--two thousand ten school year, multiplied by the
district's gap elimination adjustment percentage and provided further
that, a school district that submitted a contract for excellence for the
two thousand eleven--two thousand twelve school year, unless all schools
in the district are identified as in good standing, shall submit a
contract for excellence for the two thousand twelve--two thousand
thirteen school year which shall, notwithstanding the requirements of
subparagraph (vi) of paragraph a of subdivision two of this section,
provide for the expenditure of an amount which shall be not less than
the amount approved by the commissioner in the contract for excellence
for the two thousand eleven--two thousand twelve school year and
provided further that, a school district that submitted a contract for
excellence for the two thousand twelve--two thousand thirteen school
year, unless all schools in the district are identified as in good
standing, shall submit a contract for excellence for the two thousand
thirteen--two thousand fourteen school year which shall, notwithstanding
the requirements of subparagraph (vi) of paragraph a of subdivision two
of this section, provide for the expenditure of an amount which shall be
not less than the amount approved by the commissioner in the contract
for excellence for the two thousand twelve--two thousand thirteen school
year and provided further that, a school district that submitted a
contract for excellence for the two thousand thirteen--two thousand
fourteen school year, unless all schools in the district are identified
as in good standing, shall submit a contract for excellence for the two
thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen school year which shall,
notwithstanding the requirements of subparagraph (vi) of paragraph a of
subdivision two of this section, provide for the expenditure of an
amount which shall be not less than the amount approved by the
commissioner in the contract for excellence for the two thousand
thirteen--two thousand fourteen school year; and provided further that,
a school district that submitted a contract for excellence for the two
thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen school year, unless all schools
in the district are identified as in good standing, shall submit a
contract for excellence for the two thousand fifteen--two thousand
sixteen school year which shall, notwithstanding the requirements of
subparagraph (vi) of paragraph a of subdivision two of this section,
provide for the expenditure of an amount which shall be not less than
the amount approved by the commissioner in the contract for excellence
for the two thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen school year; and
provided further that a school district that submitted a contract for
excellence for the two thousand fifteen--two thousand sixteen school
year, unless all schools in the district are identified as in good
standing, shall submit a contract for excellence for the two thousand
sixteen--two thousand seventeen school year which shall, notwithstanding
the requirements of subparagraph (vi) of paragraph a of subdivision two
of this section, provide for the expenditure of an amount which shall be
not less than the amount approved by the commissioner in the contract
for excellence for the two thousand fifteen--two thousand sixteen school
year; and provided further that, a school district that submitted a
contract for excellence for the two thousand sixteen--two thousand
seventeen school year, unless all schools in the district are identified
as in good standing, shall submit a contract for excellence for the two
thousand seventeen--two thousand eighteen school year which shall,
notwithstanding the requirements of subparagraph (vi) of paragraph a of
subdivision two of this section, provide for the expenditure of an
amount which shall be not less than the amount approved by the
commissioner in the contract for excellence for the two thousand
sixteen--two thousand seventeen school year; and provided further that a
school district that submitted a contract for excellence for the two
thousand seventeen--two thousand eighteen school year, unless all
schools in the district are identified as in good standing, shall submit
a contract for excellence for the two thousand eighteen--two thousand
nineteen school year which shall, notwithstanding the requirements of
subparagraph (vi) of paragraph a of subdivision two of this section,
provide for the expenditure of an amount which shall be not less than
the amount approved by the commissioner in the contract for excellence
for the two thousand seventeen--two thousand eighteen school year; and
provided further that, a school district that submitted a contract for
excellence for the two thousand eighteen--two thousand nineteen school
year, unless all schools in the district are identified as in good
standing, shall submit a contract for excellence for the two thousand
nineteen--two thousand twenty school year which shall, notwithstanding
the requirements of subparagraph (vi) of paragraph a of subdivision two
of this section, provide for the expenditure of an amount which shall be
not less than the amount approved by the commissioner in the contract
for excellence for the two thousand eighteen--two thousand nineteen
school year; and provided further that, a school district that submitted
a contract for excellence for the two thousand nineteen--two thousand
twenty school year, unless all schools in the district are identified as
in good standing, shall submit a contract for excellence for the two
thousand twenty--two thousand twenty-one school year which shall,
notwithstanding the requirements of subparagraph (vi) of paragraph a of
subdivision two of this section, provide for the expenditure of an
amount which shall be not less than the amount approved by the
commissioner in the contract for excellence for the two thousand
nineteen--two thousand twenty school year; and provided further that, a
school district that submitted a contract for excellence for the two
thousand twenty--two thousand twenty-one school year, unless all schools
in the district are identified as in good standing, shall submit a
contract for excellence for the two thousand twenty-one--two thousand
twenty-two school year which shall, notwithstanding the requirements of
subparagraph (vi) of paragraph a of subdivision two of this section,
provide for the expenditure of an amount which shall be not less than
the amount approved by the commissioner in the contract for excellence
for the two thousand twenty--two thousand twenty-one school year; and
provided further that, a school district that submitted a contract for
excellence for the two thousand twenty-one--two thousand twenty-two
school year, unless all schools in the district are identified as in
good standing, shall submit a contract for excellence for the two
thousand twenty-two--two thousand twenty-three school year which shall,
notwithstanding the requirements of subparagraph (vi) of paragraph a of
subdivision two of this section, provide for the expenditure of an
amount which shall be not less than the amount approved by the
commissioner in the contract for excellence for the two thousand
twenty-one--two thousand twenty-two school year; and provided further
that, a school district that submitted a contract for excellence for the
two thousand twenty-two--two thousand twenty-three school year, unless
all schools in the district are identified as in good standing, shall
submit a contract for excellence for the two thousand twenty-three--two
thousand twenty-four school year which shall, notwithstanding the
requirements of subparagraph (vi) of paragraph a of subdivision two of
this section, provide for the expenditure of an amount which shall be
not less than the amount approved by the commissioner in the contract
for excellence for the two thousand twenty-two--two thousand
twenty-three school year; and provided further that, a school district
that submitted a contract for excellence for the two thousand
twenty-three--two thousand twenty-four school year, unless all schools
in the district are identified as in good standing, shall submit a
contract for excellence for the two thousand twenty-four--two thousand
twenty-five school year which shall, notwithstanding the requirements of
subparagraph (vi) of paragraph a of subdivision two of this section,
provide for the expenditure of an amount which shall be not less than
the amount approved by the commissioner in the contract for excellence
for the two thousand twenty-three--two thousand twenty-four school year;
and provided further that a school district that submitted a contract
for excellence for the two thousand twenty-four--two thousand
twenty-five school year, unless all schools in the district are
identified as in good standing, shall submit a contract for excellence
for the two thousand twenty-five--two thousand twenty-six school year
which shall, notwithstanding the requirements of subparagraph (vi) of
paragraph a of subdivision two of this section, provide for the
expenditure of an amount which shall be not less than the amount
approved by the commissioner in the contract for excellence for the two
thousand twenty-four--two thousand twenty-five school year; provided,
however, that, in a city school district in a city having a population
of one million or more, notwithstanding the requirements of subparagraph
(vi) of paragraph a of subdivision two of this section, the contract for
excellence shall provide for the expenditure as set forth in
subparagraph (v) of paragraph a of subdivision two of this section. For
purposes of this paragraph, the "gap elimination adjustment percentage"
shall be calculated as the sum of one minus the quotient of the sum of
the school district's net gap elimination adjustment for two thousand
ten--two thousand eleven computed pursuant to chapter fifty-three of the
laws of two thousand ten, making appropriations for the support of
government, plus the school district's gap elimination adjustment for
two thousand eleven--two thousand twelve as computed pursuant to chapter
fifty-three of the laws of two thousand eleven, making appropriations
for the support of the local assistance budget, including support for
general support for public schools, divided by the total aid for
adjustment computed pursuant to chapter fifty-three of the laws of two
thousand eleven, making appropriations for the local assistance budget,
including support for general support for public schools. Provided,
further, that such amount shall be expended to support and maintain
allowable programs and activities approved in the two thousand nine--two
thousand ten school year or to support new or expanded allowable
programs and activities in the current year.
 2. a. (i) In a common, union free, central, central high school, or a
city school district in a city having less than one hundred twenty-five
thousand inhabitants, required to prepare a contract for excellence
pursuant to subdivision one of this section and, as of April first of
the base year, does not contain any schools identified as in corrective
action or restructuring status or requiring academic progress: year
three or above, each contract for excellence shall describe how the sum
of the amounts apportioned to the school district in the current year as
total foundation aid, in excess of one hundred four percent of the
district's foundation aid base, as adjusted for additional amounts
payable as charter school basic tuition over such amount payable in the
base year, shall be used to support new programs and new activities or
redesign or expand the use of programs and activities demonstrated to
improve student achievement; provided however, up to fifty percent of
additional funding received in the current year may be used to maintain
investments in programs and activities listed in paragraph a of
subdivision three of this section.
 (ii) In a common, union free, central, central high school, or a city
school district in a city having less than one hundred twenty-five
thousand inhabitants, required to prepare a contract for excellence
pursuant to subdivision one of this section and, as of April first of
the base year, has at least one school identified as in corrective
action or restructuring status or requiring academic progress: year
three or above, each contract for excellence shall describe how the sum
of the amounts apportioned to the school district in the current year as
total foundation aid, in excess of one hundred four percent of the
district's foundation aid base, as adjusted for additional amounts
payable as charter school basic tuition over such amount payable in the
base year, shall be used to support new programs and new activities or
redesign or expand the use of programs and activities demonstrated to
improve student achievement; provided however, up to thirty-five percent
of additional funding received in the current year may be used to
maintain investments in the programs and activities listed in paragraph
a of subdivision three of this section.
 (iii) In a city school district in a city having a population of one
hundred twenty-five thousand or more inhabitants but less than one
million inhabitants that either receives a supplemental educational
improvement plan grant or is required to submit a contract for
excellence based solely upon the criteria specified in paragraph b of
subdivision one of this section, each contract for excellence shall
describe how the sum of the amounts apportioned to the school district
in the current year as total foundation aid, and as supplemental
educational improvement plan grants, in excess of one hundred four
percent of such aid apportioned to the district in the base year, as
adjusted for additional amounts payable as charter school basic tuition
over such amount payable in the base year, shall be used to support new
programs and new activities or redesign or expand the use of programs
and activities demonstrated to improve student achievement; provided
however, up to fifty percent of additional funding received in the
current year may be used to maintain investments in the programs and
activities listed in paragraph a of subdivision three of this section.
 (iv) In a city school district in a city having a population of one
hundred twenty-five thousand or more inhabitants but less than one
million inhabitants that satisfies the criteria specified in paragraph a
of subdivision one of this section and does not receive a supplemental
educational improvement plan grant, each contract for excellence shall
describe how the sum of the amounts apportioned to the school district
in the current year as total foundation aid, in excess of one hundred
three percent of the district's foundation aid base, as adjusted for
additional amounts payable as charter school basic tuition over such
amount payable in the base year, shall be used to support new programs
and new activities or expand the use of programs and activities
demonstrated to improve student achievement; provided however, up to
twenty-five percent of additional funding received in the current year
may be used to maintain investments in the programs and activities
listed in paragraph a of subdivision three of this section.
 (v) In a city school district in a city having a population of one
million or more inhabitants, each contract for excellence shall describe
how the amounts apportioned to the school district in the current year
as total foundation aid and academic achievement grants, in excess of
one hundred three percent of the district's foundation aid base, shall
be used to support new programs and new activities or expand the use of
programs and activities demonstrated to improve student achievement;
provided however, up to thirty million dollars or twenty-five percent of
additional funding received in the current year, whichever is less, may
be used to maintain investments in the programs and activities listed in
paragraph a of subdivision three of this section.
 (vi) Each contract for excellence for a school district that was
required to prepare a contract for excellence in the base year shall
provide for the expenditure of an amount equivalent to the total
budgeted amount approved by the commissioner in the district's approved
contract for excellence for the base year; provided that such amount
shall be expended to support and maintain allowable programs and
activities approved in the base year or to support new or expanded
allowable programs and activities in the current year.
 (vii) (A) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the
contrary, a school district that submitted a contract for excellence for
the two thousand seven--two thousand eight school year and the two
thousand eight--two thousand nine school year and is required to submit
a contract for excellence for the two thousand nine--two thousand ten
school year but did not fully expend all of its two thousand seven--two
thousand eight foundation aid subject to the contract for excellence
restrictions during the two thousand seven--two thousand eight school
year may re-allocate and expend such unexpended funds during the two
thousand eight--two thousand nine and two thousand nine--two thousand
ten school years for allowable contract for excellence programs and
activities as defined in subdivision three of this section in a manner
prescribed by the commissioner. For purposes of determining maintenance
of effort pursuant to subparagraph (vi) of this paragraph for the two
thousand eight--two thousand nine school year, funds expended pursuant
to this subparagraph shall be included in the total budgeted amount
approved by the commissioner in the district's contract for excellence
for the two thousand seven--two thousand eight school year; provided
that such amount shall not be counted more than once in determining
maintenance of effort for the two thousand nine--two thousand ten school
year or thereafter.
 (B) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the
contrary, a school district that submitted a contract for excellence for
the two thousand nine--two thousand ten school year but did not fully
expend all of its two thousand nine--two thousand ten foundation aid
subject to the contract for excellence restrictions during the two
thousand nine--two thousand ten school year may re-allocate and expend
such unexpended funds during the two thousand eleven--two thousand
twelve school year for allowable contract for excellence programs and
activities as defined in subdivision three of this section in a manner
prescribed by the commissioner; provided that such amount shall not be
counted more than once in determining any maintenance of effort pursuant
to this section.
 b. (i) The contract shall specify the new or expanded programs for
which additional amounts of such total foundation aid, or grant shall be
used and shall affirm that such programs shall predominately benefit
students with the greatest educational needs including, but not limited
to, those students with limited English proficiency, students in poverty
and students with disabilities.
 (ii) (A) In a city school district in a city having a population of
one million or more inhabitants such contract shall also include a plan,
which shall be developed in collaboration with the collective bargaining
units representing teachers and the principals beginning in September
two thousand twenty-two and signed off on by the chancellor and the
presidents of each bargaining unit, to reduce actual class sizes,
beginning September two thousand twenty-three and to be achieved by
September two thousand twenty-eight for all classes, with the exception
of physical education and performing groups, as follows: (1)
kindergarten-third grade to have no more than twenty students per class;
(2) fourth-eighth grade to have no more than twenty-three students per
class; and (3) high school to have no more than twenty-five students per
class. Physical education and performing groups shall have no more than
forty students per class at all levels. Each year of the plan, an
additional twenty percent of the classrooms in the city school district,
excluding special education classes, shall be in compliance with the
class size targets such that the city school district is in full
compliance by two thousand twenty-eight and all classes should maintain
the target class size. The class size reduction plan shall prioritize
schools serving populations with higher poverty levels.
 (B) The class size reduction plan shall include any exemptions to the
class size targets. These exemptions shall be limited to: (1) space; (2)
over-enrolled students; (3) license area shortages; and (4) severe
economic distress. Any such exemptions shall be approved by the
chancellor and the presidents of the collective bargaining units
representing the teachers and the principals as part of the class size
reduction plan. Should the chancellor and the presidents of the
collective bargaining units representing the teachers and the principals
be unable to reach agreement on the exemptions after thirty days, the
issue shall be determined by an arbitrator. In addition, any exemption
based on available space shall include a reference to the capital budget
to demonstrate that the budget is aligned with resolving the exemption
status. Exempted classes, for the years in which they are exempt, and
special education classes shall not count toward the twenty percent
target.
 (C) The class size reduction plan shall also include the methods to be
used to achieve the class size targets, such as the creation or
construction of more classrooms and school buildings, the placement of
more than one teacher in a classroom or methods to otherwise reduce the
student to teacher ratio, but only as a temporary measure until more
classrooms are made available in conformance with the plan. For elective
and specialty classes, the collective bargaining unit representing
teachers may negotiate class sizes higher than the targets if such
increase is approved by a majority of the staff in the school.
 (iii) A city school district in a city having a population of one
million or more inhabitants shall prepare annual reports, on the dates
set forth below, to the commissioner on the status of the implementation
of its plan to reduce actual class sizes pursuant to subparagraph (ii)
of this paragraph. Such report shall be publicly released and posted on
the city school district's website, identifying all schools that
received funds targeted at class size reduction efforts pursuant to the
requirements of this section and providing the following information
regarding such schools:
 (A) the amount of contract for excellence funds received by each
school and the school year in which it received such funds;
 (B) a detailed description of how contract for excellence funds
contributed to achieving class size reduction in each school that
received such funding including specific information on the number of
classes in each school that existed prior to receiving contract for
excellence funds and the number of new classes that were created in each
school for each year such funding was received, the number of classroom
teachers that existed in each school prior to receiving contract for
excellence funds and the number of new classroom teachers in each school
for each year such funding was received, the student to teacher ratio in
each school prior to receiving contract for excellence funds and the
student to teacher ratio in each school for each year such funding was
received;
 (C) the actual student enrollment for the current school year and the
projected student enrollment for the upcoming school year for each
school by grade level;
 (D) the actual class sizes for the current school year, and the
projected class sizes for the upcoming school year for each school by
grade level;
 (E) the annual capital plan for school construction and leasing to
show how many classrooms will be added in each year and in which schools
and districts to achieve the class size targets;
 (F) how the school capacity and utilization formula is aligned to the
class size targets in the city school district's class size reduction
plan; and
 (G) the schools that have made insufficient progress toward achieving
the class size reduction targets set forth in the approved class size
reduction plan pursuant to subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph and a
detailed description of the actions that will be taken to reduce class
sizes in such schools.
 The report shall be submitted to the commissioner on or before
November fifteenth two thousand twenty-three and on or before November
fifteenth of each year thereafter and made available to the public by
such date on the city school district's website. If the department
determines that the November fifteenth report does not demonstrate
sufficient decreases in class size, the department shall issue a letter
making that determination public on its website and the city school
district shall immediately submit a plan for corrective action, which
shall be developed in collaboration with the collective bargaining units
representing the teachers and the principals and signed off on by the
chancellor and the president of each collective bargaining unit. The
city school district's corrective action plan shall also be made
available to the public on the city school district's website upon
submission to the department. The final corrective action plan shall be
made available to the public upon approval by the department. The report
shall also be certified by the state or city comptroller that the city
school district's capital and education funding plans will provide
sufficient space and staffing for the reduction in class size set forth
in this paragraph and, if not, what measures and/or funding should be
added to the plan to achieve such targets.
 (iv) Provided the commissioner approves and the city school district
remains in compliance with the class size reduction plan, as set forth
herein, the state shall take such compliance into consideration when
determining increases in foundation aid.
 (v) In addition to the annual reports, the city school district shall
submit a financial impact statement on November fifteenth, two thousand
twenty-five. The financial impact statement may recommend a pause of the
class size reduction plan, but in no event may it result in a roll back
or increase in class sizes.
 c. The contract for excellence shall state, for all funding sources,
whether federal, state or local, the instructional expenditures per
pupil, the special education expenditures per pupil, and the total
expenditures per pupil, projected for the current year and actually
incurred in the base year.
 3. a. The commissioner shall adopt regulations establishing allowable
programs and activities intended to improve student achievement which
shall be limited to: (i) class size reduction, (ii) programs that
increase student time on task, including but not limited to, academic
after-school programs, (iii) teacher and principal quality initiatives,
(iv) middle school and high school re-structuring, (v) expansion or
replication of effective model programs for students with limited
English proficiency, and (vi) full-day kindergarten or prekindergarten.
Provided, however, that districts may use up to fifteen percent of the
additional funding they receive for experimental programs designed to
demonstrate the efficacy of other strategies to improve student
achievement consistent with the intent of this section and, in school
year two thousand seven--two thousand eight, up to thirty million
dollars or twenty-five percent of such additional funding, whichever is
less, may be used to maintain investments in programs and activities
listed in this subdivision. Any such district seeking to implement an
experimental program shall first submit a plan to the commissioner
setting forth the need for such experimental program and how such
program will improve student performance.
 b. The commissioner shall assist school districts that include in
their contract for excellence the implementation of incentives,
developed in collaboration with teachers in the collective bargaining
process, for highly qualified and experienced teachers to work in low
performing schools to ensure that such incentives are effective.
 4. a. A district's contract for excellence for the academic year two
thousand eight--two thousand nine and thereafter, shall be developed
through a public process, in consultation with parents or persons in
parental relation, teachers, administrators, and any distinguished
educator appointed pursuant to section two hundred eleven-c of this
chapter.
 b. Such process shall include at least one public hearing. In a city
school district in a city of one million or more inhabitants, a public
hearing shall be held within each county of such city. A transcript of
the testimony presented at such public hearings shall be included when
the contract for excellence is submitted to the commissioner, for review
when making a determination pursuant to subdivision five of this
section.
 c. In a city school district in a city of one million or more
inhabitants, each community district contract for excellence shall be
consistent with the citywide contract for excellence and shall be
submitted by the community superintendent to the community district
education council for review and comment at a public meeting.
 * d. For the two thousand seven--two thousand eight school year,
school districts shall solicit public comment on their contracts for
excellence.
 * NB Effective until July 1, 2023
 * d. In a city school district in a city of one million or more inhabitants, the public process set forth in paragraphs a through c of
this subdivision shall commence no later than thirty days after a state
budget is enacted each year and be completed no later than thirty days
after its commencement. Notice of the public process shall be provided
fifteen days prior to the commencement of the first public hearing and
shall be posted on the city school district's website as well as
transmitted via email to school administrators, parent and teacher
organizations, and elected officials. The proposed plan shall be
submitted for state approval within two weeks following the completion
of the public process. The proposed plan shall be posted on the city
school district's website within twenty-four hours of its submission
along with a summary of the public comments and the city school
district's explanation and reasons for which public comments were
incorporated into the proposed plan and which public comments were not
incorporated into the proposed plan.
 * NB Effective July 1, 2023
 5. a. Each contract for excellence shall be subject to approval by the
commissioner and his or her certification that the expenditure of
additional aid or grant amounts is in accordance with subdivision two of
this section.
 b. In a city school district of one million or more inhabitants, upon
approval of the contract for excellence, one-third of the contract for
excellence funds shall be released to the city school district. The
remainder of the funds shall be released to the city school district
upon submission of the November fifteenth report described in
subdivision two of this section, only if such report demonstrates
sufficient reduction in class sizes, and the remainder of the funds
shall be released upon submission by the city school district of the
corrective action plan described in subdivision two of this section. In
the years following a year which required a corrective action plan
pursuant to subdivision two of this section, no contract for excellence
funds shall be provided by the state until and unless such corrective
action plan has been fully implemented.
 6. (a) Increases in total foundation aid and supplemental educational
improvement plan grants shall be used to supplement, and not supplant
funds allocated by the district in the base year for all purposes set
forth in subdivision three of this section. In a city of one million or
more, the city school district will provide the collective bargaining
unit for teachers with the list of budget codes in which funding
provided under this section is utilized for a budget that would begin
July first, two thousand twenty-five and after. Except in a city of one
million or more, the school district audit report certified to the
commissioner by an independent certified public accountant or an
independent accountant pursuant to section twenty-one hundred sixteen-a
of this chapter shall include a certification by such accountant in a
form prescribed by the commissioner of compliance with the first
sentence of this subdivision.
 (b) Within ten days of adoption of a budget by the city of New York,
an independent certified public accountant, or an independent accountant
or the comptroller of such city shall certify in a form prescribed by
the commissioner that (i) an audit by such office has confirmed that
increases in total foundation aid and supplemental improvement grants in
the base year were used to supplement, and not supplant funds allocated
by the district in the previous year and (ii) in the adopted budget,
increases in total foundation aid and supplemental improvement grants
supplement, not supplant funds allocated by the district in the base
year for such purposes.
 Upon a determination that either (i) increases in total foundation aid
and supplemental improvement grants in the base year were used to
supplant funds allocated by the district, or (ii) increases in total
foundation aid and supplemental improvement grants as appropriated will
supplant funds allocated by the district in the base year, the district
shall be ordered to restore funds in such amounts as to eliminate the
violation.
 7. The trustees or board of education of each school district subject
to this section, or the chancellor in the case of a city school district
in a city of one million or more inhabitants, shall assure that
procedures are in place by which parents or persons in parental relation
may bring complaints concerning implementation of the district's
contract for excellence.
 a. In a city school district in a city of one million or more
inhabitants, such procedures shall provide that complaints may be filed
with the building principal with an appeal to the community
superintendent, or filed directly with the community superintendent, and
that any appeal of the determination of a community superintendent shall
be made to the chancellor.
 b. In all other districts, such procedures shall either provide for
the filing of complaints with the building principals with an appeal to
the superintendent of schools or for filing of the complaint directly
with the superintendent of schools, and shall provide for an appeal to
the trustees or board of education from the determination of the
superintendent of schools.
 c. The determination of the trustees or a board of education or the
chancellor may be appealed to the commissioner pursuant to section three
hundred ten of this title.
 8. School districts subject to the provisions of this section shall
publicly report the expenditure of total foundation aid in the form and
manner prescribed by the commissioner which shall ensure full disclosure
of the use of such funds.
 9. The department shall develop a methodology for reporting
school-based expenditures by all school districts subject to the
provisions of this section.
 § 211-e. Educational partnership organizations. 1. The board of
education of a school district, and the chancellor of the city school
district of the city of New York, subject to the approval of the
commissioner, shall be authorized to contract, for a term of up to five
years, with an educational partnership organization pursuant to this
section to intervene in a school designated by the commissioner as a
persistently lowest-achieving school, consistent with federal
requirements, or a school under registration review.
 2. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, rule or regulation to
the contrary, and except as otherwise provided in this section, such
contract shall contain provisions authorizing the educational
partnership organization to assume the powers and duties of the
superintendent of schools for purposes of implementing the educational
program of the school, including but not limited to, making
recommendations to the board of education on budgetary decisions,
staffing population decisions, student discipline decisions, decisions
on curriculum and determining the daily schedule and school calendar,
all of which recommendations shall be consistent with applicable
collective bargaining agreements. Such contract shall include district
performance expectations and/or benchmarks for school operations and
academic outcomes, and failure to meet such expectations or benchmarks
may be grounds for termination of the contract prior to the expiration
of its term. Such contract shall also address the manner in which
students will be assigned to the school, the process for employees to
transfer into the school, the services that the district will provide to
the school, and the manner in which the school shall apply for and
receive allocational and competitive grants.
 3. The board of education shall retain the ultimate decision-making
authority over the hiring, evaluating, termination, disciplining,
granting of tenure, assignment of employees serving in the school as
well as with respect to staff development for those employees, together
with authority concerning all other terms and conditions of employment,
all of which decisions shall be made in a manner consistent with
applicable collective bargaining agreements. However, notwithstanding
any law, rule or regulation to the contrary, upon the effective date of
the contract, the educational partnership organization shall be
authorized to exercise all powers of a superintendent of schools with
respect to such employment decisions, including but not limited to
making recommendations, as applicable, to the board of education in
connection with and prior to the board of education making decisions
regarding staff assignments, the hiring, the granting of tenure, the
evaluating, the disciplining and termination of employees, as well as
concerning staff development. The employees assigned to the school shall
solely be in the employ of the school district and shall retain their
tenure rights and all other employment rights conferred by law, and
service in the school shall constitute service to the school district
for all purposes, including but not limited to, the requirements for
criminal history record checks and participation in public retirement
systems. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, for
purposes of article fourteen of the civil service law, employees in the
school shall be public employees of the school district as defined in
subdivision seven of section two hundred one of the civil service law
and shall not be deemed employees of the educational partnership
organization by reason of the powers granted to the educational
partnership organization by this section. All such employees shall be
members of the applicable negotiating unit containing like titles or
positions for the public school district in which such school is
located, and shall be covered by the collective bargaining agreement
covering that public school district's negotiating unit, except that the
duly recognized or certified collective bargaining representative for
that negotiating unit may modify or supplement, in writing, the
collective bargaining agreement in consultation with the employees of
the negotiating unit working in the school. All such modifications of,
or supplements to the collective bargaining agreement are subject to
ratification by the employees employed within the school and by the
board of education of the public school district, consistent with
article fourteen of the civil service law. Upon the effective date of
the school district's contract with the educational partnership
organization, the educational partnership organization shall be
empowered to make recommendations to the board of education with respect
to the scope of, and process for making modifications and additions to
the collective bargaining agreement.
 4. Where a recommendation is made by the educational partnership
organization to the board of education pursuant to subdivision two or
three of this section, and such recommendation is denied, the board of
education shall state its reasons for the denial, which shall include an
explanation of how such denial will promote improvement of student
achievement in the school and how such action is consistent with all
accountability plans approved by the commissioner for the school and the
school district. Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to
prevent a board of education from denying a recommendation of the
educational partnership organization based upon the board of education's
determination that carrying out such recommendation would result in a
violation of law or violation of the terms of an applicable collective
bargaining agreement. If the board of education rejects a recommendation
of the educational partnership organization to terminate a probationary
employee assigned to the school or to deny tenure to an employee
assigned to the school, it shall be the duty of the board of education
to transfer such employee to another position in the school district
within such employee's tenure area for which the employee is qualified,
or to create such a position.
 5. For purposes of this section the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
 (i) "educational partnership organization" means a board of
cooperative educational services, a public or independent, non-profit
institution of higher education, a cultural institution, or a private,
non-profit organization with a proven record of success in intervening
in low-performing schools, as determined by the commissioner, provided
that such term shall not include a charter school;
 (ii) "board of education" means the trustees or board of education of
a school district, or, in the case of a city school district of a city
having a population of one million or more, the chancellor of such city
district;
 (iii) "school district" means a common, union free, central, central
high school or city school district, other than a special act school
district as defined in section four thousand one of this chapter.
 (iv) "superintendent of schools" means the superintendent of schools
of a school district, and, in the case of a city school district of a
city having a population of one million or more, a community
superintendent and the chancellor of such city district when acting in
the role of a superintendent of schools.
 § 211-f. Takeover and restructuring failing schools. 1. Eligibility
for appointment of an external receiver. (a) Failing schools. The
commissioner shall designate as failing each of the schools that has
been identified under the state's accountability system to be among the
lowest achieving five percent of public schools in the state (priority
schools) for at least three consecutive school years, or identified as a
"priority school" in each applicable year of such period except one
school year in which the school was not identified because of an
approved closure plan that was not implemented, based upon measures of
student achievement and outcomes and a methodology prescribed in the
regulations of the commissioner, provided that this list shall not
include schools within a special act school district as defined in
subdivision eight of section four thousand one of this chapter or
schools chartered pursuant to article fifty-six of this chapter. Except
as otherwise provided in paragraph (c) of this subdivision, and pursuant
to regulations promulgated by the commissioner, a school designated as
failing under this paragraph shall be eligible for receivership under
this section upon a determination by the commissioner.
 (b) Persistently failing schools. Based upon measures of student
achievement and outcomes and a methodology prescribed in the regulations
of the commissioner, the commissioner shall designate as persistently
failing each of the schools that have been identified under the state's
accountability system to be among the lowest achieving public schools in
the state for ten consecutive school years, based upon identification of
the school by the commissioner as: a "priority school" for each
applicable year from the two thousand twelve--two thousand thirteen
school year to the current school year, or identified as a "priority
school" in each applicable year of such period except one year in which
the school was not identified because of an approved closure plan that
was not implemented; and as a "School Requiring Academic Progress Year
5", "School Requiring Academic Progress Year 6", "School Requiring
Academic Progress Year 7" and/or a "School in Restructuring," for each
applicable year from the two thousand six--two thousand seven school
year to the two thousand eleven--two thousand twelve school year. This
designation shall not include schools within a special act school
district as defined in subdivision eight of section four thousand one of
this chapter or schools chartered pursuant to article fifty-six of this
chapter.
 (c) Specific provisions. (i) For schools designated as persistently
failing pursuant to paragraph (b) of this subdivision, the local
district shall continue to operate the school for an additional school
year provided that there is a department-approved intervention model or
comprehensive education plan in place that includes rigorous performance
metrics and goals, including but not limited to measures of student
academic achievement and outcomes including those set forth in
subdivision six of this section. Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, rule or regulation to the contrary, the superintendent shall be
vested with all powers granted to a receiver appointed pursuant to this
section for such time period; provided, however that such superintendent
shall not be allowed to override any decision of the board of education
with respect to his or her employment status. At the end of such year,
the department shall conduct a performance review in consultation and
cooperation with the district and school staff to determine, based on
the performance metrics in the school's model or plan, whether (1) the
designation of persistently failing should be removed; (2) the school
should remain under continued school district operation with the
superintendent vested with the powers of a receiver; or (3) the school
should be placed into receivership; provided, however, that a school
that makes demonstrable improvement based on the performance metrics and
goals herein shall remain under district operation for an additional
school year and if such school remains under district operation, it
shall continue to be subject to annual review by the department, in
consultation and cooperation with the district, under the same terms and
conditions.
 (ii) For schools designated as failing, but not persistently failing,
the local district shall continue to operate the school for two
additional school years provided that there is a department-approved
intervention model or comprehensive education plan in place that
includes rigorous performance metrics and goals, including but not
limited to measures of student academic achievement and outcomes
including those set forth in subdivision six of this section.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, rule or regulation to the
contrary, the superintendent shall be vested with all powers granted to
a receiver appointed pursuant to this section; provided, however that
such superintendent shall not be allowed to override any decision of the
board of education with respect to his or her employment status. At the
end of such two years, the department shall conduct a school performance
review in consultation and cooperation with the district and school
staff to determine, based on the performance metrics in the school's
model or plan, whether (1) the designation of failing should be removed;
(2) the school should remain under continued school district operation
with the superintendent vested with the powers of a receiver; or (3) the
school should be placed into receivership; provided, however, that a
school that makes demonstrable improvement based on the performance
metrics and goals herein shall remain under district operation for an
additional school year and if such school remains under district
operation, it shall continue to be subject to such annual review by the
department under the same terms and conditions. For schools newly
designated as failing after the two thousand sixteen--two thousand
seventeen school year, the school shall be immediately eligible for
receivership upon such designation.
 (iii) Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to limit (1) a
school district's ability to modify, subject to approval by the
department, such department approved intervention model or comprehensive
education plan, or (2) the commissioner's ability to require a school
district to modify such department approved intervention model or
comprehensive education plan and require his or her approval of such
modifications.
 (iv) The district shall provide notice to parents and guardians of the
students of the school which may be placed into receivership pursuant to
this subdivision and provided further that the district or the
commissioner shall hold a public meeting or hearing for purposes of
discussing the performance of the school and the construct of
receivership.
 1-a. Community engagement team. Upon designation as failing or
persistently failing pursuant to subdivision one of this section, the
district shall establish a community engagement team which shall include
community stakeholders, including but not limited to the school
principal, parents and guardians, teachers and other school staff and
students. Membership of such team may be modified at any time. Such team
shall develop recommendations for improvement of the school and shall
solicit input through public engagement. The team shall present its
recommendations periodically to the school leadership and, as
applicable, the receiver.
 2. Appointment of a receiver. (a) Upon a determination by the
commissioner that a school shall be placed into receivership, the
applicable school district shall appoint an independent receiver,
subject to the approval of the commissioner, to manage and operate all
aspects of the school and to develop and implement a school intervention
plan for the school that shall consider the recommendations developed by
the community engagement team when creating such plan. The independent
receiver may be a non-profit entity, another school district, or an
individual. If the school district fails to appoint an independent
receiver that meets with the commissioner's approval within sixty days
of such determination, the commissioner shall appoint the receiver.
 (b) The receiver shall be authorized to manage and operate the failing
or persistently failing school and shall have the power to supersede any
decision, policy or regulation of the superintendent of schools or chief
school officer, or of the board of education or another school officer
or the building principal that in the sole judgment of the receiver
conflicts with the school intervention plan; provided however that the
receiver may not supersede decisions that are not directly linked to the
school intervention plan, including but not limited to building usage
plans, co-location decisions and transportation of students. The
receiver shall have authority to review proposed school district budgets
prior to presentation to the district voters, or in the case of a city
school district in a city having a population of one hundred twenty-five
thousand or more, of the adoption of a contingency budget, prior to
approval by the board of education, and to modify the proposed budget to
conform to the school intervention plan provided that such modifications
shall be limited in scope and effect to the failing or persistently
failing school and may not unduly impact other schools in the district.
A school under receivership shall operate in accordance with laws
regulating other public schools, except as such provisions may conflict
with this section.
 (c) The commissioner shall contract with the receiver, and the
compensation and other costs of the receiver appointed by the
commissioner shall be paid from a state appropriation for such purpose,
or by the school district, as determined by the commissioner, provided
that costs shall be paid by the school district only if there is an open
administrative staffing line available for the receiver, and the
receiver will be taking on the responsibilities of such open line.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the receiver
and any of its employees providing services in the receivership shall be
entitled to defense and indemnification by the school district to the
same extent as a school district employee. The receiver's contract may
be terminated by the commissioner for a violation of law or the
commissioner's regulations or for neglect of duty. A receiver appointed
to operate a district under this section shall have full managerial and
operational control over such school; provided, however, that the board
of education shall remain the employer of record, and provided further
that any employment decisions of the board of education may be
superseded by the receiver. It shall be the duty of the board of
education and the superintendent of schools to fully cooperate with the
receiver and willful failure to cooperate or interference with the
functions of the receiver shall constitute willful neglect of duty for
purposes of section three hundred six of this title. The receiver or the
receiver's designee shall be an ex officio non-voting member of the
board of education entitled to attend all meetings of the board of
education.
 3. Before developing the school intervention plan, the receiver shall
consult with local stakeholders such as: (a) the board of education; (b)
the superintendent of schools; (c) the building principal; (d) teachers
assigned to the school and their collective bargaining representative;
(e) school administrators assigned to the school and their collective
bargaining representative; (f) parents and guardians of students
attending the school or their representatives; (g) representatives of
applicable state and local social service, health and mental health
agencies; (h) as appropriate, representatives of local career education
providers, state and local workforce development agencies and the local
business community; (i) for elementary schools, representatives of local
prekindergarten programs; (j) students attending the school as
appropriate; (k) as needed for middle schools, junior high schools,
central schools or high schools, representatives of local higher
education institutions; and (l) the school stakeholder team set forth in
subdivision one-a of this section.
 4. In creating the school intervention plan, the receiver shall (i)
consider the recommendations developed by the community engagement team
set forth in subdivision one-a of this section; (ii) include provisions
intended to maximize the rapid academic achievement of students at the
school; and (iii) ensure that the plan addresses school leadership and
capacity, school leader practices and decisions, curriculum development
and support, teacher practices and decisions, student social and
emotional developmental health, and family and community engagement. The
receiver shall, to the extent practicable, base the plan on the findings
of any recent diagnostic review or assessment of the school that has
been conducted and, as applied to the school, student outcome data
including, but not limited to: (a) student achievement growth data based
on state measures; (b) other measures of student achievement; (c)
student promotion and graduation rates; (d) achievement and growth data
for the subgroups of students used in the state's accountability system;
(e) student attendance; and (f) long-term and short-term suspension
rates.
 5. (a) The receiver shall include the following in the school
intervention plan: (i) measures to address social service, health and
mental health needs of students in the school and their families in
order to help students arrive and remain at school ready to learn;
provided that this may include mental health and substance abuse
screening; (ii) measures to improve or expand access to child welfare
services and, as appropriate, services in the school community to
promote a safe and secure learning environment; (iii) as applicable,
measures to provide greater access to career and technical education and
workforce development services provided to students in the school and
their families in order to provide students and families with meaningful
employment skills and opportunities; (iv) measures to address
achievement gaps for English language learners, students with
disabilities and economically disadvantaged students, as applicable; (v)
measures to address school climate and positive behavior support,
including mentoring and other youth development programs; and (vi) a
budget for the school intervention plan.
 (b) As necessary, the commissioner and the commissioners of the
department of health, the office of children and family services, the
department of labor and other applicable state and local social service,
health, mental health and child welfare officials shall coordinate
regarding the implementation of the measures described in subparagraphs
(i) through (iii) of paragraph (a) of this subdivision that are included
in the school intervention plan and shall, subject to appropriation,
reasonably support such implementation consistent with the requirements
of state and federal law applicable to the relevant programs that each
such official is responsible for administering, and grant failing
schools priority in competitive grants, as allowable before and during
the period of receivership.
 6. In order to assess the school across multiple measures of school
performance and student success, the school intervention plan shall
include measurable annual goals including, but not limited to, the
following: (a) student attendance; (b) student discipline including but
not limited to short-term and long-term suspension rates; (c) student
safety; (d) student promotion and graduation and drop-out rates; (e)
student achievement and growth on state measures; (f) progress in areas
of academic underperformance; (g) progress among the subgroups of
students used in the state's accountability system; (h) reduction of
achievement gaps among specific groups of students; (i) development of
college and career readiness, including at the elementary and middle
school levels; (j) parent and family engagement; (k) building a culture
of academic success among students; (l) building a culture of student
support and success among faculty and staff; (m) using developmentally
appropriate child assessments from pre-kindergarten through third grade,
if applicable, that are tailored to the needs of the school; and (n)
measures of student learning.
 7. (a) Notwithstanding any general or special law to the contrary, in
creating and implementing the school intervention plan, the receiver
shall, after consulting with stakeholders and the community engagement
team, convert schools to community schools to provide expanded health,
mental health and other services to the students and their families.
In addition, the receiver may: (i) review and if necessary expand, alter
or replace the curriculum and program offerings of the school, including
the implementation of research-based early literacy programs, early
interventions for struggling readers and the teaching of advanced
placement courses or other rigorous nationally or internationally
recognized courses, if the school does not already have such programs or
courses; (ii) replace teachers and administrators, including school
leadership who are not appropriately certified or licensed; (iii)
increase salaries of current or prospective teachers and administrators
to attract and retain high-performing teachers and administrators; (iv)
establish steps to improve hiring, induction, teacher evaluation,
professional development, teacher advancement, school culture and
organizational structure; (v) reallocate the uses of the existing budget
of the school; (vi) expand the school day or school year or both of the
school; (vii) for a school that offers the first grade, add
pre-kindergarten and full-day kindergarten classes, if the school does
not already have such classes; (viii) in accordance with paragraphs (b)
and (c) of this subdivision, to abolish the positions of all members of
the teaching and administrative and supervisory staff assigned to the
failing or persistently failing school and terminate the employment of
any building principal assigned to such a school, and require such staff
members to reapply for their positions in the school if they so choose;
(ix) include a provision of a job-embedded professional development for
teachers at the school, with an emphasis on strategies that involve
teacher input and feedback; (x) establish a plan for professional
development for administrators at the school, with an emphasis on
strategies that develop leadership skills and use the principles of
distributive leadership; and/or (xi) order the conversion of a school in
receivership that has been designated as failing or persistently failing
pursuant to this section into a charter school, provided that such
conversion shall be subject to article fifty-six of this chapter and
provided further that such charter conversion school shall operate
pursuant to such article and provided further that such charter
conversion school shall operate consistent with a community schools
model and provided further that such conversion charter school shall be
subject to the provisions in subdivisions three, four, five, six, nine,
ten, eleven, twelve and thirteen of this section.
 (b) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, rule or regulation to
the contrary, upon designation of any school of the school district as a
failing or persistently failing school pursuant to this section, the
abolition of positions of members of the teaching and administrative and
supervisory staff of the school shall thereafter be governed by the
applicable provisions of section twenty-five hundred ten, twenty-five
hundred eighty-five, twenty-five hundred eighty-eight or three thousand
thirteen of this chapter as modified by this paragraph. A classroom
teacher or building principal who has received two or more composite
ratings of ineffective on an annual professional performance review
shall be deemed not to have rendered faithful and competent service
within the meaning of section twenty-five hundred ten, twenty-five
hundred eighty-five, twenty-five hundred eighty-eight or three thousand
thirteen of this chapter. When a position of a classroom teacher or
building principal is abolished, the services of the teacher or
administrator or supervisor within the tenure area of the position with
the lowest rating on the most recent annual professional performance
review shall be discontinued, provided that seniority within the tenure
area of the position shall be used solely to determine which position
should be discontinued in the event of a tie.
 (c) The receiver may abolish the positions of all teachers and
pedagogical support staff, administrators and pupil personnel service
providers assigned to a school designated as failing or persistently
failing pursuant to this section and require such staff members to
reapply for new positions if they so choose. The receiver shall define
new positions for the school aligned with the school intervention plan,
including selection criteria and expected duties and responsibilities
for each position. For administrators and pupil personnel service
providers, the receiver shall have full discretion over all such
rehiring decisions. For teachers and pedagogical support staff, the
receiver shall convene a staffing committee including the receiver, two
appointees of the receiver and two appointees selected by the school
staff or their collective bargaining unit. The staffing committee will
determine whether former school staff reapplying for positions are
qualified for the new positions. The receiver shall have full discretion
regarding hiring decisions but must fill at least fifty percent of the
newly defined positions with the most senior former school staff who are
determined by the staffing committee to be qualified. Any remaining
vacancies shall be filled by the receiver in consultation with the
staffing committee. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the
contrary, a member of the teaching and pedagogical support,
administrative, or pupil personnel service staff who is not rehired
pursuant to this paragraph shall not have any right to bump or displace
any other person employed by the district, but shall be placed on a
preferred eligibility list in accordance with the applicable provisions
of section twenty-five hundred ten, twenty-five hundred eighty-five,
twenty-five hundred eighty-eight or three thousand thirteen of this
chapter. Teachers rehired pursuant to this paragraph shall maintain
their prior status as tenured or probationary, and a probationary
teacher's probation period shall not be changed.
 (d) For a school with English language learners, the professional
development and planning time for teachers and administrators identified
in clauses (vi) and (vii) of the closing paragraph of paragraph (a) of
this subdivision, shall include specific strategies and content designed
to maximize the rapid academic achievement of the English language
learners.
 8. (a) In order to maximize the rapid achievement of students at the
applicable school, the receiver may request that the collective
bargaining unit or units representing teachers and administrators and
the receiver, on behalf of the board of education, negotiate a
receivership agreement that modifies the applicable collective
bargaining agreement or agreements with respect to any failing schools
in receivership applicable during the period of receivership. The
receivership agreement may address the following subjects: the length of
the school day; the length of the school year; professional development
for teachers and administrators; class size; and changes to the
programs, assignments, and teaching conditions in the school in
receivership. The receivership agreement shall not provide for any
reduction in compensation unless there shall also be a proportionate
reduction in hours and shall provide for a proportionate increase in
compensation where the length of the school day or school year is
extended. The receivership agreement shall not alter the remaining terms
of the existing/underlying collective bargaining agreement which shall
remain in effect.
 (b) The bargaining shall be conducted between the receiver and the
collective bargaining unit in good faith and completed not later than
thirty days from the point at which the receiver requested that the
bargaining commence. The agreement shall be subject to ratification
within ten business days by the bargaining unit members in the school.
If the parties are unable to reach an agreement within thirty days or if
the agreement is not ratified within ten business days by the bargaining
unit members of the school, the parties shall submit any remaining
unresolved issues to the commissioner who shall resolve any unresolved
issues within five days, in accordance with standard collective
bargaining principles.
 (c) For purposes only for schools designated as failing pursuant to
subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (c) of subdivision one of this section,
bargaining shall be conducted between the receiver and the collective
bargaining unit in good faith and completed not later than thirty days
from the point at which the receiver requested that the bargaining
commence. The agreement shall be subject to ratification within ten
business days by the bargaining unit members of the school. If the
parties are unable to reach an agreement within thirty days or if the
agreement is not ratified within ten business days by the bargaining
unit members of the school, a conciliator shall be selected through the
American Arbitration Association, who shall forthwith forward to the
parties a list of three conciliators, each of whom shall have
professional experience in elementary and secondary education, from
which the parties may agree upon a single conciliator provided, however,
that if the parties cannot select a conciliator from among the three
within three business days, the American Arbitration Association shall
select a conciliator from the list of names within one business day, and
the conciliator shall resolve all outstanding issues within five days.
After such five days, if any unresolved issues remain, the parties shall
submit such issues to the commissioner who shall resolve such issues
within five days, in accordance with standard collective bargaining
principles.
 9. A final school intervention plan shall be submitted to the
commissioner for approval and, upon approval, shall be issued by the
receiver within six months of the receiver's appointment. A copy of such
plan shall be provided to the board of education, the superintendent of
schools and the collective bargaining representatives of teachers and
administrators of the school district. The plan shall be publicly
available and shall be posted on the department's website and the school
district's website, and the school district shall provide notice to
parents of such school intervention plan and its availability.
 10. Each school intervention plan shall be authorized for a period of
not more than three years. The receiver may develop additional
components of the plan and shall develop annual goals for each component
of the plan in a manner consistent with this section, all of which must
be approved by the commissioner. The receiver shall be responsible for
meeting the goals of the school intervention plan.
 11. The receiver shall provide a written report to the board of
education, the commissioner, and the board of regents on a quarterly
basis to provide specific information about the progress being made on
the implementation of the school intervention plan. One of the quarterly
reports shall be the annual evaluation of the intervention plan under
subdivision twelve of this section.
 12. (a) The commissioner shall, in consultation and cooperation with
the district and the school staff, evaluate each school with an
appointed receiver at least annually. The purpose of the evaluation
shall be to determine whether the school has met the annual goals in its
school intervention plan and to assess the implementation of the plan at
the school. The evaluation shall be in writing and shall be submitted to
the superintendent and the board of education not later than September
first for the preceding school year. The evaluation shall be submitted
in a format determined by the commissioner.
 (b) If the commissioner determines that the school has met the annual
performance goals stated in the school intervention plan, the evaluation
shall be considered sufficient and the implementation of the school
intervention plan shall continue. If the commissioner determines that
the school has not met one or more goals in the plan, the commissioner
may require modification of the plan.
 13. Upon the expiration of a school intervention plan for a school
with an appointed receiver, the commissioner, in consultation and
cooperation with the district, shall conduct an evaluation of the school
to determine whether the school has improved sufficiently, requires
further improvement or has failed to improve. On the basis of such
review, the commissioner, in consultation and cooperation with the
district, may: (a) renew the plan with the receiver for an additional
period of not more than three years; (b) if the failing or persistently
failing school remains failing and the terms of the plan have not been
substantially met, terminate the contract with the receiver and appoint
a new receiver; or (c) determine that the school has improved
sufficiently for the designation of failing or persistently failing to
be removed.
 14. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the commissioner or a local
district from closing a school pursuant to the regulations of the
commissioner.
 15. The commissioner shall be authorized to adopt regulations to carry
out the provisions of this section.
 16. The commissioner shall report annually to the governor and the
legislature on the implementation and fiscal impact of this section. The
report shall include, but not be limited to, a list of all schools
currently designated as failing or persistently failing and the
strategies used in each of the schools to maximize the rapid academic
achievement of students.
 17. The commissioner shall provide any relevant data that is needed to
implement and comply with the requirements of the chapter of the laws of
two thousand fifteen which added this section to any school district
that has a school or schools designated as failing or persistently
failing pursuant to this section by August fifteenth of each year, to
the fullest extent practicable. Provided that the commissioner shall
provide guidance to districts and may establish a model intervention
plan. And provided further, that the commissioner shall make available
to the public any school intervention plan, or other department-approved
intervention model or comprehensive education plan of a school or
district provided that such measures are consistent with all federal and
state privacy laws.
 § 212. Fees. The department shall charge the following fees: 1. For
the issuance of a qualifying certificate for admission to a professional
school as required by or pursuant to law, five dollars.
 2. For admission to a special examination in English authorized or
required by or pursuant to law as a pre-requisite to admission to a
professional school or to an examination for a license to engage in or
practice a profession, ten dollars.
 3. For other certifications or permits for which fees are not
otherwise provided, fees as fixed by regulations of the department.
 4. For the issuance of a replacement license, ten dollars.
 5. For the replacement of a biennial registration certificate which
has been lost or destroyed, or for the issuance of each registration
certificate for more than one office, five dollars.
 6. For a detailed certification of licensure record at the request of
an individual, ten dollars.
 7. For services and expenses incurred by the department in conducting
evaluations, processing complaints or performing other administrative
functions related to the review of post-secondary distance education
conducted by out-of-state institutions seeking approval to offer
distance education to students in New York state who do not participate
in an interstate reciprocity agreement pursuant to section two hundred
ten-c of this chapter.
 § 212-a. Return of deposits for professional and graduate schools.
Any person who makes a deposit on tuition to a professional or graduate
school for the fall semester next following the making of the deposit
and who demands return of the deposit in writing by the April first
previous to such fall semester shall be entitled to the return of such
deposit within thirty days of receipt of such demand by the school, and
such professional or graduate school shall return the deposit within
thirty days.
 § 212-b. Return of tuition for colleges, universities, professional,
proprietary and graduate schools. Any person who pays tuition to a
college, university, professional, proprietary or graduate school and
who demands its refund in writing before the thirtieth day before the
commencement of the term for which the tuition was paid shall be
entitled to one hundred percent reimbursement of such tuition within
sixty days of receipt of such demand by the college, university,
professional, proprietary or graduate school; provided, however, that no
deposit on tuition payable upon acceptance shall be governed by the
provisions of this section. The provisions of this section shall not
apply if a college, university, professional, proprietary or graduate
school enters into a nonrevokable contract for special or extraordinary
instructional services after receipt of tuition and in reliance of the
prospective attendance of the person paying such tuition so long as such
person was given notice before paying tuition that such a contract would
be entered into.
 A violator of the provisions of this section shall be liable for a
civil penalty not to exceed ten percent of the amount of tuition which
was not refunded as herein provided.
 § 212-c. Teacher accreditation review fees. The costs of accreditation
reviews of teacher education programs shall be borne by the institution
seeking accreditation by the board of regents. The commissioner shall
establish and charge fees to cover the costs of the accreditation
visits, any other related visits the commissioner may determine to be
necessary, and related expenses. Fees collected shall be deposited to
the credit of the teacher education accreditation account and disbursed
pursuant to section ninety-nine-h of the state finance law. The
commissioner shall be authorized to adopt any regulations needed to
implement the provisions of this section.
 § 213. Extension of educational facilities. 1. The regents may
extend to the people at large increased educational opportunities and
facilities, stimulate interest therein, recommend methods, designate
suitable teachers and lecturers, conduct examinations and grant
credentials, and otherwise organize, aid and conduct such work. And the
regents, and with their approval the commissioner of education, may buy,
sell, exchange and receive by will, or other gift, or on deposit, books,
pictures, statuary or other sculptured work, lantern slides, apparatus,
maps, globes, films, sound films, kinescopes, photographic recordings
and any article or collections pertaining to or useful in and to any of
the departments, divisions, schools, institutions, associations or other
agencies, or work, under their supervision, or control, or
encouragement, and may lend or deposit any such articles in their
custody or control, when or where in their judgement compensating
educational usefulness will result therefrom; and may also, from time to
time, enter into contracts desirable for carrying into effect the
foregoing provisions.
 2. In carrying out the provisions of subdivision one of this section,
the regents may: a. Contract with institutions in the university,
school districts, boards of cooperative educational services or other
non-profit educational agencies for the acquisition from such
institutions, school districts, boards or agencies of sound films,
kinescopes, audio recordings and video recordings, scripts, research
reports or related educational television materials, for the use of the
department, or for the production of educational television programs:
 b. Lease, to school districts, boards of cooperative educational
services or television corporations created pursuant to section two
hundred thirty-six of this chapter, educational television facilities,
including transmitters, micro-wave relay facilities, production centers,
closed-circuit systems and any equipment necessary therefor, constructed
or acquired, and owned by the state, leased by the state, or contract
with such districts, boards of cooperative educational services or
corporations for the operation of such facilities:
 c. Lease and operate a television station in the city of New York.
 3. For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of subdivision two
of this section, the regents may make rules or authorize the
commissioner to make regulations providing standards for research and
experimentation, operation and programming of educational television by
the state and the school districts, boards of cooperative educational
services, institutions, corporations and agencies, respectively.
 4. In carrying out the provisions of subdivisions one and two of this
section and in order to encourage and stimulate the further development
and use of educational television in the state of New York and for the
purposes of providing educational services and facilities for pupils in
the public schools of the state of New York, the board of regents is
hereby authorized to make additional apportionments to school districts
or boards of cooperative educational services in accordance with the
provisions of this subdivision to encourage and assist such districts or
boards to install and operate a broadcast or closed-circuit television
system, or television receiving equipment for the improvement of
classroom instruction.
 a. Any school district or board of cooperative educational services
planning to establish such a program shall submit to the commissioner of
education on or before the first day of May of the school year preceding
the school year during which the program is to be conducted an
application, together with such information as the commissioner of
education shall require, including at least a complete statement of
purposes of the program, the detailed procedures of operation, a
detailed estimate of the cost of such program and a complete description
of the installation and equipment to be installed and the detailed
procedures of evaluations to be used in determining the improvement of
classroom instruction.
 b. The commissioner of education shall establish procedures for
evaluations of such programs. One such program for each school district
or board of cooperative educational services may be approved by the
commissioner of education, and any program so approved by the
commissioner of education shall be placed on a list in accordance with
the educational merit and value of the program, and the date of receipt
of the application, where several programs are evaluated as having equal
merit and value.
 c. Apportionment shall then be made in accordance with the formula
contained in paragraph d of this subdivision, in the order of such
programs on the list established in accordance with paragraph b of this
subdivision within the amount of the appropriation therefor.
 d. Any district or board which proposes to install and operate a
broadcast or closed-circuit television system or television receiving
equipment for the improvement of classroom instruction, in accordance
with a program approved as provided in this subdivision and to the
extent that funds are available pursuant to this subdivision, shall be
entitled to an apportionment during the five-year period following the
approval of the program as follows:
 Fifty per cent of the approved cost relative to the acquisition and
installation of the equipment, and during the first year fifty per cent
of the approved operational expenses in connection with the approved
operation of the program; during the second year forty per cent of the
approved operational expenses in connection with the approved operation
of the program; during the third year thirty per cent of the approved
operational expenses in connection with the approved operation of the
program; during the fourth year twenty per cent of the approved
operational expenses in connection with the approved operation of the
program; and during the fifth year ten per cent of the approved
operational expenses in connection with the approved operation of the
program.
 5. A school district or a board of cooperative educational services
is hereby authorized and empowered to do and perform any and all acts
necessary or convenient to enable it to carry out the provisions of this
section.
 6. The regents are authorized to make grants of money, materials and
equipment for the purpose of promoting the erection and use of
educational television facilities by educational television corporations
established pursuant to the provisions of section two hundred thirty-six
of this chapter. Such grants may be made upon such terms and conditions
as the regents may prescribe.
 § 213-b. Unlawful sale of dissertations, theses and term papers. 1. No
person shall, for financial consideration, or the promise of financial
consideration, prepare, offer to prepare, cause to be prepared, sell or
offer for sale to any person any written material which the seller
knows, is informed or has reason to believe is intended for submission
as a dissertation, thesis, term paper, essay, report or other written
assignment by a student in a university, college, academy, school or
other educational institution to such institution or to a course,
seminar or degree program held by such institution.
 2. Nothing herein contained shall prevent such educational institution
or any member of its faculty or staff, from offering courses,
instruction, counseling or tutoring for research or writing as part of a
curriculum or other program conducted by such educational institution.
Nor shall this section prevent any educational institution or any member
of its faculty or staff from authorizing students to use statistical,
computer, or any other services which may be required or permitted by
such educational institution in the preparation, research or writing of
a dissertation, thesis, term paper, essay, report or other written
assignment. Nor shall this section prevent tutorial assistance rendered
by other persons which does not include the preparation, research or
writing of a dissertation, thesis, term paper, essay, report or other
written assignment intended for submission to such educational
institution in fulfillment of the requirements for a degree, diploma,
certificate or course of study. Nor shall any person be prevented by the
provisions of this section from rendering services for a fee which shall
be limited to the typing, transcription or reproduction of a manuscript.
 3. Nothing contained within this section shall prevent any person from
selling or offering for sale a publication or other written material
which shall have been registered under the United States laws of
copyright, provided, however, that the owner of such copyright shall
have given his authorization or approval for such sale and provided
further that such publication or other written material shall not be
intended for submission as a dissertation, thesis, term paper, essay,
report or other written assignment to such educational institution
within the state of New York in fulfillment of the requirements for a
degree, diploma, certificate or course of study.
 4. No person shall sell, assign or otherwise transfer for business or
for any other purpose to any person any information and material of a
personal or private nature acquired from a purchaser of a dissertation,
thesis, term paper, essay, report or other written assignment without
the prior consent of such purchaser. The term "information and material
of a personal or private nature" as used in this subdivision shall
include, but not be limited to the name of such purchaser, his address
and telephone number, the name of such educational institution, the name
or number of the course, the name of the faculty member or members for
whom such written assignment has been prepared and any description of
the research involved or the nature of such written assignment.
 5. A violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a
class B misdemeanor.
 6. The attorney general and district attorney of the county wherein a
violation of this section occurs shall have concurrent authority to
investigate and prosecute any violation of this section and any related
violations discovered during the course of such investigation.
 7. Whenever there shall be a violation of this section, an application also may be made by the attorney general in the name of the people
of the state of New York to a court or justice having jurisdiction to
issue an injunction, and upon notice to the defendant of not less than
five days, to enjoin and restrain the continuance of such violation; and
if it shall appear to the satisfaction of the court or justice that the
defendant has, in fact, violated this section, an injunction may be
issued by such court or justice, enjoining and restraining any further
violation, without requiring proof that any person has, in fact, been
injured or damaged thereby. In any such proceeding the court may make
allowances to the attorney general as provided in section eighty-three
hundred three, subdivision six of the civil practice law and rules. In
connection with any such proposed application, the attorney general is
authorized to take proof and make a determination of the relevant facts
and to issue subpoenas in accordance with the civil practice law and
rules. Additionally, the attorney general may apply in any such
proceeding for a monetary penalty of not more than one thousand dollars
per violation.
 § 214. Institutions in the university. The institutions of the
university shall include all secondary and higher educational
institutions which are now or may hereafter be incorporated in this
state, and such other libraries, museums, institutions, schools,
organizations and agencies for education as may be admitted to or
incorporated by the university. The regents may exclude from such
membership any institution failing to comply with law or with any rule
of the university.
 § 215. Visitation and reports. The regents, or the commissioner of
education, or their representatives, may visit, examine into and
inspect, any institution in the university and any school or institution
under the educational supervision of the state, and may require, as
often as desired, duly verified reports therefrom giving such
information and in such form as the regents or the commissioner of
education shall prescribe. For refusal or continued neglect on the part
of any institution in the university to make any report required, or for
violation of any law or any rule of the university, the regents may
suspend the charter or any of the rights and privileges of such
institution.
 § 215-a. Annual report by regents to governor and legislature. 1. The
regents of the university of the state of New York shall prepare and
submit to the governor, the temporary president of the senate, and the
speaker of the assembly, not later than the first day of January,
nineteen hundred eighty-nine, nineteen hundred ninety and nineteen
hundred ninety-one and the fifteenth day of February of each year
thereafter, a report concerning the schools of the state which shall set
forth with respect to the preceding school year: enrollment trends;
indicators of student achievement in reading, writing, mathematics,
science and vocational courses; graduation, college attendance and
employment rates; such other indicators of student performance as the
regents shall determine; information concerning teacher and
administrator preparation, turnover, in-service education and
performance; information concerning school library expenditures and
school library media specialist employment; expenditure per pupil on
regular education and expenditure per pupil on special education and
such other information as requested by the governor, the temporary
president of the senate, or the speaker of the assembly. To the extent
practicable, all such information shall be displayed on both a statewide
and individual district basis and by racial/ethnic group and gender. The
regents are authorized to require school districts, boards of
cooperative educational services and nonpublic schools to provide such
information as is necessary to prepare the report. In preparing the
report, the regents shall consult with other interested parties,
including local school districts, teachers' and faculty organizations,
school administrators, parents and students.
 2. The annual report shall specifically identify school districts (i)
having fifteen percent or more of their students in special education;
or (ii) having fifty percent or more of their students with disabilities
in special education programs or services sixty percent or more of the
school day in a general education building; or (iii) having eight
percent or more of their students with disabilities in special education
programs in public or private separate educational settings. Such report
shall also present each district's percent and the statewide percent for
each such measure.
 § 215-b. Annual report by commissioner to governor and legislature.
The commissioner shall prepare and submit to the governor, the president
pro tem of the senate and the speaker of the assembly not later than
January first, nineteen hundred ninety-six and by the first day of
January in each year thereafter, a report detailing the financial and
statistical outcomes of boards of cooperative educational services which
shall, at minimum, set forth with respect to the preceding school year:
tuition costs for selected programs; standard per pupil cost information
for selected services as determined by the commissioner; and aggregate
expenditure data for the following categories: administration,
instructional services, career education, special education, rent and
facilities and other services; and such other information as deemed
appropriate by the commissioner. The format for such report shall be
developed in consultation with school district officials and the
director of the budget. Such report will include changes from the year
prior to the report year for each such item for all boards of
cooperative educational services. Such report shall be distributed to
all school districts and boards of cooperative educational services and
shall be made available to all other interested parties upon request.
 § 215-c. Promoting cost-effectiveness in public elementary and
secondary schools. 1. Definitions. For the purposes of this section,
the following terms shall have the following meanings:
 (a) "cost-effectiveness" shall mean one or more measures of the
efficient use of school district resources relative to school
performance in accordance with state educational standards, as
determined by the department.
 (b) "cost-effective practices" shall mean those practices which most
efficiently use limited resources to produce a particular outcome or set
of outcomes in accordance with state educational standards.
 (c) "board" shall mean the board of regents of the state of New York.
 2. The board and the commissioner shall wherever practicable promote
cost-effectiveness and cost-effective practices in the public elementary
and secondary schools and boards of cooperative educational services of
the state. As part of the effort pursuant to this section, by January
first, nineteen hundred ninety-eight and periodically thereafter, the
commissioner shall (a) identify current structures, policies, laws and
regulations which hinder cost-effectiveness in schools and school
districts; (b) identify cost-effective districts by determining which
schools or school districts have demonstrated significant achievement or
improvement relative to resource allocation in such areas as student
performance, instruction, management, business administration, early
childhood education and such other areas as the board deems appropriate;
(c) identify cost-effective action, policies, practices and programs
which may be successfully replicated in other school districts; and (d)
recommend or, to the extent feasible, develop specific cost-effective
ways in which to encourage, recognize and reward academic improvement
and success in school districts, and remove existing penalties and
fiscal disincentives to such improvement or success.
 3. The commissioner shall consult with school district administrators,
district superintendents and superintendents of schools, teachers,
school board members, parents, students, non-pedagogical school support
personnel, representatives from post-secondary institutions and other
pertinent groups and individuals in determining cost-effective programs
pursuant to subdivision two of this section.
 4. The commissioner shall disseminate information to school district
administrators, school board members and other interested parties on how
cost-effective practices can be used and applied in school districts,
individual schools and the classroom. Such information shall include a
summary of exemplary cost-effective practices among school districts
receiving apportionments pursuant to subparagraph one of paragraph h of
subdivision fourteen of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter.
 § 215-d. State university of New York report on economic development
activities. The chancellor of the state university of New York shall
report to the governor and to the legislature, on or before January
first, two thousand fifteen, on economic development activities
undertaken by the state university of New York. Such report shall
include, but not be limited to, expenditures of capital funds for
economic development activities received from the empire state
development corporation, SUNY 2020 challenge grant projects, capital
expenditures from other sources, and activities for the purpose of
securing START-UP NY approval.
 § 216. Charters. Under such name, with such number of trustees or
other managers, and with such powers, privileges and duties, and subject
to such limitations and restrictions in all respects as the regents may
prescribe in conformity to law, they may, by an instrument under their
seal and recorded in their office, incorporate any university, college,
academy, library, museum, or other institution or association for the
promotion of science, literature, art, history or other department of
knowledge, or of education in any way, associations of teachers,
students, graduates of educational institutions, and other associations
whose approved purposes are, in whole or in part, of educational or
cultural value deemed worthy of recognition and encouragement by the
university. No school; college; university or other entity providing
post secondary education; library; or museum or historical society shall
be incorporated under the business corporation law, the not-for-profit
corporation law, or any other general law without the consent of the
commissioner or, in the case of a college or university, without the
written authorization of the Regents. Any other entity incorporated for
educational purposes may be formed under the business corporation law or
the not-for-profit corporation law without the consent of the
commissioner, provided that such institution or association submits a
certified copy of the certificate of incorporation to the commissioner
within thirty days after the corporation receives confirmation from the
department of state that the certificate has been accepted for filing.
 No individual, association, partnership, company or corporation not
authorized by special charter from the legislature of this state or by
charter from the regents to operate a museum, or arboretum shall
knowingly use, advertise or transact business under the names "museum,"
or "arboretum," or any name, title or descriptive material indicating or
tending to imply that said individual, association, partnership, company
or corporation conducts, carries on, or is such a business when it is
not, or that it is authorized to operate as such, unless the right to do
so has been granted by the regents or the commissioner in writing. Any
violation of this paragraph shall be a misdemeanor. Notwithstanding any
other provision of this section, an individual, association,
partnership, company or corporation doing business under any of such
names on the effective date of this paragraph may come into compliance
with this paragraph by obtaining consent of the regents or the
commissioner within one year of such effective date.
 § 216-a. Applicability of not-for-profit corporation law. 1. The term
"education corporation" as used in this section means a corporation (a)
chartered or incorporated by the regents or otherwise formed under this
chapter, or (b) formed by a special act of this state with its principal
purpose an education purpose and which is a member of the university of
the state of New York, or (c) formed under laws other than the statutes
of this state which, if it were to be formed currently under the laws of
this state, might be chartered by the regents, and which has been
authorized to conduct its activities in this state by the regents or as
an authorized foreign education corporation with the consent of the
commissioner. A corporation as defined in the business corporation law
is not an education corporation under this section.
 2. An education corporation formed prior to September first, nineteen
hundred seventy-three which has authority to issue stock, is subject to
the business corporation law in all matters involving shares of stock.
To that extent, the not-for-profit corporation law does not apply to
such education corporation.
 3. A corporation within clause (c) of subdivision one of this section
(a) may be granted authority to conduct activities in this state by the
regents pursuant to this section and subject to such provisions, not
inconsistent with this section, as the regents may prescribe, or (b)
with the consent of the commissioner, may receive authority under
article 13 (Foreign Corporations) of the not-for-profit corporation law
to conduct activities in this state as an authorized foreign
not-for-profit corporation. If required by the commissioner and subject
to such provisions, not inconsistent with this section, as he may
prescribe, an authorized foreign not-for-profit corporation shall be
designated as an "authorized foreign education corporation" in its
certificate of authority filed with the department of state. A foreign
corporation granted authority by the regents hereunder or an "authorized
foreign education corporation" is an "education corporation" under this
section.
 4. Except as provided in subdivisions 2 and 3 of this section, the
not-for-profit corporation law applies to a domestic education
corporation and an authorized foreign education corporation, provided
that:
 a. If a provision of the not-for-profit corporation law conflicts with
a provision of this chapter or of a special act by which an education
corporation is formed, the provision of this chapter or of such special
act shall prevail and the not-for-profit corporation law shall not apply
in such case. If an applicable provision of this chapter or of such
special act relates to a matter embraced in the not-for-profit
corporation law but is not in conflict therewith, both provisions shall
apply.
 b. An education corporation to which the not-for-profit corporation
law is made applicable by this section shall be treated as a "corporation", "domestic corporation", "foreign corporation", or "authorized
foreign corporation" as such terms are used in the not-for-profit
corporation law as modified by this section, except that the purposes of
an education corporation shall not thereby be extended.
 c. The following provisions of the not-for-profit corporation law
shall not apply to education corporations: section one hundred five,
section one hundred fourteen, paragraph (a) of section two hundred one,
paragraphs (b) and (c) of section two hundred two, section two hundred
five, section three hundred one, section three hundred two, section
three hundred three, article four except paragraphs (b) through (p) of
section four hundred four and section four hundred five, section five
hundred nine, article eight except section eight hundred four, section
nine hundred seven, section one thousand twelve and article fourteen.
 d. The following adjusting provisions shall apply in the application
of the not-for-profit corporation law under this section:
 (1) The opening clause of paragraph (a) of section one hundred twelve
shall read: "At the request of the regents of the university of the
state of New York, the attorney-general may maintain an action or
special proceeding:"
 (2) The first sentence of section five hundred one shall read: "Except
when the charter or certificate of incorporation so permits, a
corporation shall not have stock or shares or certificates for stock or
for shares, but may issue nontransferable membership certificates or
cards to evidence membership, whether or not connected with any
financial contribution to the corporation, as provided in section six
hundred one (Members). The fact that the corporation is an education
corporation, and that the membership certificate or card is
non-transferable shall be noted conspicuously on the face or back of
each such certificate or card."
 (3) The first sentence of paragraph (b) of section five hundred eleven
shall read as follows: "Upon presentation of the petition, the Court
shall direct that notice of the application be given promptly to the
attorney general and the commissioner, and in its discretion may direct
that notice of the application be given, personally or by mail, to any
person interested therein, as member, officer or creditor of the
corporation."
 (4) Paragraph (a) of section five hundred fifteen shall read as
follows: "Except when the charter or certificate of incorporation
authorizes the issuance of stock, a corporation shall not pay dividends
or distribute any part of its income or profit to its members, directors
or officers."
 (5) Section five hundred twenty shall include after the words, "suit
of the attorney general" the following words, "at the request of the
regents of the university of the state of New York,"
 (6) Paragraph (b) of section seven hundred three, and section seven
hundred four shall not reduce the term of office of directors as
provided in the charter or certificate of incorporation of a
corporation, or of the number of classes into which its board is
divided, if, as of September first, nineteen hundred seventy-three, such
term of office of a director is greater than five years or the board is
divided into more than five classes. Such term of office or number of
classes shall not be increased after September first, nineteen hundred
seventy-three.
 (7) The requirement of the affirmative vote of a majority of the
entire board under paragraph (f) of section seven hundred fifteen for
fixing the salaries of officers, if not done in or pursuant to the
by-laws, shall not apply where the number of the entire board is over
twenty. In such case the affirmative vote of a number of directors at
least equal to the applicable quorum requirement of such board for the
transaction of business shall be sufficient.
 (8) Section seven hundred sixteen shall not apply to a loan by an
education corporation if its board, in the discharge of its duty to the
corporation, finds that such loan (1) is in the best interests of the
education corporation and (2) is (a) to an officer or director thereof
pursuant to a plan of employee or faculty assistance, or (b) to a business corporation the shares of which are wholly owned by such education
corporation, or (c) to a not-for-profit corporation which is controlled
by such education corporation, or by a group of education corporations
including such education corporation, or (d) to any corporation on the
board of which a director or officer of such education corporation is
serving as a director at the request of the board of such lending
education corporation; provided, however, that any loan by an education
corporation to any corporation or other entity in which a director or
officer of such education corporation has, directly or indirectly, a
substantial financial interest, is prohibited. The provisions of this
subparagraph shall not apply to a private foundation under section two
hundred sixteen-b of this chapter.
 (9) The opening clause of paragraph (b) of section seven hundred
twenty shall read as follows: "An action may be brought for the relief
provided in this section and in paragraph (a) of section seven hundred
nineteen (Liabilities of director in certain cases) by the attorney
general at the request of the regents of the university of the state of
New York, by the corporation, or, in the right of the corporation, by
any of the following:"
 (10) Under section nine hundred six, if any constituent corporation or
the consolidated corporation is or would be an education corporation,
the consent of the commissioner shall be endorsed on or annexed to the
certificate of merger or consolidation prior to the filing by the
department of state.
 (11) In addition to the requirements of section nine hundred nine
(Consent to filing), the consent of the regents shall be endorsed on or
annexed to a certificate of merger or consolidation if any constituent
or consolidated corporation was chartered, or formed by special act with
a purpose for which a corporation might be created by the regents.
 (12) The opening clause of paragraph (a) of section eleven hundred one
shall read: "At the request of the regents of the university of the
state of New York, the attorney general may bring an action for the
dissolution of a corporation upon one or more of the following grounds:"
 (13) The opening clause of paragraph (a) of section eleven hundred two
shall read: "With the consent of the regents of the university of the
state of New York, a petition for the judicial dissolution of a
corporation may be presented:"
 (14) The opening clause of paragraph (a) of section twelve hundred two
shall read: "Upon notice to the attorney general and the commissioner, a
receiver of the property of a corporation can be appointed only by the
court, and in one of the following cases:"
 e. Any reference in the not-for-profit corporation law to the delivery
of any certificate or other instrument to the department of state for
filing shall refer to and provide for corresponding action of the
regents or the commissioner relating thereto, as the case may be, except
that in cases where the commissioner consents to the filing under
article thirteen of the not-for-profit corporation law of a certificate
of authority in which the authorized foreign corporation is designated
as an "authorized foreign education corporation", filing under article
thirteen shall mean filing with the department of state.
 5. Every corporation to which the not-for-profit corporation law is
made applicable by this section, is a charitable corporation as defined
in paragraph (a) of section one hundred two (Definitions) of the
not-for-profit corporation law under all applicable provisions of that
law.
 6. From and after the effective date of this section the general
corporation law shall not apply to an education corporation.
 7. For the purpose of this section and elsewhere in this chapter, the
effective date of the not-for-profit corporation law as to corporations
to which the not-for-profit corporation law is made applicable by this
section, shall be September one, nineteen hundred seventy-three.
 8. Nothing in this section shall impair the rights and powers,
otherwise granted by law, of the courts or the attorney general of this
state.
 § 216-b. Private foundations, as defined in the United States internal
revenue code of 1954: provisions included in the charter.
 1. The following provisions are hereby included in the charter,
heretofore or hereafter granted under this chapter, to incorporate an
institution or association (chartered organization) which is a private
foundation as defined in section 509 of the United States internal
revenue code of 1954 ("Code").
 a. The chartered organization shall distribute such amounts for each
taxable year at such time and in such manner as not to subject the
chartered organization to tax on undistributed income under section 4942
of the code.
 b. The chartered organization shall not engage in any act of
self-dealing which is subject to tax under section 4941 of the code.
 c. The chartered organization shall not retain any excess business
holdings which are subject to tax under section 4943 of the code.
 d. The chartered organization shall not make any investments in such
manner as to subject the corporation to tax under section 4944 of the
code.
 e. The chartered organization shall not make any taxable expenditures
which are subject to tax under section 4945 of the code. Except as
provided in subdivision two, this subdivision applies notwithstanding
any other provision of the charter or any direction in an instrument by
which assets were transferred to the chartered organization.
 2. Subdivision 1 shall not apply to the extent that it conflicts with
any mandatory direction in an instrument by which assets were
transferred to the chartered organization prior to the effective date of
this section unless such conflicting direction is removed as
impracticable under article eight of the estates, powers and trusts law
or in any other manner provided by law. The absence of a specific
provision in such an instrument for the current use of the principal of
the fund, or the presence in such an instrument of a provision, as to
the principal of the fund, limited to the principal's being held,
invested and reinvested, is not such a conflicting mandatory direction.
 3. All references in this section to sections of the code shall be to
sections as amended from time to time, or to corresponding provisions of
subsequent internal revenue laws.
 4. Nothing in this section shall impair the rights and powers of the
courts or the attorney-general of this state.
 § 216-c. Special provisions for cutlery and knife museums that exhibit
automatic knives. 1. For the purposes of this section:
 a. "automatic knife" has the meaning defined therefor in subdivision
five-c of section 265.00 of the penal law.
 b. "cutlery and knife museum" means either: (i) a cutlery and knife
museum or institution that is located in Orange, Sullivan, or Ulster
county which is devoted to the public exhibition, display, or
demonstration of cutlery and knives, including an automatic knife
collection, and is incorporated for the promotion of art, education,
history, and science, or for preserving the cultural significance of the
manufacture of knives and cutlery in the Hudson valley and throughout
the United States, or (ii) any other museum or institution, which is not
located in a city having a population of one million or more, that is
incorporated for the promotion of art, education, history, and science
and which offers for public display or exhibition an automatic knife
collection.
 2. A cutlery and knife museum that wishes to exhibit, show, or
display, in whole or in part, an automatic knife collection may be
chartered, established, or otherwise permitted to operate and conduct
its business pursuant to the provisions of this section and section two
hundred sixteen of this part. Any such museum shall also be subject to
the other sections of this part applicable to museums or institutions;
provided that this section shall supersede any inconsistent provision of
any other section of this part applicable to museums or institutions,
except section two hundred sixteen of this part.
 3. All applicants for a cutlery and knife museum subject to the
provisions of this section, who plan to exhibit, show, or display
automatic knives, shall be fingerprinted. Any other person thereafter
seeking to become a director, officer, employee, or agent of such museum
shall be fingerprinted. Such fingerprints shall be submitted to the
division of criminal justice services for a state criminal history
record check, as defined in subdivision one of section three thousand
thirty-five of this chapter, and may be submitted to the federal bureau
of investigation for a national criminal history record check.
 4. Every museum that contains, displays, exhibits or demonstrates
cutlery, knives and/or automatic knives that are unlawful to possess in
this state shall implement and submit for approval a security plan for
securing such cutlery, knives and automatic knives to the division of
state police or police department or sheriff's office having
jurisdiction over the museum. The security plan will detail specific
measures that would be used to prevent the unlawful use of such items.
The division of state police or police department or sheriff's office
having jurisdiction over the museum shall review the plan and certify
whether it meets statutory requirements. Such plan must satisfy at least
the following requirements:
 a. The building in which all cutlery, knife and automatic knife
collections are housed shall be secured against unauthorized entry,
using heavy duty locks and doors that are resistant to damage, and
windows shall be resistant to breakage.
 b. The display and exhibition cases shall be securely locked at all
times except when removing a single cutlery, knife or automatic knife
item to be placed in storage or on display; and
 c. When not displayed, all cutlery, knives and automatic knives shall
be secured in a locked fireproof safe or vault on the premises or in a
similar secured and locked area.
 5. All cutlery and knife museums subject to the provisions of this
section that wish to ship or loan cutlery, knives or automatic knives to
other licensed museums shall notify in writing and obtain approval from
the division of state police. Additionally, any museum that does not
contain, display, exhibit or demonstrate cutlery, knives or automatic
knives that are unlawful to possess prior to the effective date of this
section shall implement and submit for approval a security plan pursuant
to subdivision four of this section prior to obtaining such items.
 6. No cutlery and knife museum, subject to the provisions of this
section, may introduce automatic knives into its premises until the
division of state police or police department or sheriff's office having
jurisdiction over the museum has inspected the equipment and building
features specified in subdivisions four and five of this section and
certified in writing that all of them are in compliance with their
statutory requirements.
 7. All cutlery and knife museums, subject to the provisions of this
section, shall be allowed to possess, own, collect, accept, and purchase
automatic knives to further their activities to promote art, education,
history, and science, and for the preservation of the cultural
significance of the manufacture of cutlery and knives in New York state.
 § 217. Provisional charters. On evidence satisfactory to the regents
that the conditions for an absolute charter will be met within a
prescribed time, they may grant a provisional charter which shall be
replaced by an absolute charter when the conditions have been fully met;
otherwise, after the specified time, on notice from the regents to this
effect, the provisional charter shall terminate and become void and
shall be surrendered to the regents. No such provisional charter shall
give power to confer degrees.
 § 218. Conditions of incorporation. 1. No institution shall be given
power to confer baccalaureate or higher degrees in this state unless it
shall have financial resources which, in the judgment of the regents,
are adequate to insure satisfactory conduct of its degree program and
achievement of its stated educational goals; and no institution for
higher education shall be incorporated without suitable provision,
approved by the regents, for educational resources and programs. No
institution shall institute or have any faculty or department of
education in any place or be given power to confer any degree not
specifically authorized by its charter; and no corporation shall, under
authority of any general act, extend its business to include
establishing or carrying on any educational institution or work, without
the consent of the board of regents.
 2. No institution shall be given power to confer associate degrees in
this state unless it shall possess financial resources which, in the
judgment of the regents, are adequate to insure satisfactory conduct of
its degree programs and achievement of its stated educational goals.
 § 219. Change of name or charter. 1. The regents may, at any time, for
sufficient cause, by an instrument under their seal and recorded in
their office, change the name, or alter, suspend or revoke the charter
or certificate of incorporation of any domestic corporation which they
might incorporate under section two hundred sixteen, or any certificate
of authority of a foreign corporation which they have issued or to which
the commissioner has consented, (a) if subject to their visitation, or,
(b) if authorized, chartered or incorporated by the regents or under a
general law; provided that, unless on three-fourths request of the
trustees of the corporation, no name shall be changed and no charter or
certificate shall be altered, suspended or revoked, nor shall any rights
or privileges thereunder be suspended or repealed by the regents, until
they have mailed to the usual address of every director or trustee of
the corporation concerned at least thirty days' notice of a hearing when
any objections to the proposed change will be considered, and until
ordered by a vote at a meeting of the regents at which the notices have
specified that action is to be taken on the proposed change. A certified
copy of such order of the regents, under their seal, to change the name,
or alter, suspend or revoke a certificate of incorporation of any
domestic corporation filed by the department of state under a general
law, or certificate of authority of any foreign corporation filed by the
department of state under a general law, shall be delivered by the
regents to such department. The order shall become effective upon the
filing of such certified copy by the department of state.
 2. Any notice to a trustee whose address is not readily ascertainable
may be mailed to him in care of the institution. Where it appears that
any institution incorporated by the regents has ceased to function, and
the regents after diligent effort are unable to ascertain the names of
the surviving trustees, if any, and their addresses or any address for
the institution formerly maintained by the corporation, and are
therefore unable to send the thirty-day notice to the trustees in the
manner prescribed in this section, they may give such thirty days'
notice by causing the same to be published once a week for three
successive weeks prior to the date of such hearing in a daily or weekly
newspaper published or printed in the place where the said corporation
or its principal office is or was located; or if there be no such paper,
then in a daily or weekly paper published or printed within the county,
if there be one, or, if not, in an adjoining county to that in which
such corporation or its principal office is or was located.
 3. Whenever the trustees of any such corporation shall determine, upon
three-fourths vote to dissolve the corporation, they may petition the
regents to issue an order of dissolution. If it appears to the
satisfaction of the regents that there is no sufficient reason for the
continuance of the corporation that all taxes chargeable to the
corporation have been paid, and, if the corporation has stock
provisions, that the outstanding stock has been surrendered for
cancellation, the regents shall thereupon have power to dissolve the
corporation.
 4. Whenever the charter or incorporation of an institution is revoked
or an order of dissolution made pursuant to the provisions of this
section, it shall be the duty of the trustees and/or the custodians of
the permanent academic records of such institution to file the same with
the state education department, or with such other agency as may be
approved by said department where they shall be kept available for
future reference. In the event, however, that an application is made to
the supreme court for an order directing the disposition of assets of
such educational corporation pursuant to the provisions of section two
hundred twenty of this chapter and such order is thereupon made, the
disposition of such permanent academic records may be directed therein.
A copy of the order shall be filed with the education department by the
applicant and such order shall so provide.
 5. An education corporation may file an assumed name certificate
pursuant to section one hundred thirty of the general business law,
provided that the consent of the regents is endorsed or annexed thereto.
Any education corporation that has filed an assumed name certificate
with the secretary of state prior to the effective date of this
subdivision shall file a copy of such certificate with the department no
later than ninety days after the effective date of this subdivision.
 § 220. Distribution of assets. 1. Whenever the regents have revoked
the charter of any educational corporation or dissolved such corporation
pursuant to section two hundred nineteen of this chapter or whenever a
provisional charter has expired, if the corporation has assets the board
of trustees shall, within three months after such revocation,
dissolution or expiration, petition the supreme court in the judicial
district where the principal office of the corporation is or was located
for an order directing the disposition of any and all property belonging
to the corporation. Such petition shall be duly verified and shall set
forth a complete statement of all the assets, together with their
location and an estimate of their value, and also a statement of the
ascertainable debts of the corporation.
 2. Such petition shall be accompanied by proof that notice of the time
and place of such intended application to said court has been duly
published once in each week for at least four weeks successively, next
preceding such application, in a newspaper circulated in the county
where such corporation is located.
 3. A copy of such petition shall be served upon the regents and the
attorney general not less than ten days prior to such application.
 4. The court shall direct the sale of sufficient designated assets to
pay any outstanding debts and the cost of dissolution. The regents and
the board of trustees may present to the court their recommendation as
to the disposition of the remaining property of the corporation if there
be library books, objects of art or of historical significance, as far
as possible they shall not be sold but shall be transferred to
libraries, museums or educational institutions willing to accept them.
If a charter contains a provision indicating a proposed disposition of
the assets in case of dissolution, such provision shall be followed by
the court in its order as far as practicable. If there be any surplus
moneys after payment of debts and the expenses of liquidation, the court
may direct that the same be devoted and applied to any such educational,
religious, benevolent, charitable or other objects or purposes as the
said trustees may indicate by their petition and the said court may
approve.
 5. Upon the revocation of the charter of an educational corporation or
its dissolution, the trustees of such corporation shall be empowered to
continue in office for the purpose of settlement of the affairs of the
corporation.
 § 221. Dissolution of educational institution by stockholders. 1.
Meeting to consider application for dissolution, when to be called. The
trustees of any educational corporation chartered by regents or subject
to their visitation and having capital stock, may, and upon the written
application of any person owning or lawfully holding one-third of the
said capital stock, must call a general meeting of the stockholders of
the said corporation as hereinafter provided, for the purpose of
determining whether or not such corporation shall surrender its charter
and be dissolved and its property distributed among the stockholders
thereof.
 2. Notice thereof, how published. The notice for such general meeting
must state the object thereof and be subscribed by the chairman or other
acting presiding officer and the secretary or acting secretary of the
said corporation or board of trustees; it shall be published once a week
for three successive weeks prior to such meeting in a daily or weekly
newspaper circulated in the place where the principal office of such
corporation is located; or if there be no such paper, then in a daily or
weekly paper circulated within the county, if there be one, or, if not,
in an adjoining county to that in which such corporation is located.
 3. Vote requisite for surrender of charter and dissolution. Whenever,
at a meeting of the stockholders called as hereinbefore provided, any
person or persons holding or qualified to vote upon a majority of the
capital stock of such educational corporation shall vote to surrender
the charter thereof and to dissolve the corporation, the trustees of
such corporation, or a majority of them, must make and sign a
certificate of such action, cause the same to be properly attested by
the officers of the corporation and file the same, together with a copy
of the published notice for the meeting at which such action was taken,
and due proof of the publication thereof, in the office of the board of
regents of the university of the state of New York and thereupon, if the
said proceedings shall have been regularly conducted as above
prescribed, the charter of said corporation shall be deemed to be
surrendered and the said corporation dissolved.
 4. Powers of trustees of educational corporations upon dissolution.
Upon the dissolution of such educational corporation as herein provided,
or upon the revocation by the regents, pursuant to section two hundred
nineteen of this chapter, of the charter of an educational corporation
having outstanding shares of stock, the trustees thereof shall forthwith
become and be trustees of the creditors and stockholders of the
corporation dissolved. They shall have full power to settle the affairs
of the said corporation; to collect and pay the outstanding debts; to
sue for and recover debts and property thereof by the name of the
trustees of such corporation; to sell and dispose of the property
thereof, at public or private sale, and to divide among the stockholders
the moneys or other property that shall remain after the payment of
debts and necessary expenses.
 5. Notice to creditors to present claims, how published. The said
trustees shall, after the dissolution of the said corporation, insert in
a newspaper circulated in the place where the principal office of said
corporation is located, or if there be none such then in a newspaper
circulated within the county, if there be one, or, if not, in an
adjoining county, a notice once in each week for three successive
months, requiring all persons having claims against the said corporation
dissolved to present the same with proof thereof to the said trustees at
the place designated in such notice, on or before a day therein named
which shall be not less than three months from the first publication
thereof. In case any action shall be brought upon any claim which shall
not have been presented to the said trustees within three months from
the first publication of such notice, the said trustees shall not be
chargeable for any assets, moneys or proceeds of the said corporation
dissolved, which they may have paid in satisfaction of other claims
against the said corporation, or in making distribution to the
stockholders thereof, before the commencement of such action.
 6. Surrender of stock scrip, upon distribution to shareholders. Upon
the distribution by the said trustees of assets or property, or the
proceeds thereof, of the dissolved corporation among its stockholders,
the said trustees may require the certificates of ownership of capital
stock, if such have been issued, standing in the name of any stockholder
claiming a distributive share, or under whom such share is claimed, to
be surrendered for cancellation by such stockholder or person claiming
the said share. In the event of the non-production of any such
certificate, the said trustees may require satisfactory proof of the
loss thereof, or of any other cause for such non-production, together
with such security as they may prescribe, before payment of the
distributive share to which the person claiming upon such share of stock
may appear to be entitled.
 7. Notice of distribution, to absent and unknown shareholders. In
case the said trustees upon such distribution by them of assets or
property, or the proceeds thereof, of the dissolved corporation among
its stockholders, shall be unable to find any of the said stockholders
or the persons lawfully owning or entitled to any portion of the said
capital stock, they shall give notice in the manner hereinabove provided
for calling the general meeting of stockholders of such distribution, to
the persons in whose names such stock shall stand upon the books of the
said corporation, requiring them to appear at a time and place
designated, to receive the portion of such assets or property to which
they may be entitled; in case of the failure of any such persons to so
appear, it shall be lawful for the said trustees to pay over and deliver
to the county treasurer of the county wherein the principal office of
such corporation was located, or to any trust company or other
corporation located within such county and authorized to receive moneys
on deposit under order or judgment of a court of record, the proportion
of the assets, property or proceeds aforesaid which such non-appearing
stock bears to the whole stock; the said trustees shall also deliver
therewith a list of the persons entitled to receive the same, together
with the separate amounts to which they shall be severally entitled.
 8. Liability of trustees, when to cease. Upon the payment and
discharge of the debts and obligations of the corporation dissolved, as
hereinbefore provided, and the distribution of its assets, property and
proceeds among the stockholders thereof, and due provision made, as
hereinabove prescribed, for the interests of non-appearing stockholders
and such as can not be found, the said trustees shall become and be
relieved and discharged from further duty, liability and responsibility
by reason of their relation to the said corporation, or towards the
stockholders thereof.
 9. Duties and liabilities of custodians. Any county treasurer, trust
company or other corporation to whom assets, property or proceeds shall
be delivered as herein provided, shall hold the same in trust for the
persons designated and entitled to receive it; and upon receiving
satisfactory proof of the right and title thereto, or upon the order of
any court of record competent to adjudicate thereupon, shall pay over
and deliver to any persons entitled to receive the same the portion of
such proceeds, property or assets to which they shall be entitled.
 § 222. Suspension of operations. If any institution in the university
shall discontinue its educational operations without cause satisfactory
to the regents, it shall surrender its charter to them, subject,
however, to restoration whenever arrangements satisfactory to the
regents are made for resuming its work.
 § 223. Consolidation or merger of corporations. Any two or more
corporations chartered under the powers of the regents or incorporated
under a special act of the legislature or under a general law for
purposes for which a charter may be granted by the regents may enter
into an agreement for the consolidation or merger of such corporations,
setting forth the terms and conditions of consolidation or merger, the
name of the proposed consolidated or merged corporation, the place or
places where the institution or institutions to be maintained is or are
to be located, the number of its directors, which may be five or more,
the time of the annual election and the names of the persons to be
directors until the first or next annual meeting.
 The agreement must be approved by three-fourths of the trustees or
directors of such corporations at a meeting of the trustees or directors
of each corporation, separately and specially called for that purpose,
which approval, duly verified by the chairman and clerk of such meeting,
shall be annexed to the petition. On presentation of a petition,
together with the certificate of approval and the agreement for
consolidation or merger, and on such notice to interested parties as the
regents shall prescribe, and after hearing such interested parties as
desire to be heard, the regents may make and execute an order for the
consolidation or merger of the corporations on such terms and conditions
as the regents may prescribe. When such order is made, such corporations
shall become one corporation by the name designated in the order, and
shall be subject only to such duties and obligations as a corporation
formed under this chapter for the same purposes; and all the property
belonging to the corporations so consolidated or merged shall be vested
in and transferred to the new or surviving corporation, which shall be
subject to all the liabilities of the former corporations, to the same
extent as if they had been contracted or incurred by it. If any
corporation so consolidated or merged was incorporated under a special
act of the legislature or under a general law pursuant to which its
certificate of incorporation was filed with the department of state, the
regents shall deliver a certified copy of the order of consolidation or
merger to such department.
 § 224. Prohibitions. 1. a. No individual, association, partnership or
corporation not holding university, college or other degree conferring
powers by special charter from the legislature of this state or from the
regents, shall confer any degree or use, advertise or transact business
under the name university or college, or any name, title or descriptive
material indicating or tending to imply that said individual,
association, partnership or corporation conducts, carries on, or is a
school of law, medicine, dentistry, pharmacy, veterinary medicine,
nursing, optometry, podiatry, architecture or engineering, unless the
right to do so shall have been granted by the regents in writing under
their seal.
 b. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no
individual, association, partnership or corporation operating an
institution on a for-profit basis and holding degree-conferring powers
granted by the regents pursuant to this subdivision shall, through a
change of ownership or control, convey, assign or transfer such
degree-conferring authority without the consent of the regents. For
purposes of this subdivision, a change of ownership or control shall
include, but shall not be limited to, merger or consolidation with any
corporation; sale, lease, exchange or other disposition of all or
substantially all of the assets of the institution; and the transfer of
a controlling interest of the stock of a corporation.
 2. No person shall buy, sell or fraudulently or illegally make or
alter, give, issue or obtain or attempt to obtain by fraudulent means
any diploma, certificate or other instrument purporting to confer any
literary, scientific, professional or other degree, or to constitute any
license, or a duplicate thereof, or any certificate of registration, or
to certify to the completion in whole or in part of any course of study
in any university, college, academy or other educational institution.
 3. No person, firm, association or corporation shall offer or
otherwise advertise a college degree in the state of New York without
the prior written approval of the department, in accordance with the
regulations of the commissioner of education, unless the institution
offering or advertising such a degree is accredited by at least one
accrediting commission recognized by the United States commissioner of
education as a reliable authority for the purpose of accreditation at
the post secondary level or unless the program leading to such degree is
registered with the department of education of the state of New York. A
violation of this subdivision is a violation punishable by a fine not to
exceed five hundred dollars. Any newspaper or other advertising medium
which carries said advertisement shall be exempt from the provisions of
this subdivision.
 3-a. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision three of this
section, the commissioner of education, boards of education, school
authorities, or authorized school officers shall not be required to
accept for purposes of certification, recertification, licensure,
appointment, promotional increment, or salary differential for pedagogic
personnel, any diploma, degree or course credit from a university,
college, academy, school or other institution of learning located
outside the state of New York if such diploma, degree or course credit
was granted without the requirement of on-campus attendance and if
instruction and testing was transacted primarily by correspondence.
 Any person making application for certification, recertification,
licensure, appointment, promotional increment or salary differential may
be required by the commissioner, or by boards of education, school
authorities or authorized school officers to submit a signed statement
or affidavit as part of such application to identify any diploma, degree
or course credit which was granted by a university, college, academy,
school or other institution of learning located outside the state of New
York if such diploma, degree or course credit was granted without the
requirement of on-campus attendance and if instruction and testing was
transacted primarily by correspondence. A willful and wrongful
misrepresentation on such application shall constitute grounds for
disciplinary action in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
the rules of the regents, the regulations of the commissioner, or the
by-laws, rules or regulations of such school authorities.
 The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to any diploma,
degree or course credit completed before the effective date of this
subdivision.
 4. No diploma or degree shall be conferred in this state except by a
regularly organized institution of learning meeting all requirements of
law and of the university, nor shall any person, with intent to deceive,
falsely represent himself to have received any such degree or
credential, nor shall any person append to his name any letters in the
same form registered by the regents as entitled to the protection
accorded to university degrees, unless he shall have received from a
duly authorized institution the degree or certificate for which the
letters are registered. Counterfeiting or falsely or without authority
making or altering in a material respect any such credential issued
under seal shall be a felony; any other violation of this section shall
be a misdemeanor; and any person who aids or abets another, or
advertises or offers himself to violate the provisions of this section,
shall be liable to the same penalties.
 § 224-a. Students unable because of religious beliefs to register or
attend classes on certain days. 1. No person shall be expelled from or
be refused admission as a student to an institution of higher education
for the reason that he or she is unable, because of his or her religious
beliefs, to register or attend classes or to participate in any
examination, study or work requirements on a particular day or days.
 2. Any student in an institution of higher education who is unable,
because of his or her religious beliefs, to attend classes on a
particular day or days shall, because of such absence on the particular
day or days, be excused from any examination or any study or work
requirements.
 3. It shall be the responsibility of the faculty and of the
administrative officials of each institution of higher education to make
available to each student who is absent from school, because of his or
her religious beliefs, an equivalent opportunity to register for classes
or make up any examination, study or work requirements which he or she
may have missed because of such absence on any particular day or days.
No fees of any kind shall be charged by the institution for making
available to the said student such equivalent opportunity.
 4. If registration, classes, examinations, study or work requirements
are held on Friday after four o'clock post meridian or on Saturday,
similar or makeup classes, examinations, study or work requirements or
opportunity to register shall be made available on other days, where it
is possible and practicable to do so. No special fees shall be charged
to the student for these classes, examinations, study or work
requirements or registration held on other days.
 5. In effectuating the provisions of this section, it shall be the
duty of the faculty and of the administrative officials of each
institution of higher education to exercise the fullest measure of good
faith. No adverse or prejudicial effects shall result to any student
because of his or her availing himself or herself of the provisions of
this section.
 6. Any student, who is aggrieved by the alleged failure of any faculty
or administrative officials to comply in good faith with the provisions
of this section, shall be entitled to maintain an action or proceeding
in the supreme court of the county in which such institution of higher
education is located for the enforcement of his or her rights under this
section.
 6-a. It shall be the responsibility of the administrative officials
of each institution of higher education to give written notice to
students of their rights under this section, informing them that each
student who is absent from school, because of his or her religious
beliefs, must be given an equivalent opportunity to register for classes
or make up any examination, study or work requirements which he or she
may have missed because of such absence on any particular day or days.
No fees of any kind shall be charged by the institution for making
available to such student such equivalent opportunity.
 7. As used in this section, the term "institution of higher education"
shall mean any institution of higher education, recognized and approved
by the regents of the university of the state of New York, which
provides a course of study leading to the granting of a post-secondary
degree or diploma. Such term shall not include any institution which is
operated, supervised or controlled by a church or by a religious or
denominational organization whose educational programs are principally
designed for the purpose of training ministers or other religious
functionaries or for the purpose of propagating religious doctrines. As
used in this section, the term "religious belief" shall mean beliefs
associated with any corporation organized and operated exclusively for
religious purposes, which is not disqualified for tax exemption under
section 501 of the United States Code.
 § 225. Unlawful acts in respect to examinations and records. A person
who shall:
 1. Personate or attempt to offer to personate another person in
taking, or attempting or offering to take an examination held in
accordance with this chapter or with the rules of the university; or
 2. Take, or attempt or offer to take, such an examination in the name
of any other person; or
 3. Procure any other person to falsely personate him or to take, or
attempt or offer to take, any such examination in his name; or
 4. Have in his possession question papers to be used in any such
examination, when not contained in their sealed wrappers, or copies of
such papers or questions, at any time prior to the date set for such
examination, unless duly authorized by the regents or the commissioner
of education; or
 5. Sell or offer to sell question papers or any questions prepared for
use in any examination held in accordance with this chapter or with the
rules of the university; or
 6. Use in any such examination any question papers or questions, or
secure or prepare the answers to such questions prior to the time set
for the examination; or
 7. Willfully and wrongfully disclose or transmit to any person the
questions or answers to such examination prior to the time set for such
examination, unless duly authorized by the regents, commissioner of
education or appropriate school authorities or otherwise provided by
law, or willfully and wrongfully destroy, falsify or conceal the records
or results of such examination from the appropriate authorities to whom
such records or results are required to be transmitted in accordance
with this chapter, the rules of the regents, the regulations of the
commissioner, or the by-laws, rules or regulations of such school
authorities; or
 8. Transmit to the state education department answers to questions
used in any such examination which are prepared or written outside of
the period of examination, or alter any such answers after such period
is closed; or
 9. Secure or attempt to secure any credential regularly issued by the
university, which is based upon such examination or based upon a course
or courses of study in any institution of learning or educational
institution approved by the university, which he has not actually passed
or completed; or
 9-a. Knowingly and willfully make an unauthorized and false alteration
or representation of any official records related to a student and
maintained by a school or college under the supervision of the regents,
the commissioner, or the university of the state of New York, including
identifying data, grades, records of attendance, records of student
achievement, assessment results, disciplinary records, and
individualized education programs.
 10. Otherwise secure or attempt to secure the record of having passed
such examination or of having been issued or of having been given credit
toward such credential in violation of the university rules; is guilty
of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished for a
first offense by a fine of not less than fifty dollars or imprisonment
for not less than thirty days, or by both such fine and imprisonment,
and for a second offense by a fine of not less than two hundred and
fifty dollars or imprisonment for not less than six months or by both
such fine and imprisonment.
 11. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision ten of this section,
a violation of this section shall also constitute grounds for
disciplinary action in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
the rules of the regents, the regulations of the commissioner, or the
by-laws, rules or regulations of such school authorities.
 § 226. Powers of trustees of institutions. The trustees of every
corporation created by the regents, unless otherwise provided by law or
by its charter, may:
 1. Number and quorum. Fix the term of office and number of trustees,
which shall not exceed twenty-five, nor be less than five. If any
institution has more than five trustees, the body that elects, by a
two-thirds vote after notice of the proposed action in the call for a
meeting, may reduce the number to not less than five by abolishing the
office of any trustee which is vacant and filing in the regents' office
a certified copy of the action. A majority of the whole number shall be
a quorum.
 2. Executive committee. Elect an executive committee of not less than
five, who, in intervals between meetings of the trustees, may transact
such business of the corporation as the trustees may authorize, except
to grant degrees or to make removals from office.
 3. Meetings and seniority. Meet on their own adjournment or when
required by their by-laws, and as often as they shall be summoned by
their chairman, or in his absense by the senior trustee, on written
request of three trustees. Seniority shall be according to the order in
which the trustees are named in the charter or subsequently elected.
Notice of the time and place of every meeting shall be mailed not less
than five nor more than ten days before the meeting to the usual address
of every trustee.
 4. Vacancies and elections; removals by board of regents. Fill any
vacancy occurring in the office of any trustee by electing another for
the unexpired term; provided, however, that where trustees are elected
by the legal voters the person so appointed to fill any such vacancy
shall hold office until the next annual election of trustees. The office
of any trustee shall become vacant on his death, resignation, refusal to
act, removal from office, expiration of his term, or any other cause
specified in the charter. If any trustee shall fail to attend three
consecutive meetings without excuse accepted as satisfactory by the
trustees, he shall be deemed to have resigned, and the vacancy shall be
filled. Any vacancy in the office of trustee continuing for more than
one year, or any vacancy reducing the number of trustees to less than
two-thirds of the full number may be filled by the regents. The regents
may remove any trustee of a corporation created by them for misconduct,
incapacity, neglect of duty, or where it appears to the satisfaction of
the regents that the corporation has failed or refuses to carry into
effect its educational purposes. A hearing in the proceeding for the
removal of such trustees shall be had before the board of regents or a
committee thereof and the trustees shall be given at least ten days'
notice of the time and place of such hearing. In case of removal the
regents may appoint successors to the trustees so removed. The
provisions of this section as to removal and filling of vacancies in
trustees shall not apply to corporations now or hereafter established
and maintained by a religious denomination, order or sect. No person
shall be ineligible as a trustee by reason of sex.
 5. Property holding. Take and hold by gift, grant, devise or bequest
in their own right or in trust for any purpose comprised in the objects
of the corporation, such additional real and personal property, beyond
such as shall be authorized by their charter or by special or general
statute, as the regents shall authorize within one year after the
delivery of the instrument or probate of the will, giving, granting,
devising or bequeathing such property, and such authority given by the
regents shall make any such gift, grant, devise or bequest operative and
valid in law. Any grant, devise or bequest shall be equally valid
whether made in the corporate name or to the trustees of a corporation,
and powers given to the trustees shall be powers of the corporation.
 6. Control of property. a. Buy, sell, mortgage, let and otherwise use
and dispose of its property as they shall deem for the best interests of
the institution; and also to lend or deposit, or to receive as a gift,
or on loan or deposit, literary, scientific or other articles,
collections, or property pertaining to their work; and such gifts, loans
or deposits may be made to or with the university or any of its
institutions by any person, or by legal vote of any board of trustees,
corporation, association or school district, and any such transfer of
property, if approved by the regents, shall during its continuance,
transfer responsibility therefor to the institution receiving it, which
shall also be entitled to receive any money, books or other property
from the state or other sources to which said corporation, association
or district would have been entitled but for such transfer.
 b. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, prior to the discarding
of used or surplus books or other such reading materials by trustees of
a chartered public or free association library which receives over ten
thousand dollars in state aid, such trustees shall offer to donate such
books or materials to a not-for-profit corporation or political
subdivision located within the area of the library system or offer to
sell such books or materials to the general public. The trustees shall
retain any proceeds received from the sale of such books and materials
for the purpose of maintaining and improving library service within the
system.
 7. Officers and employees. Appoint and fix the salaries of such
officers and employees as they shall deem necessary who, unless employed
under special contract, shall hold their offices during the pleasure of
the trustees; but no trustee shall receive compensation as such. The
president or chief executive officer of an association library
corporation shall be elected by the trustees from their own number and
shall be the chairman of the board.
 8. Removals and suspensions. Remove or suspend from office by vote of
a majority of the entire board any trustee, officer or employee engaged
under special contract, on examination and due proof of the truth of a
written complaint by any trustee, of misconduct, incapacity or neglect
of duty; provided, that at least one week's previous notice of the
proposed action shall have been given to the accused and to each
trustee.
 9. Degrees and credentials. Grant such degrees and honors as are
specifically authorized by their charter, and in testimony thereof give
suitable certificates and diplomas under their seal; and every
certificate and diploma so granted shall entitle the conferee to all
privileges and immunities which by usage or statute are allowed for
similar diplomas of corresponding grade granted by any institution of
learning.
 10. Rules. Make all by-laws and rules necessary and proper for the
purposes of the institution and not inconsistent with law or any rule of
the university; but no rule by which more than a majority vote shall be
required for any specified action by the trustees shall be amended,
suspended or repealed by a smaller vote than that required for action
thereunder.
 § 227. Colleges may construct water-works and sewer systems. 1. Every
incorporated college in this state is duly authorized and empowered to
construct and maintain a system of water-works for the purpose of
supplying its college buildings and premises with pure and wholesome
water for domestic, sanitary and fire purposes, and for the preservation
of the health of its students, faculty and employees, and for the
preservation of the public health of the town, village or city in or
near which such college is located, and the construction and maintenance
of such water-works is declared to be a public use. Such water-works, as
often as necessary, may be enlarged or improved. Every such incorporated
college owning its water-works system and having an adequate supply of
water therefrom, may furnish water to persons other than students,
faculty and employees of such college at and for a just and adequate
compensation, providing that they reside within a sewer district now
created in which the premises of the said college or any part thereof
are embraced, and provided no municipal or private public service
corporation operates or maintains a system of water-works therein
capable of supplying water to such inhabitants, and provided further
that the provisions therein relative to the residence of the purchasers
of water within a sewer district shall not restrict Cornell University
from selling water to the residents of the hamlet of Forest Home or a
water district organized for the purpose of furnishing a potable water
supply to said hamlet. Whenever any such college shall extend its mains
along any streets, avenues or highways for the purpose of supplying
water to such inhabitants, it shall not lose its exemption from taxation
by reason thereof, and shall not be deemed to be exercising a public or
corporate franchise within the meaning of the tax law.
 2. Any such college shall have the right to acquire real estate, or
any interest therein, necessary or proper for such water-works, and the
right to lay, relay, repair and maintain conduit and water pipes, with
connections and fixtures, on, through, and over the lands of others; the
right to intercept and divert the flow of waters from the lands of
riparian owners, and from persons owning and interested in any waters;
and the right to prevent the flow or drainage of noxious, or impure, or
unwholesome matter from the lands of others into its reservoirs, or
sources of supply. But no such college shall ever have power to take or
use water from any of the lands of this state, or any land, reservoir,
or feeders, or any streams which have been taken by the state for the
purpose of supplying the canals with water. The consent of an
incorporated village or city must be obtained to lay any such pipes in
or through its streets, and such consent may be accompanied by such
reasonable conditions or restrictions as are proper.
 3. Such college may cause such examinations and surveys for its
proposed water-works to be made as may be necessary to determine the
proper location thereof, and for such purpose, by its officers, agents
and servants, may enter upon any lands or waters in the vicinity for the
purpose of making such examinations and surveys, subject to liability
for all damage done. When surveys or examinations are made or concluded,
a map shall be made of the lands or interests to be taken or entered
upon, and on which the land or interest of each owner or occupant shall
be designated, and all streets and roads in which it is proposed to lay
conduit pipes, with the proposed line thereof, which map shall be dated
and signed by the engineer making the same; and said map shall be filed
and kept in the college library for examination and reference, and a
duplicate thereof shall be filed in the clerk's office in each county
wherein any of such lands or interests proposed to be taken are located.
Such examinations and surveys may be ordered and directed by the
president or board of trustees of such college. A majority of the
trustees shall determine upon the construction of such water-works and
the plans thereof, and order contracts therefor to be made by such
officers of the college as may be designated.
 4. If any such college shall be unable to agree upon such terms of
purchase of any such property, right or easements, before or after plans
shall be determined upon, it may, after such plans have been adopted,
acquire the same by condemnation, according to the provisions of the
eminent domain procedure law.
 5. When any such college has constructed and completed water-works, as
above provided, it may, by a majority of its trustees, determine upon
and construct a sewer system; it may connect the same with the sewer
system of the village, city or town sewer districts thereof in or near
which said college is situated, if such connection is practicable. A
college, with the approval of its trustees, may allow its sewer system
to serve as an interconnection between separate sewer systems of
villages, cities or town sewer districts when and so long as such use of
the sewer system of the college does not interfere with or limit the use
of that sewer system by the college. The college shall not lose its
exemption from taxation by reason of such connection or interconnection
of its sewer system and the college shall not be deemed to be exercising
a public or corporate franchise within the meaning of the tax law.
Examination, surveys and a map may be made as above provided. Lands and
easements may be acquired by purchase, as above provided, and in case
such acquisition can not be made by purchase then they may be acquired
by condemnation, according to the provisions of the condemnation law.
 § 228. The Hamilton college sewer district. The Hamilton college sewer
district established in the town of Kirkland, Oneida county, outside the
village of Clinton, is hereby continued and all the provisions of the
town law relating to a sewer district in a town shall apply to such
district, except as herein otherwise provided: The district shall be
governed by a board of sewer district commissioners consisting of three
persons, who shall serve until a vacancy shall occur by reason of death,
resignation or removal from office. The town board of the town of
Kirkland may remove a member of the board for inefficiency, neglect of
duty or misconduct in office after a public hearing on not less than ten
days' written notice and an opportunity to be heard in person or by
counsel. A vacancy in office of a commissioner shall be filled by
appointment by the town board from a list of nominations of not less
than three persons made by the remaining commissioners. Each
commissioner appointed by the town board must be a resident taxpayer of
the sewer district or in lieu thereof an officer, trustee or member of
the faculty of Hamilton college. Such commissioners shall select one of
their number as chairman and another as secretary. Each commissioner,
before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take the
constitutional oath of office and execute to the town of Kirkland and
file with the town clerk an official undertaking in such sum and with
such sureties as the town board from time to time may direct. Such
commissioners may be paid for their services an annual amount, as
determined by the town board, up to two thousand dollars. Such
compensation shall be deemed an expense of the district. The board of
sewer district commissioners of such district shall have all the powers
and be subject to the duties and responsibilities of district
commissioners elected pursuant to the provisions of article thirteen of
the town law.
 § 229. County educational institutions. The board of supervisors of a
county, having a population of over five hundred thousand and adjacent
to a city having a population of over two million, may determine, by
resolution, to make application to the regents for the incorporation,
pursuant to the provisions of part one of this article of one or more of
the institutions enumerated in section two hundred sixteen of this
chapter. The regents may, by an instrument under their seal and
recorded in their office, incorporate any such institution or
institutions under such name with such number of trustees or other
managers, and with such powers, privileges and duties, and subject to
such limitations and restrictions in all respects as the regents may
prescribe in conformity to law. The cost and expenses necessary to
establish, maintain and support such institution or institutions
pursuant to the provisions of part one of this article, including the
acquisition of real property, and the construction and equipment of
buildings and grounds, shall be a county charge and the board of
supervisors shall provide for the payment of such cost and expenses by
the levy, assessment and collection of taxes in the same manner that
taxes are levied, assessed and collected for other county purposes. The
provisions of part one of this article shall apply to such institution
or institutions, except the provision of section two hundred eighteen of
this chapter, requiring resources of at least five hundred thousand
dollars.
 § 230. Municipal training institute. The municipal training institute
of the state of New York, a corporation created by the regents pursuant
to section two hundred sixteen of the education law for the purpose of
improving the administration of municipal affairs by providing courses
of training for municipal officials in cities and villages of the state
and conducting schools therefor having received an absolute charter
under section two hundred sixteen, and the regents having approved the
courses of study and plan of instruction of such institute, the cost of
carrying out the program of the institute may be defrayed in part with
grants of federal vocational education moneys made to the regents under
acts of congress for training those in public and other service
occupations.
 § 231. Town and county officers training school. The town and county
officers training school of the state of New York, a corporation created
by the regents pursuant to section two hundred sixteen of the education
law for the purpose of improving the administration of municipal affairs
by providing courses of training for municipal officials in towns and
counties of the state and conducting school therefor having received an
absolute charter under section two hundred sixteen, and the regents
having approved the courses of study and plan of instruction of such
institute, the cost of carrying out the program of the training school
may be defrayed in part with grants of federal vocational education
moneys made to the regents under acts of congress for training those in
public and other service occupations.
 § 232. Departments and their government. The state library and state
museum shall be departments of the university, and the regents may
establish such other departments and divisions therein as they shall
deem useful in the discharge of their duties.
 § 233. State Museum; collections made by the staff. 1. All scientific
specimens and collections, works of art, objects of historic interest
and similar property appropriate to a general museum, if owned by the
state and not placed in other custody by a specific law, shall
constitute the collections of the state museum. The state museum shall
be the custodian of the collections, shall perform standard curatorial,
research and educational activities and a director appointed by the
regents shall constitute its head.
 2. Any scientific collection made by a member of the museum staff
during his term of office shall, unless otherwise authorized by
resolution of the regents, belong to the state and form part of the
state museum.
 3. The state of New York, through its legislative authority accepts
the provisions of section one hundred twenty of the federal-aid highway
act of nineteen hundred fifty-six (70 Stat. 374) relating to the salvage
of archaeological or paleontological objects, including but not limited
to ruins, historic sites, Indian burial grounds, cemeteries, buildings,
artifacts, fossils or, other objects of antiquity having national
significance from an historical, cultural, social or scientific
standpoint, and empowers and directs the commissioner of education to
promulgate joint regulations with the department of environmental
conservation, the office of general services, and the office of parks,
recreation and historic preservation and make agreements with those and
other appropriate state departments or agencies and such agency or
agencies as needed to carry out the purposes of such provision of law.
 4. Except as otherwise provided in subdivision three of this section,
no person shall investigate, excavate, remove, injure, appropriate or
destroy any object of archaeological, historical, cultural, social,
scientific or paleontological interest, situated on, in or under lands
owned by the state of New York, without the written permission of the
commissioner of education. A violation of this provision shall
constitute a class A misdemeanor. The attorney general, either
independently or upon referral from a state agency, shall seek civil
and/or criminal prosecution, civil and/or criminal penalties and any
other relief, including but not limited to seizure and forfeiture of the
appropriate items, and forfeiture of the instrumentalities of the
unauthorized actions on state lands. The discovery of any such objects
shall be forthwith reported to the commissioner by the state department
or agency having jurisdiction over such lands.
 5. Permits for the examination, excavation or gathering of
archaeological, historical, cultural, social, scientific or
paleontological objects upon the lands under their respective
jurisdictions may be granted by the heads of those state departments or
agencies to persons authorized by the commissioner of education for the
purposes of the state museum and state science service, for the purpose
of the preservation of any such objects worthy of permanent preservation
and, in all cases, to the acquisition and dissemination of knowledge
relating thereto.
 § 233-a. Property of the state museum. 1. As used in this section:
 (a) The term "museum" shall mean the New York state museum.
 (b) The term "deaccession" shall mean the permanent removal or
disposal of an object from the collection of the museum by virtue of its
sale, exchange, donation or transfer by any means to any person.
 (c) The term "person" shall mean any natural person, partnership,
corporation, company, trust association or other entity, however
organized.
 (d) The term "property" means any inanimate object, document or
tangible object under the office's care which has intrinsic historic,
artistic, scientific, or cultural value.
 (e) The term "claimant" means a person who asserts ownership or some
other legal right to undocumented property held by the museum.
 (f) The term "loan" means a deposit of property with the museum not
accompanied by a transfer to the museum of title to the property.
 (g) The term "lender" means a person whose name appears on the records
of the museum as the person legally entitled to, or claiming to be
legally entitled to, property held by the museum or, if deceased, the
legal heirs of such person.
 (h) The term "lender's address" means the most recent address for the
lender shown on the museum's records pertaining to the property on loan,
or if the lender is deceased, the last known address of the legal heirs
of such lender.
 (i) The term "permanent loan" means a loan of property to the museum
for an unspecified period.
 (j) The term "undocumented property" means property in the possession
of the museum for which the museum cannot determine the owner by
reference to its records.
 (k) The term "conservation measures" means any actions taken to
preserve or stabilize a property including, but not limited to, proper
storage support, cleaning, proper lighting, and restoration.
 2. The deaccessioning of property by the museum must be consistent
with the mission of the museum.
 3. Prior to the acquisition of property by gift, the museum shall
provide the donor with a written copy of its mission statement and
collections policy, which shall include policies and procedures of the
museum relating to deaccessioning.
 4. If the museum has the knowledge of a planned bequest of any
property prior to the death of the testator, the museum shall provide
the testator with a written copy of its mission statement and
collections policy, which shall include policies and procedures of the
museum relating to deaccessioning.
 6. Notice given by the museum under this section must be mailed to the
lender's last known address by certified mail, return receipt requested.
Service by mail is complete if the museum receives proof that the notice
was received not more than thirty days after it was mailed; provided,
however, notice may be given by publication if the museum does not:
 (a) know the identity of the lender; or
 (b) know the address of the lender; or
 (c) receive proof that the notice mailed under this section was
received within thirty days of mailing. Notice by publication must be
given at least once a week for three consecutive weeks in a newspaper of
general circulation in:
 (i) the county in which the property is held by the museum; and
 (ii) the county of the lender's last address, if known.
 The date of notice under this subdivision shall be the date of the
third published notice.
 In addition to any other information that may be required or seem
appropriate, any notice given under this section must contain the
following:
 (A) The name of the lender or claimant, if known.
 (B) The last address of the lender or claimant, if known.
 (C) A brief description of the property on loan to the museum
referenced in the notice.
 (D) The date of the loan, if known or the approximate date of
acquisition of the property.
 (E) The name and address of the museum.
 (F) The name, address, and telephone number of the person to be
contacted regarding the property.
 7. Notwithstanding any other provisions of law regarding abandoned or
lost property, the museum may, beginning five years from the date the
lender last contacted the museum, clarify title to property on permanent
loan or loaned for a specified term that has expired. Proof of such
contact shall include previously sent restricted letters or loan forms,
returned envelopes, inventories and other documentary evidence. The
procedure for clarifying title shall be as follows:
 (a) The museum must give notice by mail to the lender that it wishes
to clarify ownership rights in the property.
 (b) In addition to the information described in subdivision six of
this section, the notice shall be entitled "Notice of Termination" and
must include a statement containing substantially the following
information: "The records of the New York State Museum indicate that
you have property on loan at (name of facility). The museum is seeking
to determine whether you wish (i) that the museum return the property to
you, (ii) that the property remain on loan to the museum subject to
annual renewal (if the museum wishes that the property remain on loan),
or (iii) that the museum retain the property permanently as its owner.
Please contact (name of contact) in writing within one hundred twenty
days, in order to advise the museum as to which of the above
alternatives you wish to follow."
 (c) If, no later than one hundred twenty days following receipt
thereof, the lender does not respond to the notice of termination by
submitting a written claim to the property on loan with verifying
documentation the office shall send a second notice to the lender
containing the following information: "On (date of first notice), the
New York State Museum sent you a notice concerning property that,
according to our records, has been loaned to the office. You have not
responded to that notice, a copy of which is enclosed, and the museum
will commence proceedings to acquire title to the property if you do not
contact (name of contact), in writing within one hundred twenty days of
receiving this second notice."
 If the lender fails to respond to the second notice within one hundred
twenty days of receipt, at the request of the commissioner, the attorney
general may make an application to the supreme court pursuant to article
thirty of the civil practice law and rules for a declaratory judgment to
determine the museum's right to such property. In a case in which there
is no evidence that the notices previously sent by the museum were
received by the lender, upon application, the supreme court shall
specify the method by which service shall be made upon the lender.
 8. Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding abandoned or
lost property the museum may acquire title to undocumented property held
by the museum for at least five years as follows:
 (a) The museum must give notice by publication that it is asserting
title to the undocumented property.
 (b) In addition to the information described herein, the notice shall
be entitled "Notice of Intent to Acquire Title to Property" and must
include a statement containing substantially the following information:
"The records of the New York State Museum fail to indicate the owner of
record of certain property in its possession. The museum hereby asserts
its intent to acquire title to the following property: (general
description of property). If you claim ownership of this property, you
must submit written proof of ownership to the museum and make
arrangements to collect the property. If you fail to do so within one
hundred eighty days, the museum will commence proceedings to acquire
title to the property. If you claim an interest in the property but do
not possess written proof of such interest, you should submit your name
and address and a written statement of your claim to (name of contact),
within one hundred eighty days, in order to receive notice of any legal
proceedings concerning the property. If you wish to commence legal
proceedings to claim the property, you should consult your attorney."
 If after one hundred eighty days following the last date of
publication of such notice no claimant has responded thereto by
submitting written proof of ownership of the property to the museum, or
if there is a dispute between the museum and any claimant as to
ownership of the property, upon the request of the commissioner, the
attorney general may make an application to the supreme court pursuant
to article thirty of the civil practice law and rules for a declaratory
judgment to determine the museum's rights in the property.
 9. A copy of all notices required by subdivision seven or eight of
this section shall be sent, by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the International Foundation for Art Research, or any successor
foundation or agency having similar purposes, on or before the date on
which such notices are mailed or first published pursuant to the
requirements of this section.
 10. Any person who purchases or otherwise acquires property from the
museum acquires good title to such property if the museum has acquired
title in accordance with this section.
 11. The provisions of subdivisions seven and eight of this section
shall not apply to any property that has been reported as stolen to a
law enforcement agency or to the Art Theft Archives of the International
Foundation for Art Research, or any successor foundation or agency
having similar purposes, no later than one year following the theft or
discovery of the theft.
 12. The museum shall have the following duty to lenders:
 (a) When the museum accepts a loan of property, it shall inform the
lender in writing of the provisions of this section.
 (b) The museum shall give a lender, at the lender's address, prompt
written notice by mail of any known injury to, or loss of, property on
loan or of the need to apply conservation measures. Such notice shall
advise the lender of his right, in lieu of the application of such
conservation measures, to terminate the loan and, no later than thirty
days after having received such notice, either retrieve the property or
arrange for its isolation and retrieval. The museum shall not be
required to publish notice of injury or loss to any undocumented
property.
 13. The owner of property loaned to the museum is responsible for
promptly notifying the museum, in writing, of any change of address or
change in the ownership of the property.
 14. (a) Unless there is a written loan agreement to the contrary, the
museum may apply conservation measures to property on loan to the museum
without giving formal notice or first obtaining the lender's permission
if immediate action is required to protect the property on loan or other
property in the custody of the museum or if the property on loan is a
hazard to the health and safety of the public or the museum staff,
provided that:
 (i) the museum is unable to reach the lender at the lender's last
known address or telephone number before the time the museum determines
action is necessary; or
 (ii) the lender either (A) does not respond to a request for
permission to apply conservation measures made pursuant to subdivision
twelve of this section within three days of receiving the request or
will not agree to the conservation measures the museum recommends or (B)
fails to terminate the loan and either retrieve the property or arrange
for its isolation and retrieval within thirty days of receiving the
request.
 If immediate conservation measures are necessary to protect the
property or to protect the health or safety of the public or museum
staff, the conditions set forth in subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of this
paragraph shall not apply.
 (b) Unless provided otherwise in an agreement with the lender, if the
museum applies conservation measures to property under paragraph (a) of
this subdivision, and provided that the measures were not required as a
result of the museum's own action or inaction, the museum shall acquire
a lien on the property in the amount of the costs incurred by the
museum, including, but not limited to the cost of labor and materials,
and shall not be liable for injury to or loss of the property, provided
that the museum:
 (i) had a reasonable belief at the time the action was taken that the
action was necessary to protect the property on loan or other property
in the custody of the museum, or that the property on loan was a hazard
to the health and safety of the public or the museum staff; and
 (ii) exercised reasonable care in the choice and application of
conservation measures.
 15. The museum shall maintain or continue to maintain, as the case may
be and to the extent such information is available, a record of
acquisition, whether by purchase, bequest, gift, loan or otherwise, of
property for display or collection and of deaccessioning or loan of
property currently held or thereafter acquired for display or
collection. Any such record shall: (a) state the name, address, and
telephone number of the person from whom such property was acquired, or
to whom such property was transferred by deaccessioning or loan, and a
description of such property, its location, if known, and the terms of
the acquisition or deaccessioning or loan, including any restrictions as
to its use or further disposition, and any other material facts about
the terms and conditions of the transaction; (b) include a copy of any
document of conveyance relating to the acquisition or deaccessioning or
loan of such property and all notices and other documents prepared or
received by the museum.
 16. Notwithstanding the provisions of the civil practice law and rules
or any other law, except for laws governing actions to recover stolen
property:
 (a) No action against the museum for damages arising out of injury to
or loss of property loaned to the museum shall be commenced more than
three years from the date the museum gives the lender or claimant notice
of the injury or loss under this section.
 (b) No action against the museum to recover property shall be
commenced more than three years from the date the museum gives notice of
its intent to terminate the loan or notice of intent to acquire title to
undocumented property.
 § 233-aa. Property of other museums. 1. As used in this section:
 (a) The term "museum" means any institution, including but not limited
to museums, historical societies, zoological gardens, aquariums,
botanical gardens, and arboreta, having collecting as a stated purpose
in its charter, or owning or holding collections, or intending to own or
hold collections, that is a governmental entity or not-for-profit
corporation. The term museum does not include the state museum.
 (b) The term "deaccession" means the permanent removal or disposal of
property from the collection of a museum by virtue of its sale,
exchange, donation, or transfer by any means to any person.
 (c) The term "person" means any natural person, partnership,
corporation, company, trust association, or other entity, however
organized.
 (d) The term "property" means any inanimate object, document,
organism, or tangible object under a museum's care which has intrinsic
historic, artistic, scientific, or cultural value.
 (e) The term "loan" means a deposit of property with a museum not
accompanied by a transfer to such museum of title to the property.
 (f) The term "lender" means a person legally entitled to, or claiming
to be legally entitled to, property held by the museum or, if such
person is deceased, the legal heirs of such person.
 (g) The term "unclaimed property" means property which is on loan to a
museum and in regard to which the lender, or anyone acting legitimately
on the lender's behalf, has not contacted the museum for at least ten
years from the date of the beginning of the loan, if the loan was for an
indefinite or undetermined period, or for at least five years after the
date upon which the loan for a definite period expired.
 (h) The term "undocumented property" means property that has been in
the possession of a museum for at least ten years and for which the
museum cannot determine the lender, donor, or owner by making a good
faith and reasonable search for the identity and last known address of
the lender, donor or owner from the museum records and other records
reasonably available to museum staff.
 (i) The term "conservation measures" means any actions taken to
preserve or stabilize a property, including, but not limited to, proper
storage, support, cleaning, and restoration.
 2. The acquisition of property by a museum pursuant to this section
must be consistent with the mission of the museum.
 3. Prior to the acquisition of property by gift, a museum shall inform
a donor or prospective donor of the provisions of this section and shall
provide a donor or prospective donor with a written copy of its mission
statement and collections policy, which shall include policies and
procedures of the museum related to deaccessioning.
 4. If the museum has knowledge of a planned bequest of any property
prior to the death of the testator, the museum shall provide the
testator with a written copy of its mission statement and collections
policy, which shall include policies and procedures of the museum
relating to deaccessioning, provided, however, that any museum that
routinely makes its mission statement and collections policy available
on its website shall be deemed to have complied with this subdivision.
 5. Proceeds derived from the sale of any property title to which was
acquired by a museum pursuant to this section shall be used only for the
acquisition of property for the museum's collection or for the
preservation, protection, and care of the collection and shall not be
used to defray ongoing operating expenses of the museum.
 6. (a) Notice by mail required by this section shall be mailed to a
lender's last known address by certified mail, return receipt requested;
provided, however, that notice shall be given by publication pursuant to
paragraph (b) of this subdivision if the museum does not:
 (i) know the identity of the lender; or
 (ii) know the address of the lender; or
 (iii) receive proof that the notice mailed under this section was
received within thirty days of mailing.
 (b) Notice by publication must be given at least once a week for three
consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in:
 (i) the county in which the property is held by the museum; and
 (ii) the county of the lender's last address, if known.
 The date of notice under this paragraph shall be the date of the third
published notice.
 (c) In addition to any other information required by this section, any
notice given under this section must contain the following:
 (i) The name of the lender, if known.
 (ii) The last address of the lender, if known.
 (iii) A brief description of the property on loan to the museum
referenced in the notice.
 (iv) The date of the loan, if known, or the approximate date of
acquisition of the property.
 (v) The name and address of the museum.
 (vi) The name, address, and telephone number of the person to be
contacted regarding the property.
 (d) A copy of all notices required by this section pertaining to
property in the form of identifiable works of art known to have been
created before nineteen hundred forty-five and to have changed hands in
Europe during the Nazi era (1933-1945) shall be sent to The Art Loss
Register or any successor organization having similar purposes on or
before the date on which such notices are mailed or first published
pursuant to the requirements of this section.
 7. Unless there is a written loan agreement to the contrary, and
notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding abandoned or lost
property, a museum that has made a good faith and reasonable search for
the identity and last known address of the lender from the museum
records and other records reasonably available to museum staff may
terminate a loan for unclaimed property in its possession in accordance
with the provisions of this subdivision.
 (a) If the museum has identified the lender and the lender's last
known address, the museum shall give notice by mail, in accordance with
subdivision six of this section, of its intent to terminate the loan.
 (b) Such notice shall be entitled "Notice of Termination" and must
include a statement containing substantially the following information:
"The records of the (name of museum) indicate that you have or may have
property on loan at (name of facility). The museum is seeking to
determine whether you wish:
 (i) that the museum return the property to you,
 (ii) that the property remain on loan to the museum subject to annual
renewal (if the museum also wishes that the property remain on loan), or
 (iii) that the museum obtain all of the lender's rights to the
property, either to take the property into its collection or to dispose
of the property, in its sole discretion. Please contact (name of
contact) in writing within one hundred twenty days to advise the museum
as to which of the above alternatives you wish to follow."
 (c) If the lender does not respond to the notice of termination,
within one hundred twenty days following receipt thereof, the museum
shall send a second notice to the lender containing the following
information: "On (date of first notice), the (name of museum) sent you a
notice concerning property that, according to our records, has been lent
to the (name of museum). You have not responded to that notice, a copy
of which is enclosed, and the museum will commence proceedings to
acquire title to the property if you do not contact (name of contact) in
writing within one hundred twenty days of receiving this second notice."
 (d) If the lender fails to respond to the second notice within one
hundred twenty days of receipt thereof, the museum shall acquire all of
the lender's rights to the property.
 (e) If the museum does not receive proof that the notices mailed
pursuant to this subdivision were received within thirty days of
mailing, or if the museum has undertaken a good faith and reasonable
search of museum records and other records reasonably available to
museum staff but has been unable to determine the identity and last
known address of the lender, the museum may terminate the loan by
complying with the procedures established in subdivision eight of this
section for acquisition of title to undocumented property.
 8. (a) Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding abandoned
or lost property, a museum may acquire the rights of the lender, donor,
or owner to undocumented property by giving notice by publication, in
accordance with subdivision six of this section, that it is asserting
title to the undocumented property.
 (b) Such notice shall be entitled "Notice of Intent to Acquire
Property" and must include a statement containing substantially the
following information: "The (name of museum) hereby asserts its intent
to acquire title to the following property: (brief description of
property). If you claim ownership of this property, you must contact the
museum in writing and make arrangements to collect the property. If you
fail to do so within one hundred eighty days, the museum will commence
proceedings to acquire title to the property. If you wish to commence
legal proceedings to claim the property, you should consult an
attorney."
 (c) If the museum does not receive contact from any person who can
provide documentation or other evidence establishing an ownership
interest in the property within one hundred eighty days of the date of
notice by publication, the museum shall cause a brief description of the
property to be submitted to the comptroller, who shall post such
description on the unclaimed funds registry for not less than one
hundred eighty days.
 (d) If the museum does not receive contact from any person who can
provide documentation or other evidence establishing an ownership
interest in the property prior to or within thirty days following the
conclusion of the unclaimed funds registry posting, the museum shall
acquire title to the property.
 9. The provisions of subdivisions seven and eight of this section
shall not apply to:
 (a) any property that was created before nineteen hundred forty-five
and changed hands due to theft, seizure, confiscation, forced sale, or
other involuntary means in Europe during the Nazi era (1933-1945); or
 (b) notwithstanding any copy of a notice sent pursuant to subdivision
six of this section, any property reported as stolen to a law
enforcement agency or insurer or The Art Loss Register or any successor
organization having similar purposes no later than three years following
the theft or discovery of the theft.
 10. A museum shall acquire all rights to undocumented property that is
not solicited by the museum and that is delivered to the museum or left
on museum premises after January first, two thousand nine if no person
provides documentation or other evidence establishing an ownership
interest in the property within ninety days of delivery of such property
to the museum.
 11.(a) The museum shall give a lender prompt written notice by mail,
in accordance with subdivision six of this section, of any known injury
to, or loss of, property on loan or of the need to apply conservation
measures. Such notice shall advise the lender of his or her right, in
lieu of the application of such conservation measures, to terminate the
loan and, no later than thirty days after having received such notice,
either retrieve the property or arrange for its isolation and retrieval.
The museum shall not be required to publish notice of injury or loss to
any undocumented property.
 (b) Unless there is a written loan agreement to the contrary, the
museum may apply conservation measures to property on loan to the museum
without giving formal notice or first obtaining the lender's permission
if immediate action is required to protect the property on loan or other
property in the custody of the museum or if the property on loan is a
hazard to the health and safety of the public or the museum staff;
provided that:
 (i) the museum is unable to reach the lender at the lender's address
or telephone number before the time by which the museum determines
action is necessary; or
 (ii) the lender either (1) does not respond to a request for
permission to apply conservation measures within three days of receiving
the request or will not agree to the conservation measures the museum
recommends; or (2) fails to terminate the loan and either retrieve the
property or arrange for its isolation and retrieval within thirty days
of receiving the request.
 If immediate conservation measures are necessary to protect the
property or to protect the health or safety of the public or museum
staff, the conditions set forth in subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of this
paragraph shall not apply.
 (c) Unless provided otherwise in an agreement with the lender, if a
museum applies conservation measures to property under paragraph (a) of
this subdivision, and provided that the measures were not required as a
result of such museum's own action or inaction, such museum shall
acquire a lien on the property in the amount of the costs incurred by
such museum, including, but not limited to, the cost of labor and
materials, and shall not be liable for injury to or loss of the
property, provided that such museum:
 (i) had a reasonable belief at the time when the action was taken that
the action was necessary to protect the property on loan or otherwise in
the custody of the museum or that such property on loan was a hazard to
the health and safety on the public or the museum staff; and
 (ii) exercised reasonable care in the choice and application of
conservation measures.
 12. A lender shall promptly notify a museum, in writing, of any change
of address or change in the ownership of property on loan to such
museum.
 13. The museum shall maintain or continue to maintain, as the case may
be and to the extent such information is reasonably available, a record
of acquisition, whether by purchase, bequest, gift, loan or otherwise,
of property for display or collection and of deaccessioning or loan of
property currently held or thereafter acquired for display or
collection. Any such record shall:
 (a) state the name, address, and telephone number of the person from
whom such property was acquired, or to whom such property was
transferred by deaccessioning or loan, and a description of such
property, its location, if known, and the terms of the acquisition or
deaccessioning or loan, including any restrictions as to its use or
further disposition, and any other material facts about the terms and
conditions of the transaction, which records shall be updated if a
lender informs the museum of a change in address, ownership of the
property or other relevant information, or if the lender and museum
negotiate a change in the terms of the transaction;
 (b) include a copy of any document of conveyance relating to the
acquisition or deaccessioning or loan of such property and all notices
and other documents prepared or received by the museum; and
 (c) in the case of property acquired pursuant to this section, include
records documenting the search for the identity and last known address
of the lender, and copies of all notices and other documents prepared or
received by the museum in connection with the acquisition of title to
such property.
 14. Nothing in this section shall limit the ability of a lender and
museum to bind themselves to different loan provisions by written
agreement, nor shall this section abrogate rights and obligations of a
lender or museum pursuant to a written agreement.
 15. Every museum which has on display any identifiable works of art
known to have been created before nineteen hundred forty-five and which
changed hands due to theft, seizure, confiscation, forced sale or other
involuntary means in Europe during the Nazi era (nineteen hundred
thirty-three--nineteen hundred forty-five) shall, to the extent
practicable, prominently place a placard or other signage acknowledging
such information along with such display.
 § 233-b. New York state freedom trail commission. 1. a. There is
hereby established within the department the New York state freedom
trail commission. The commission shall consist of twelve members, to be
appointed as follows: three members to be appointed by the governor,
three members to be appointed by the board of regents, two members to be
appointed by the temporary president of the senate, one member to be
appointed by the minority leader of the senate, two members to be
appointed by the speaker of the assembly, and one member to be appointed
by the minority leader of the assembly. Such members shall be
representative of academic or public historians, corporations,
foundations, historical societies, civic organizations, and religious
denominations. In addition, the following state officers, or their
designees, shall serve as members of the commission: the commissioner of
education, the head of the state museum, the head of the state archives,
the head of the office of state history, the commissioner of economic
development, the head of the state tourism advisory council and the
commissioner of parks, recreation and historic preservation.
 b. The commission shall begin functioning upon the appointment of a
majority of its members. The chair of the commission shall be chosen by
the members of the commission for a three year term. Commission members,
other than ex officio members, shall serve for terms of five years and
vacancies shall be appointed in the same manner as provided for original
appointments.
 c. The department and the office of parks, recreation and historic
preservation may provide the commission with such staff, equipment, and
facilities as it may need.
 2. As part of its responsibilities the commission shall be charged
with reviewing and assisting in the implementation of a master plan in
conjunction with federal authorities; sponsoring commemorations,
linkages, seminars and public forum; assisting, encouraging, and
promoting the making of applications for inclusion on the national or
state registers of historic places by the parties eligible to do so and
the inclusion of such places therein; and developing partnerships and
seeking private and public funds to carry out activities to protect,
preserve, and promote the important legacy and lessons of the freedom
trail and the underground railroad in New York state.
 3. The commission shall report annually to the governor, the
legislature, and the board of regents for a period of five years from
the date of establishment of the commission, but beginning no later than
January first, nineteen hundred ninety-nine.
 § 233-c. Study. The commissioner shall conduct a study which shall
include, but not be limited to, documenting the history of the freedom
trail and underground railroad including identifying sites most likely
to be eligible for inclusion on the national or state registers of
historic places, or both; providing for the historic research and
compilation of contemporaneous reports and records necessary to document
the underground railroad sites in New York state, as well as the
contributions of individuals and organizations who participated in the
activities of the underground railroad; and developing cultural and
historic guidebooks, local histories and the publication of public and
private documents relating to the underground railroad. The commissioner
shall consult with the commissioner of the office of parks, recreation
and historic preservation and the national park service in the conduct
of the study.
 § 234. Indian collection. There shall be made, as the Indian section
of the state museum, as complete a collection as practicable of the
historical, ethnographic and other records and relics of the Indians of
the state of New York, including implements or other articles pertaining
to their domestic life, agriculture, the chase, war, religion, burial
and other rites or customs.
 § 235. State science service. There shall be maintained in the
university a science service which shall be known as the state science
service and the state geologist, paleontologist, botanist, entomologist,
and archaeologist shall constitute its staff together with such other
scientists as the regents may employ or who are now employed by them.
This service is empowered and directed to make available its services to
all the departments of the state, and the residents of the state under
such rules and regulations as the regents may prescribe and is empowered
to engage in such scientific research as directed by law or by the
regents and shall cooperate with scientific units or agencies of other
states, the federal government, educational institutions and industry in
the discovery, analysis and dissemination of scientific information. The
director of the state museum shall also be the director and head of the
state science service and the staff of the service shall be members of
the staff of the state museum.
 § 235-a. New York state biodiversity research institute. 1. The New
York state biodiversity research institute is hereby created within the
New York state museum within the education department. The purposes of
the institute shall include:
 (a) advising the governor, governmental agencies, the regents, and the
legislature on matters relating to biodiversity in New York state;
 (b) fostering, pursuing and sponsoring collaborative biological and
ecological research;
 (c) increasing understanding of biodiversity research and conservation
needs in New York by establishing and reporting on what is known and
what is not known about the biological diversity of the state;
 (d) identifying priority needs for biodiversity research and inventory
work within New York that currently are not receiving adequate
attention, and identifying public or private entities that are best
situated to address such needs, thereby leading to better coordination
of biodiversity research efforts in the state;
 (e) promoting awareness of existing and new sources of biodiversity
information and biodiversity expertise among planners, policy makers,
and resource managers;
 (f) educating elected officials, governmental agencies, and the
general public on biodiversity issues through such means as it may
determine;
 (g) organizing and sponsoring meetings on biodiversity topics;
 (h) encouraging the establishment of networks of collaborating
scientists engaged in related aspects of biodiversity research;
 (i) raising sensitivity to biodiversity concerns among state and local
government agencies, and serving as a forum for enhanced interagency
information sharing and cooperation;
 (j) recommending priority activities for funding through the state
land biodiversity stewardship account, created pursuant to section
ninety-seven-oo of the state finance law;
 (k) assisting the commissioners of environmental conservation and
parks, recreation and historic preservation in conducting reviews,
pursuant to section 3-0302 of the environmental conservation law and
subdivision eighteen of section 3.09 of the parks, recreation and
historic preservation law, of lands currently in state ownership, to
identify lands and waters that harbor plants, animals, and ecological
communities that are rare in New York state;
 (l) assisting the commissioner of parks, recreation and historic
preservation in identifying ecologically significant sites within state
parks and historic sites that are candidates for park preserve or park
preservation area designation pursuant to article twenty of the parks,
recreation and historic preservation law; and
 (m) assisting the commissioner of environmental conservation in
identifying lands of ecological significance, currently in state
ownership, to recommend to the governor and the legislature for
dedication to the state nature and historical preserve trust pursuant to
article forty-five of the environmental conservation law.
 2. Definitions. When used in this section, the following terms shall
mean:
 (a) "Biodiversity" or "biological diversity" means the total variety
of living organisms found in the state, and the natural processes that
support them; and
 (b) "Institute" shall mean the New York state biodiversity research
institute created pursuant to subdivision one of this section.
 3. Research programs. The institute shall foster, pursue and sponsor
original systematic and ecological research, field studies, and
inventories of biological collections that are designed to:
 (a) increase the information base pertaining to plant, animal,
biological community, and ecosystem occurrences in the state, including
descriptions, collections and catalogs of fauna and flora, plant and
animal life-cycle requirements and characteristics, the dynamics of
ecological processes, and the status of rare plants, animals, and
biological communities;
 (b) detect, document, and interpret patterns and changes in the flora
and fauna of the state, including expansions, losses, and introductions
of species;
 (c) explore and foster the gathering of data in poorly known or
vulnerable areas of the state; and
 (d) investigate techniques designed to conserve, protect, and manage
biodiversity.
 4. Education and information transfer programs. The institute shall
foster the collection, transfer, and application of biodiversity
information in the state by:
 (a) fostering access, compatibility, interchange, and synthesis of
data among biological information systems maintained by public entities,
academic and research institutions, and private organizations;
 (b) employing advanced technology to coordinate for ease of use the
scattered biological collection resources of the state;
 (c) promoting adherence to accepted standards for biodiversity
research, including quality control for the collection of voucher
specimens and data, and protocols for responsible collection policies;
and
 (d) supporting the preparation and publication of interpretative works
that draw upon biological collection resources.
 5. Biennial reports. The institute shall prepare and submit a report
on or before January first, nineteen hundred ninety-five and every two
years thereafter to the governor, the regents, and the legislature
describing programs undertaken or sponsored by the institute, the status
of knowledge regarding the state's biodiversity, and research needs
related thereto.
 6. Executive committee. The institute shall be guided by an executive
committee. Members of the committee shall be from varying backgrounds
with members selected from the stewardship community, from the
scientific community, as well as from government service. Such committee
shall consist of seventeen members including the commissioner, the
commissioner of environmental conservation, the commissioner of parks,
recreation and historic preservation, the chancellor of the state
university of New York or their designees, seven at large members
appointed by the governor, one of whom shall be chairperson, two members
appointed by the temporary president of the senate, one member appointed
by the minority leader of the senate, two members appointed by the
speaker of the assembly and one member appointed by the minority leader
of the assembly. Appointed members shall serve for a term of three
years, provided that such members may be reappointed. The executive
committee shall:
 (a) adopt policies, procedures, and criteria governing the programs
and operations of the institute;
 (b) recommend to the governor and legislature appropriate actions to
identify, manage and conserve exemplary occurrences of common ecological
communities on state-owned lands. An "exemplary occurrence of a common
ecological community" shall mean a representative, high quality example
of a given ecological community type, characterized by a distinctive
assemblage of interacting plant and animal populations;
 (c) develop and implement the research, education and information
transfer programs of the institute;
 (d) identify and rate proposals for biodiversity research;
 (e) identify and rate proposals for biodiversity stewardship;
 (f) submit to the director of the budget, and the chairpersons of the
senate finance committee and the assembly ways and means committee on
the first day of October nineteen hundred ninety-three and on or before
August first in each year thereafter, a budget request for the
expenditure of funds available from the biodiversity stewardship and
research fund, for the purposes established by section ninety-seven-oo
of the state finance law;
 (g) meet publicly at least twice a year. The committee shall widely
disseminate notice of its meetings at least two weeks prior to each
meeting. The commissioners of environmental conservation, education and
parks, recreation and historic preservation and the chancellor of the
state university shall aid in such dissemination.
 7. Scientific working group. The executive committee shall appoint a
scientific working group composed of not more than fifteen individuals
representing governmental agencies (including a biologist from the
department of environmental conservation), academic or research
institutions, educational organizations, the forest products industry
and non-profit conservation organizations. Members of the scientific
working group shall have knowledge and expertise in biodiversity
conservation and research and shall serve for a term of three years,
provided, however that members may be reappointed for more than one term
at the discretion of the executive committee. The scientific working
group shall make recommendations to the executive committee with respect
to:
 (a) the identification of priority biodiversity research needs in the
state;
 (b) the development and implementation of the institute's research,
education, and information transfer programs;
 (c) the allocation and expenditure of funds from the biodiversity
stewardship and research fund created pursuant to section
ninety-seven-oo of the state finance law;
 (d) identification and rating of proposals for biodiversity research;
and
 (e) identification and rating of proposals for biodiversity
stewardship.
 8. Institute director. The institute shall have a director who shall
be appointed by the executive committee and shall after appointment be
an employee of the state museum and science service. The institute
director shall serve at the pleasure of the executive committee. The
institute director shall serve as chief administrative officer of the
institute and provide the necessary support for the executive committee.
 9. Compensation. The members of the executive committee and the
scientific working group shall serve without additional compensation,
but shall be eligible to receive reimbursement for their actual and
necessary expenses from the biodiversity stewardship and research fund
established by section ninety-seven-oo of the state finance law,
provided however, members of the executive committee representing state
agencies may receive reimbursement for their actual and necessary
expenses from their respective agencies. Members of the executive
committee and scientific working group shall be considered state
employees for the purposes of sections seventeen and nineteen of the
public officers law.
 10. Memorandum of understanding. The education department, the
department of environmental conservation, and the office of parks,
recreation and historic preservation shall enter into a written
memorandum of understanding to facilitate the appropriate implementation
of the biodiversity research institute and the goals, responsibilities,
and programs established by this section.
 § 235-b. New York state biological survey. 1. The New York state
biological survey is hereby established in the New York state science
service within the state museum to inventory, research, analyze and
disseminate information about all the biota of New York. The biological
survey shall:
 (a) Develop and maintain an inventory of the biological resources of
New York state, with special emphasis on identifying those resources
that are important to biological diversity, have real or potential
economic significance, or have particular scientific, systematic, or
environmental importance;
 (b) Conduct research on and advance the knowledge of the biological
and ecological characteristics and processes that constitute or affect
New York state's environment;
 (c) Interpret and publish the results of research on New York state's
biological resources, thereby making information available to citizens,
teachers, industry, and government for educational purposes and for use
in decision making;
 (d) Insure the preservation and appropriate expansion of the state's
collection of scientific specimens and artifacts, conduct research on
these collections, and make specimens and data available for biological
resource studies, ecosystem analyses, and other research projects; and
 (e) Cooperate with the department of environmental conservation,
office of parks, recreation and historic preservation, and other state
and federal agencies, private organizations and institutions,
corporations, and individuals interested in biological resources.
 2. The survey shall not be authorized to enter any privately owned
lands without the written consent of the landowner, lessee, or person in
control. The survey shall be authorized to enter into agreements with
landowners to enter private lands on such terms as may be acceptable.
 § 236. Public television and radio. 1. Short title. This section shall
be known and may be cited as the "Public Television and Radio Act of
nineteen hundred seventy-eight".
 2. Legislative findings and declaration of intent. In the years since
New York state's educational television act was passed in nineteen
hundred fifty-four, public television in New York has made enormous
strides. Audiences which only a decade ago were calculated in the
thousands now number in the millions. Approximately seven million New
York residents now view public television every week. Public television,
which initially served only a handful of students, now brings nearly ten
thousand hours annually of the best of the state's and the nation's
educational programming to over one million two hundred thousand
students in three thousand schools throughout the state. These programs
are used by approximately fifty thousand teachers for direct classroom
instruction. Public television also provides the state's youngsters with
some twelve thousand hours annually of the finest children's programming
available including "Sesame Street", "Electric Company", "Zoom" and "Mr.
Rogers Neighborhood". In addition, public television provides a wealth
of specialized programming in the educational and cultural arts designed
for viewing by, among others, minority and ethnic populations, senior
citizens, the unemployed, consumers and citizens interested in the
performing arts. It is the sense of the legislature that public
television's contributions to the people of New York state have been
exceptional. Despite public broadcasting's great progress in New York
state in recent years, its full potential remains untapped. It is,
therefore, the intent of the legislature both to maintain and, expand
the role of public broadcasting in supplying educational, instructional
and cultural programs to New Yorkers, as well as to enhance the state's
role in its partnership with its citizens so that this valuable state
resource can be nurtured to its optimum potential.
 3. Public television and radio corporations; creation and operation.
a. The board of regents may incorporate any group, institution or
association for the purpose of constructing, owning, operating or
maintaining a non-profit and noncommercial public television station or
public television and/or radio station for providing educational
television and radio programs. Any such corporation shall be subject to
all the provisions applicable to corporations created by the board of
regents and, in addition, shall be subject to the provisions of this
section.
 b. The charter of any such corporation may be amended from time to
time, suspended, or revoked, upon the regents' own motion, after notice
and an opportunity to be heard, before the board of regents or a
committee thereof or a hearing officer designated by the board of
regents.
 c. Each such corporation and all its operations and the powers and
duties of its trustees and officers shall be subject to the general
supervision and control of the board of regents and to such rules as the
board of regents may adopt and promulgate from time to time with respect
to such corporations.
 d. The television programs developed and presented by such
corporations shall consist of educational, instructional and cultural
programs.
 e. The appointment or election of any trustee of such corporation
shall be subject to approval by the regents while under regents' charter
and through the first five years of broadcast operations. The regents
may reinstitute requirements for trustee approval over a reasonable
period on finding a corporation in violation of an applicable rule,
regulation or law. After the expiration of rule requirements,
corporations shall include a list of current trustees in its annual
report.
 f. The regents may remove any trustee, officer or employee of such
corporation for misconduct, incapacity, wilful violation or neglect of
duty under this chapter, or wilfully disobeying, or refusing to comply
with, any order or rule of the regents. The hearing in the proceeding
for the removal of any such person shall be had before the board of
regents or a committee thereof or a hearing officer designated by the
board of regents and such trustee, officer or employee shall be given at
least ten days' notice of the time and place of such hearing.
 g. The use of programs for partisan or political purposes or to
influence the enactment of legislation shall, in the discretion of the
board of regents, be basis for termination of the corporate charter.
 h. Each such corporation shall render a report to the board of regents
not later than October first of each year upon such matters as the
regents may require, and shall furnish such other reports and
information from time to time as the regents may require.
 i. Any corporation created under the provisions of this section may
make purchases of commodities and services through the office of general
services subject to such rules as may be established from time to time
pursuant to section one hundred sixty-three of the state finance law;
provided that each such purchase shall have a cost of five hundred
dollars or more and that said corporation shall accept sole
responsibility for any payment of such cost due the vendor.
 4. Grants-in-aid to public television and radio corporations and
public radio stations. a. There shall be apportioned, as assistance for
approved operating expenses of public television corporations governed
by the provisions of this section, an amount not exceeding the product
of the number of residents of the state as determined from the nineteen
hundred eighty decennial federal census multiplied by: one dollar for
the period beginning July first, nineteen hundred eighty-five and ending
June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-six; one dollar multiplied by
four-twelfths plus one dollar and twenty-five cents multiplied by
eight-twelfths for the period beginning July first, nineteen hundred
eighty-six and ending June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-seven; and
one dollar and forty cents for the period beginning July first, nineteen
hundred eighty-seven and ending June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
eighty-eight, and annually thereafter. Such amount shall be allocated to
each such corporation in accordance with a formula and schedule of
payments developed and approved by the commissioner and the director of
the division of the budget.
 b. The formula and schedule of payments developed pursuant to
paragraph a hereof shall include provision for an amount not less than
twenty percent of the total state operating assistance for instructional
television services to be provided to local educational agencies by
public television corporations through agreements with local school
districts, subject to the approval of the commissioner.
 c. There shall be annually apportioned funds for the payment of
approved capital expenses of educational television corporations and
public radio stations in such amounts and in such manner as the
legislature shall provide.
 d. There shall be apportioned, as assistance for approved radio
programming operating expenses, an amount not exceeding: eighty thousand
dollars for the period beginning July first, nineteen hundred
eighty-five and ending June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-six, and
eighty thousand dollars multiplied by four-twelfths plus one hundred
thousand dollars multiplied by eight-twelfths for the period beginning
July first, nineteen hundred eighty-six and ending June thirtieth,
nineteen hundred eighty-seven, and one hundred ten thousand dollars for
the period beginning July first, nineteen hundred eighty-seven and
ending June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-eight, and annually
thereafter to each public television and radio corporation, governed by
the provisions of this section, and to each public radio station, as
defined in paragraph f of this subdivision and paid in accordance with a
formula and schedule of payments developed and approved by the
commissioner and the director of the division of the budget. Recipients
of assistance shall render a fiscal report to the board of regents not
later than December first of each year upon such matters as the regents
may require and shall furnish annually such other fiscal reports as the
regents may require.
 e. On or before November first in each year, the board of regents
shall submit to the division of the budget a plan outlining a matching
capital grant program for approved capital expenses of public television
and/or radio corporations and public radio stations to meet the
replacement costs of capital items including towers, antennas,
transmitters, videotape recorders, cameras, film chains, control room
equipment, buildings and building renovations.
 f. Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, for purposes of this
subdivision the term "public radio station" shall mean a non-profit and
noncommercial radio station which meets the following requirements:
 (1) The station shall be licensed to:
 (i) an institution chartered by the board of regents; or
 (ii) an agency of a municipal corporation; or
 (iii) a corporation created in the state education department and
within the university of the state of New York.
 (2) The station other than stations operated by corporations approved
for funding prior to April first, nineteen hundred eighty-five shall
have for a period of three consecutive years immediately prior to
apportionment of such money and all recipients shall continue to after
receipt of such money:
 (i) broadcast at least eighteen hours per day or the maximum hours of
operation authorized by the federal communications commission, whichever
is less, three hundred sixty-five days per year; and
 (ii) operate with a staff of at least five full-time members paid at
least the federal minimum wage, a budget that includes at least
ninety-five thousand dollars of non-federal income of which a reasonable
portion is received from local business, foundations, or individual
contributors paid either directly to the radio station or broadcast
corporation or to a not-for-profit corporation for the benefit of such
radio station and an effective radiated power equivalent to three
thousand watts at five hundred feet above average terrain or the maximum
tower height authorized by the federal communications commission,
whichever is less for FM radio stations or two hundred fifty watts for
AM radio stations.
 g. At such time that assistance authorized by paragraph a of this
subdivision exceeds the sum appropriated in state fiscal year nineteen
hundred ninety--nineteen hundred ninety-one, there shall be apportioned
as assistance for approved operating expenses of New York city-licensed
WNYC-TV, for each three hundred sixty-five hours of public service
programming broadcast by such station annually, an amount equal to one
percent of that portion of public television assistance for approved
operating expenses which represents the increment above the level
appropriated in state fiscal year nineteen hundred ninety--nineteen
hundred ninety-one; provided, however, that the total apportionment to
WNYC-TV shall not exceed ten percent of such incremental assistance over
such nineteen hundred ninety--nineteen hundred ninety-one level.
Notwithstanding any provision of this paragraph to the contrary, such
funding for WNYC-TV shall not diminish the amount of state aid received
by the nine public television corporations pursuant to paragraph a of
this subdivision in state fiscal year nineteen hundred ninety--nineteen
hundred ninety-one. For the purposes of this subdivision, "public
service programming" shall be defined as non-commercial cultural,
instructional or educational programming. In order to qualify for
assistance under this subdivision, the minimum hours of non-commercial
public service programming, shall be eight hours daily and shall include
three hours daily of prime time service, which is defined as service
between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. Non-commercial public
service programming, other than prime time, shall be broadcast in blocks
of not less than one hundred twenty minutes. All funds so apportioned
shall be used for non-commercial public service television broadcast
activities. WNYC-TV shall render a report to the commissioner not later
than December first of each year such funds are appropriated upon the
use of such appropriation, and shall furnish such other reports and
information relating to such funds as the commissioner may from time to
time require. Funds appropriated pursuant to this subdivision shall not
be used for partisan or political purposes or to influence the enactment
of legislation.
 h. There shall be apportioned, at such time that any appropriation
exceeds the sum appropriated in state fiscal year nineteen hundred
ninety--nineteen hundred ninety-one for approved capital expenses of
educational television corporations and public radio stations, as
provided in paragraph c of this subdivision, an amount to New York
city-licensed WNYC-TV. Notwithstanding any provisions of this paragraph
to the contrary, such funding shall not diminish the amount of state
aid, for capital purposes, that the nine public television corporations
and fifteen public radio stations received in state fiscal year nineteen
hundred ninety--nineteen hundred ninety-one. WNYC-TV shall render a
report to the commissioner not later than December first of each year
such funds are appropriated upon the use of funds apportioned pursuant
to this paragraph, and shall furnish such other reports and information
relating to such funds as the commissioner may require.
 5. Implementation. For the purposes of carrying out the provisions of
this section, the regents may make rules, or authorize the commissioner
to make regulations, providing for the implementation of this section,
including provision for annual audited reports of the financial records
of such corporations as the regents or the commissioner may require.
 § 237. Regents plan for higher education including approved plans of
state university and city university of New York and plans of
independent institutions of higher education. 1. Purposes of planning.
Master planning for higher education in New York State should:
 a. Define and differentiate the missions and objectives of higher
education.
 b. Identify the needs, problems, societal conditions and interests of
the citizens of the state of New York to which programs of higher
education may most appropriately be addressed.
 c. Define and differentiate the missions and objectives of
institutions of higher education.
 d. Develop programs to meet the needs, solve the problems, affect the
conditions and respond to the public's interests by:
 (1) Setting goals.
 (2) Describing the time required to meet those goals.
 (3) Identifying the resources needed to achieve the goals.
 (4) Establishing priorities.
 e. Be in sufficient detail to enable all participants in the planning
process, representatives of the people and the citizens themselves to
evaluate the needs, objectives, program proposals, priorities, costs and
results of higher education.
 f. Optimize the use of resources.
 g. Evaluate program effectiveness.
 2. The regents shall, on or before the twenty-fifth day of April
nineteen hundred seventy-one and each fourth year thereafter, request
the state university trustees, the board of higher education of the city
of New York, and all independent higher educational institutions to
submit long-range master plans for their development. Such request shall
specify the nature of the information, plans and recommendations to be
submitted, shall describe statewide needs, problems, societal conditions
and interests of the citizens and discuss their priorities, and provide
appropriate information which may be useful in the formulation of such
plans.
 3. The regents shall, once every four years, review the proposed plan
and recommendations required to be submitted by the state university
trustees pursuant to section three hundred fifty-four of this chapter,
the proposed plan and recommendations of the board of higher education
in the city of New York required to be submitted pursuant to section
sixty-two hundred two of this chapter, and the plans of independent
institutions of higher education and, upon approval by the regents of
the plans submitted by the state university trustees and the board of
higher education, they shall be incorporated into a regents plan or
general revision thereof for the development of higher education in the
state. Such regents plan shall include the plan and recommendations
proposed by the state university trustees and the plan and
recommendations proposed by the board of higher education in the city of
New York and may include plans with respect to other matters not
comprehended within the plan of the state and city universities,
including but not limited to improving institutional management and
resources, instruction and guidance programs, financial assistance to
students and extension of educational opportunities. In determining the
need for additional educational facilities in a particular area, the
plans and facilities of existing public and independent institutions
shall be fully evaluated. Such statewide plan shall include for
information purposes a summary of all recommendations appearing in the
prior statewide plan and subsequent amendments thereof containing a
brief statement of action taken and progress toward achievement of each
such recommendation.
 4. During the calendar year nineteen hundred sixty-four and each
fourth year thereafter the regents shall evaluate all available
information with respect to the plans and facilities of independent
institutions and shall review and act upon the proposed plan and
recommendations of the state university trustees and upon the proposed
plan and recommendations of the board of higher education in the city of
New York and incorporate such information, recommendations and each of
the component plans so acted upon into a tentative regents plan or
general revision thereof for the development of higher education in the
state. Copies of such tentative regents plan or general revision
thereof, as the case may be, shall be made available to the trustees of
the state university, the board of higher education in the city of New
York and the governing boards of all other institutions of higher
education admitted to the university of the state of New York.
Thereafter, after giving due notice, the regents shall conduct one or
more hearings on such tentative regents plan or general revision
thereof.
 5. The regents shall transmit their plan or general revision thereof
for the development of higher education in the state to the governor and
the legislature on or before the first day of November, nineteen hundred
sixty-four and each fourth year thereafter. The governor may disapprove
or conditionally approve any part of the plan or general revision
thereof after notifying the regents of such disagreements at least sixty
days prior to such action during which time they may revise their
recommendations relating to such items and request the governor to adopt
such revised recommendations in lieu of such action. Such plan or
general revision thereof or so much thereof as shall be approved and
upon such terms and conditions as the governor may impose, shall become
effective upon such approval by the governor.
 6. Any modification recommended by the state university trustees or by
the board of higher education in the city of New York to their
respective plans, theretofore formulated and approved pursuant to
section three hundred fifty-four or section sixty-two hundred two of
this chapter shall be reviewed by the regents who may hold one or more
hearings thereon after giving due notice thereof. As approved by the
regents, such modification shall be made a part of the respective plans
of the state university and of the city university and shall, together
with any modifications the regents may make to that portion of their
plan for the development of higher education in the state not
comprehended in the plans of the state and city universities, be
transmitted to the governor and the legislature, all of which shall then
become effective upon approval by the governor as modifications of the
regents plan. By the first day of November in nineteen hundred
seventy-four and each fourth year thereafter the regents shall summarize
and report to the governor and the legislature any modifications made
pursuant to this subdivision and shall include in such report a
statement on the progress made in implementing the regents plan and
their general recommendations with respect to higher education.
 7. An advisory council on higher education consisting of the
chancellor of the state university of New York, the chancellor of the
city university of New York, and a representative of the commission on
independent colleges and universities shall be convened by the
commissioner of education and shall advise the regents and the
commissioner on all phases of planning.
 § 238. Chair on geriatrics in the state university. 1. There is
hereby established in the state university of New York, under the
jurisdiction of its board of trustees, one distinguished chair on
geriatrics at a state operated institution in the state university for
professional education in medicine.
 2. The state university board of trustees shall select the location of
such chair and shall determine the fields of knowledge to be included
within the term "geriatrics" as used in this section.
 3. The state university board of trustees are hereby authorized,
within annual appropriations made for this purpose, to appoint
outstanding scholars to fill the chair on geriatrics established by this
section, on such terms and conditions and for such duration as may be
agreed upon by the parties.
 § 238-a. Statewide resource centers for geriatric education. 1. There
is hereby established in the state university of New York, under the
jurisdiction of its board of trustees, a statewide resource center for
geriatric education as established by chapter seven hundred
seventy-seven of the laws of nineteen hundred eighty-one, and the acts
supplemental thereto.
 2. The state university board of trustees is hereby authorized within
annual appropriations made for this purpose to designate the SUNY Health
Science Center at Syracuse and Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York
city to implement the provisions of this section.
 3. The statewide resource centers for geriatric education shall be
charged with developing a clearinghouse based on information gathered on
educational programs in existence throughout the state and nation. The
centers shall make available information on model curricula, textbooks,
resource materials, medical residencies, internships, clinical
rotations, conferences, continuing education programs, funding for
research and training and other information that may be useful in
improving geriatric training in medical schools within the state. They
may also provide such services to allied professions.
 4. The centers shall periodically disseminate information of interest
to each of the medical schools and allied professions within the state.
The centers shall also be available to assist the medical schools and
allied professions within the state with individual requests for
improving their programs in geriatric education. Efforts should be made
to utilize an interdisciplinary approach in disseminating the centers'
information.
 5. The board of trustees shall submit a report annually to the
governor, the president of the senate, the speaker of the assembly, the
director of the state office for the aging and the commissioner of
health.
 § 239. Albert Einstein chairs in science and Albert Schweitzer chairs
in the humanities. 1. Legislative finding and declaration of policy.
The public and private colleges in this state enjoy a well-deserved
reputation for academic excellence and intellectual vitality. For them
to preserve and further enhance their great stature they must compete
with colleges in other states and countries to attract the world's most
distinguished and renowned scholars. The presence of these giants of
science and the humanities at institutions of learning in this state
strengthens and stimulates the academic community of the entire state.
Their presence in this state also serves to attract exceptional faculty
members, research scholars and students to colleges and research
facilities in this state and nurtures the development of graduate work
in science and the humanities in colleges in this state which do not now
have such programs. All of this helps to create an atmosphere of
intellectual, scientific and cultural vigor conducive to the attraction
of new atomic, space, technological and other industries to this state.
The people of the entire state benefit from the resulting state-wide
intellectual, cultural and economic growth. The great cost attendant
upon attracting such world famous figures, compensating them and
providing them with necessary staff and facilities is beyond the
financial means of most colleges. The legislature finds that in order
to meet this need a program of distinguished chairs should be
established within the university of the state of New York, under the
jurisdiction of the regents.
 2. There are hereby established in the university of the state of New
York, under the jurisdiction of the regents, two distinguished chairs,
one of which shall be known as the Albert Einstein chair in science and
one of which shall be known as the Albert Schweitzer chair in the
humanities. One additional such Einstein chair and one additional such
Schweitzer chair shall be established during each of the fiscal years
commencing April first, nineteen hundred sixty-five, nineteen hundred
sixty-six, nineteen hundred sixty-seven and nineteen hundred
sixty-eight, until a total of ten such chairs has been established. The
regents shall determine the fields of knowledge to be included within
the terms science and humanities as used in this section.
 3. The regents are hereby authorized, within appropriations made
therefor, to contract with outstanding scholars to fill the Albert
Einstein chairs in science and the Albert Schweitzer chairs in the
humanities established by this section, on such terms and conditions and
for such duration as may be agreed upon by the parties.
 4. The regents are hereby authorized, within appropriations made
therefor, to contract with any college in this state on such terms and
conditions and for such duration as may be agreed upon by the parties,
in relation to the provision of proper facilities, equipment, supplies,
professional assistants, clerical and other personnel and such other
services as may be necessary or appropriate to enable the holder of an
Albert Einstein chair in science or an Albert Schweitzer chair in the
humanities to carry out his work in connection therewith and to give
effect to the purposes for which such chair was established as set forth
in subdivision one of this section. Every college in this state is
hereby authorized to enter into such a contract with the regents.
 § 239-a. Collection and distribution of student's residual consumer
goods. 1. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
 a. "consumer goods" shall mean goods that are used or bought for use
primarily for personal, family or household purposes including, but not
limited to, home furnishings, canned and non-perishable foods,
factory-sealed and/or originally-packaged toiletries, clothing,
cookware, and electronics.
 b. "university" and "college" shall have the same meaning as set forth
in section two of this title.
 c. "city university" shall have the same meaning as set forth in
section sixty-two hundred two of this chapter.
 2. The administration of the individual state and city universities
and colleges and every public or private college, community college or
university within the state, are hereby authorized to facilitate a
campus-wide charitable donation program for local area not-for-profit
organizations utilizing students' residual consumer goods. The
administration:
 a. shall designate a collection area for students to drop-off their
unused or surplus goods two weeks before the end of the school year;
 b. shall either develop a direct donation program of the residual
consumer goods or organize a charitable event to collect residual
consumer goods and donate such goods to local not-for-profit
organizations; and
 c. may involve student organizations for the implementation of the
program.
 3. The consumer goods collected:
 a. shall be from those college students residing in campus-related
residential facilities;
 b. shall be consumer goods that would be discarded at the end of the
school year by college students;
 c. shall be in useable and good working condition.
 4. In the event that there is no viable local not-for-profit
organization able to accept the residential consumer goods collected,
the administration of the individual state or city university or college
or public or private college, community college or university within the
state may organize a campus-wide sale of such goods. The profits of such
sale may be dedicated by the student organizations or by the individual
state or city university or college or public or private college,
community college or university facilitating the program to a local
not-for-profit organization.
 5. The administration of any individual state or city university or
college or public or private college, community college or university
may grant credit to student members of organizations involved with the
program, pursuant to subdivision two of this section, in the amount and
form that such administration deems appropriate.
 § 239-b. Research dogs and cats. 1. A higher education research
facility that receives public money, including tax-exempt status, or a
facility that provides research in collaboration with a higher education
facility shall after the completion of any testing or research involving
a dog or cat, assess the health of the dog or cat and determine whether
it is suitable for adoption. Such facility shall thereafter make
reasonable efforts to offer for adoption the dog or cat determined to be
suitable for adoption, either through private placement or through an
animal rescue and shelter organization, a duly incorporated society for
the prevention of cruelty to animals, a duly incorporated humane
society, or a duly incorporated animal protective association that
operates physical animal sheltering facilities and offers household pets
to the public for adoption by way of an established adoption program,
prior to euthanizing such dog or cat. Nothing in this section shall
create a duty upon such an organization, association or society to
accept a dog or cat offered by a higher education research facility for
adoption.
 2. A facility that is required to offer dogs or cats for adoption
under this section may enter into an agreement with an animal rescue and
shelter organization, a duly incorporated society for the prevention of
cruelty to animals, a duly incorporated humane society, or a duly
incorporated animal protective association that operates physical animal
sheltering facilities and offers household pets to the public for
adoption by way of an established adoption program.
 3. The attending or institutional veterinarian at a facility that is
required to offer dogs or cats for adoption under this section shall
have the authority to assess the health of an animal and determine
whether an animal is suitable for adoption.
 PART 1-A
 CODY CENTER FOR AUTISM AND DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES
Section 240. The Stony Brook university Cody center for autism and
 developmental disabilities at Stony Brook university.
 241. Purposes of the Cody center.
 242. Site.
 243. Funding and reporting.
 § 240. The Stony Brook university Cody center for autism and
developmental disabilities at Stony Brook university. The Stony Brook
university Cody center for autism and developmental disabilities
(hereinafter the "Cody center") is hereby established under the
jurisdiction of the state university of New York. The Cody center shall
be administered as a program of the state university in accordance with
the policies of the trustees of the state university.
 § 241. Purposes of the Cody center. The purposes of the Cody center
shall be to:
 1. Advance the standards of care for individuals with autism spectrum
disorders and other developmental disabilities.
 2. Provide an educational setting for professionals working with
families of individuals with developmental disabilities.
 3. Contribute significant research outcomes to the body of science
surrounding cause, identification, and treatment of developmental
disabilities.
 4. Practice a multidisciplinary approach when serving people with
developmental disabilities.
 5. Support and advance developed programs that form the core of
community services and education including the social skills program,
the resource center, the school consultation program, undergraduate and
graduate courses, the parent education program and case management.
 (a) The social skills program at the Cody center:
 (i) Curriculum is primarily geared toward children and adolescents
with pervasive developmental disorders.
 (ii) The program uses a positive teaching approach, in a group format,
to promote the development of pro-social behaviors.
 (iii) Clinical psychologists and behavior specialists facilitate
groups.
 (b) Resource center services: The Cody center occupies a facility in
Port Jefferson Station designed to provide evaluation and continuing
treatment by a multidisciplinary staff including psychiatry, psychology,
neurology, genetics, social work and other specialties. The Cody center
provides the following services:
 (i) Community outreach.
 (ii) Individualized information/support sessions with family members
of newly diagnosed children.
 (iii) Medicaid service coordination.
 (iv) Non-medicaid service coordination.
 (v) Sponsorship of parent and professional training seminars.
 (c) School consultation services: Children with autism spectrum
disorders face a number of challenges in mainstream educational systems.
Often, school district personnel do not have the special training
required to make inclusion a rewarding and successful experience. The
school consultation program aims to support teachers and other school
personnel in their efforts to educate and work effectively with children
with autism spectrum disorders. The program provides:
 (i) Proactive and ongoing technical assistance to school districts and
private educational facilities throughout Long Island.
 (ii) Consultation services by Cody center autism specialists with
extensive experience and training in addressing the learning and
behavioral needs of children with autism spectrum disorders.
 (d) Services include:
 (i) Program planning and staff development.
 (ii) Parent training.
 (iii) Technical assistance to classroom teams to address the needs of
a particular child or children.
 § 242. Site. The site of the Cody center shall be at the Matt and
Debra Cody center for autism and developmental disabilities at the state
university at Stony Brook.
 § 243. Funding and reporting. Funds shall be made available for the
support of the Cody center in the amounts appropriated for this purpose.
The Cody center shall annually submit a complete and detailed report
setting forth its operations and accomplishments to the chancellor of
the state university, the president of the state university at Stony
Brook, the director of the budget, and the chairs of the senate higher
education committee, the senate finance committee, the assembly higher
education committee and the assembly ways and means committee.
 PART II
 LIBRARIES
 § 245. State library, how constituted. All books, pamphlets,
manuscripts, records, archives and maps, and all other property
appropriate to a general library, if owned by the state and not placed
in other custody by law, shall be in charge of the regents and
constitute the state library.
 § 246. State medical library. The state medical library shall be a
part of the New York state library under the same government and
regulations and shall be open for consultation to every citizen of the
state at all hours when the state library is open and shall be available
for borrowing books to every accredited physician residing in the state
of New York, who shall conform to the rules made by the regents for
insuring proper protection and the largest usefulness to the people of
the said medical library.
 § 247. State law library; legislative reference library. The state
law library and the legislative reference library shall be parts of the
New York state library under the same government and regulations and
shall be open for consultation to every citizen of the state at all
hours when the state library is open and the law library shall be
available for borrowing books to every duly admitted attorney residing
in the state of New York, who shall conform to the rules made by the
regents for insuring proper protection and the largest usefulness to the
people of the said law library.
 § 248. Manuscript and records "on file". Manuscript or printed papers
of the legislature, usually termed "on file," and which shall have been
on file more than five years in custody of the senate and assembly
clerks, and all public records of the state not placed in other custody
by a specific law shall be part of the state library and shall be kept
in rooms assigned and suitably arranged for that purpose by the trustees
of public buildings. The regents shall cause such papers and records to
be so classified and arranged that they can be easily found. No paper or
record shall be removed from such files except on a resolution of the
senate and assembly withdrawing them for a temporary purpose, and in
case of such removal a description of the paper or record and the name
of the person removing the same shall be entered in a book provided for
that purpose, with the date of its delivery and return.
 § 249. State library, when open; use of books. The state library shall
be kept open at least eight hours each day on five days every week in
the year except the legal holidays known as Independence day,
Thanksgiving day and Christmas day. Nothing in this section shall
prohibit the regents from opening the state library on other days and
times. Members of the legislature, judges of the court of appeals,
justices of the supreme court and heads of state departments may borrow
from the library books for use in Albany, but shall be subject to such
restrictions and penalties as may be prescribed by the regents for the
safety or greater usefulness of the library. Under such rules and
conditions as the regents may prescribe, the state library may lend its
books and printed material for a limited time to other individuals and
institutions conforming to said rules and conditions. Such service shall
be free to residents of this state as far as practicable, but the
regents may, in their discretion, charge a proper fee to nonresidents or
for assistance of a personal nature or for other reason not properly an
expense to the state, but which may be authorized for the accommodation
of users of the library.
 § 249-a. Libraries of public institutions of higher education; access
and use. The state university trustees and the board of higher
education of the city of New York are hereby authorized to establish
such rules and regulations as may be necessary and appropriate to make
provision for access and use by the residents of the state of the
libraries and library facilities of the public institutions of higher
education under their respective jurisdictions.
 § 250. Duplicate department. The regents shall have charge of the
preparation, publication and distribution, whether by sale, exchange or
gift, of the colonial history, natural history and all other state
publications not otherwise assigned by law. To guard against waste or
destruction of state publications, and to provide for the completion of
sets to be permanently preserved in American and foreign libraries, the
regents shall maintain a duplicate department to which each state
department, bureau, board, commission, authority, division, office or
public benefit corporation shall send after completing its distribution,
any remaining copies which it no longer requires. The above, with any
other publications not needed in the state library, shall be the
duplicate department, and rules for sale, exchange or distribution from
it shall be fixed by the regents, who shall use all receipts from such
exchanges or sales for the expenses of and for increasing the duplicate
department or depository of the state library.
 § 251. Transfers from state officers. The librarian of any library
owned by the state, or the officer in charge of any state department,
bureau, board, commission or other office may, with the approval of the
regents, transfer to the permanent custody of the state library or
museum any books, papers, maps, manuscripts, specimens or other articles
which, because of being duplicates or for other reasons, will in his
judgment be more useful to the state in the state library or museum than
if retained in his keeping.
 § 252. Other libraries owned by the state. The report of the state
library to the legislature shall include a statement of the total number
of volumes or pamphlets, the number added during the year, with a
summary of operations and conditions, and any needed recommendation for
safety or usefulness for each of the other libraries owned by the state,
the custodian of which shall furnish such information or facilities for
inspection as the regents may require for making this report. Each of
these libraries shall be under the sole control now provided by law, but
for the annual report of the total number of books owned by or bought
each year by the state, it shall be considered as a branch of the state
library and shall be entitled to any facilities for exchange of
duplicates, inter-library loans or other privileges properly accorded to
a branch.
 § 253. Public and association libraries and museums. 1. All
provisions of this section and of sections two hundred fifty-four to two
hundred seventy-one inclusive shall apply equally to libraries, museums,
and to combined libraries and museums, and the word "library" shall be
construed to mean reference and circulating libraries and reading rooms.
 2. The term "public" library as used in this chapter shall be
construed to mean a library, other than professional, technical or
public school library, established for free public purposes by official
action of a municipality or district or the legislature, where the whole
interests belong to the public; the term "association" library shall be
construed to mean a library established and controlled, in whole or in
part, by a group of private individuals operating as an association,
closed corporation or as trustees under the provisions of a will or deed
of trust; and the term "free" as applied to a library shall be construed
to mean a library maintained for the benefit and free use on equal terms
of all the people of the community in which the library is located.
 3. The term "Indian library" shall be construed to mean a public
library established by the tribal government of the Saint Regis Mohawk
tribe, the Seneca Nations of Indians or the Tonawanda Seneca tribe and
located on their respective reservations, to serve Indians residing on
such reservations and any other persons designated by its board of
trustees.
 § 254. Standards of library service. The regents shall have power to
fix standards of library service for every free association, public and
hospital library or, with the advice of the appropriate tribal
government and library board of trustees, Indian library which receives
any portion of the moneys appropriated by the state to aid such
libraries, or which is supported in whole or in part by tax levied by
any municipality or district. In the case of a hospital library or a
library serving a hospital, such standards shall be established in
consultation with the commissioner of health. If any such library shall
fail to comply with the regents requirements, such library shall not
receive any portion of the moneys appropriated by the state for free,
hospital or Indian libraries nor shall any tax be levied by any
municipality or district for the support in whole or in part of such
library.
 § 255. Establishment of a public library. 1. By a majority vote at any
election, or at a meeting of the electors duly held, any county, city,
village, town, school district or other body authorized to levy and
collect taxes; or by vote of its board of supervisors or other governing
elective body any county, or by vote of its common council or by action
of a board of estimate and apportionment or other proper authority any
city, or by vote of its board of trustees any village, or by vote of its
town board any town, or any combination of such voting bodies, may
individually or jointly authorize the establishment of a public library
with or without branches, and may appropriate money raised by tax or
otherwise to equip and maintain such library or libraries or to provide
a building or rooms for its or their use. Any such municipality or
district may acquire real or personal property for library purposes by
gift, grant, devise, bequest or condemnation and may take, buy, sell,
hold and transfer either real or personal property for public library
purposes. Whenever twenty-five taxpayers shall so petition, the question
of providing library facilities shall be voted on at the next election
or meeting at which taxes may be voted, provided that due public notice
of the proposed action shall have been given. Whenever the electors of a
school district at a district meeting duly held shall have authorized
the establishment of a public library under the provisions of this
section, at such meeting or at any subsequent meeting duly held, they
may determine by a majority of the voters present and voting on the
proposition to levy a tax to be collected in installments for the
purchase or condemnation of a site and the erection thereon of a library
building or the erection of a library building on land acquired
otherwise than by purchase or condemnation, or for the purchase of land
and a suitable building thereon and make necessary alterations and
additions and equip such building for use as a library.
 2. Upon the request of a majority of the members of the boards of
trustees of two or more libraries chartered by the regents, if it shall
appear to the satisfaction of the commissioner that the establishment of
a cooperative library system will result in improved and expanded
library service to the area and that the area is suitable for the
establishment of such a cooperative library system, the commissioner may
call a joint meeting of the trustees of such libraries for the purpose
of determining whether a cooperative library system shall be established
and electing a board of trustees of such cooperative library system. If
it shall appear to the commissioner that the area proposed for the
cooperative library system is not sufficient to warrant the
establishment of such system; that such area is not otherwise suitable
or that for sufficient other reason such cooperative library system as
proposed should not be established he shall disapprove such request.
 a. Notice of such meeting shall be given by the commissioner to each
trustee by mail to his last known address at least five days prior to
such meeting. At such meeting the board of trustees of each library
participating shall have five votes.
 b. Such meeting shall be called to order by the person designated by
the commissioner and shall thereupon organize by the election of a
chairman. At such meeting a resolution in substantially the following
form shall be presented for the action of the meeting: "Resolved that a
cooperative library system be established consisting of the following
libraries chartered by the regents ............... (name libraries) for
the purpose of expanding and improving library service in the area
served by the above named libraries."
 c. If the resolution described above is adopted, then the meeting
shall proceed to elect a board of trustees of such library system to
consist of not less than five nor more than twenty-five members as
determined by the meeting.
 d. Within one month after taking office, the trustees-elect shall
apply to the regents for a charter as a cooperative library system.
 e. The board of trustees shall manage and control such cooperative
library system and shall have all the powers of trustees of other
educational institutions in the university as defined in this chapter.
Such board shall elect a president, secretary and treasurer. Before
entering upon his duties, such treasurer shall execute and file with the
trustees an official undertaking in such sum and with such sureties as
the board shall direct and approve. The treasurer need not be a member
of such board. The funds of the cooperative library system shall be
deposited in a bank or banks designated by the board of trustees and
shall be expended only under the direction of such trustees upon
properly authenticated vouchers.
 f. The term of office of trustees shall be either three or five years
except that the members of the first board of trustees shall determine
by lot the year in which the term of office of each trustee shall expire
so that as nearly as possible the terms of either one-third or one-fifth
of the members of such board will expire annually. Thereafter, the
successors of such trustees shall be elected annually by a meeting of
the trustees of the participating libraries in the cooperative library
system. Where the term of office of a trustee is five years, no trustee
shall hold office consecutively for more than two full five year terms
and where the term of office of a trustee is three years, no trustee
shall hold office consecutively for more than three full three year
terms. Provided further, however, years served by a trustee appointed to
fill an unexpired term shall not count towards the term limit. Such
meeting shall be called by the secretary of the cooperative library
system who shall give notice to all the trustees of participating
libraries in the manner provided in subparagraph a of this subdivision
for giving notice of the meeting to authorize the establishment of such
cooperative library system. Within one month after approving a change in
the length of the term of office of trustees, the trustees shall apply
to the regents for an amendment to the charter of the cooperative
library system. Such change in the length of the term of office of
trustees shall not take effect until such charter amendment is approved
by the regents. Any cooperative library system that changes the length
of the term of office of trustees pursuant to this paragraph, may
appoint an individual for a shorter term in order to ensure that as
nearly as possible, an equal number of trustees shall be elected to the
board each year, with the trustees assigned such shorter terms
determined by lot, and provided further that the term of office of each
incumbent member of the board shall not be decreased thereby.
 g. A contract may be entered into between the board of trustees of a
cooperative library system and the department under which the state
library will provide services, facilities and staff to the cooperative
library system upon terms agreed upon by and between the parties to such
contract.
 h. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to deprive any
participating library of its property.
 i. The board of trustees of any library chartered by the regents which
is not participating in a cooperative library system may adopt a
resolution requesting that such library become a participating library
in a cooperative library system. Duplicate copies of such resolution
certified by the clerk of such board of trustees shall be filed with the
board of trustees of the cooperative library system. If such board
approve such resolution such approval shall be endorsed thereon and a
copy thereof shall be filed with the commissioner. Upon such resolution
being approved by the commissioner such additional library shall become
a participating library in such system and shall have the same rights,
duties and privileges as other libraries participating therein.
 j. The participating libraries in such library system shall be those
libraries, members of the boards of trustees of which join in
petitioning the commissioner to call the meeting for the establishment
of the cooperative library system pursuant to this section, and who are
named in the resolution voted upon by such meeting and in the charter of
the library system.
 k. The board of trustees of each public library system shall meet no
fewer than six times a year.
 3. Trustees of a reference and research library resources system shall
have those powers set forth in section two hundred twenty-six of this
article with respect to trustees of corporations chartered by the
regents, and in addition shall have the following powers and duties:
 a. The board of trustees of a reference and research library resources
system shall include at least one representative of each constituent
public library system, at least one representative of the member
academic library with the largest collection, and at least two
nonlibrarians from the research community served by the system.
 b. The term of office of trustees shall be five years except that the
members of the first board of trustees shall determine by lot the year
in which the term of office of each trustee shall expire so that as
nearly as possible the terms of one-fifth of the members of such board
will expire annually. Thereafter, the successors of such trustees shall
be elected annually by a meeting of the designated representatives of
the member institutions participating in the reference and research
library resources system. No trustee shall hold office consecutively for
more than two full terms. Such annual meeting shall be called by the
secretary of the reference and research library resources system who
shall give notice to all the participating libraries by mail at least
five days prior to such meeting.
 c. The board of trustees shall meet no fewer than six times a year.
 4. By a majority vote of the tribal government of an Indian
reservation, or upon the request of the tribal government of an Indian
reservation, an Indian library may be established, with or without
branches, and may make application to the state or other source for
money to equip and maintain such library or libraries or to provide a
building or rooms for its uses. Notwithstanding the provisions of
section seven of the Indian law, the board of trustees of such library,
on behalf of the tribal government, may acquire real or personal
property for use by an Indian library by gift, grant, devise, bequest
and may take, buy, sell, hold and transfer either real or personal
property for the purposes of such library. No more than one Indian
library may be established on a reservation and such library shall serve
all inhabitants of that reservation. No such library shall be
established on any reservation that has fewer than three hundred
permanent residents and one thousand acres of land.
 5. The boards of trustees of any two, or more, public libraries,
Indian libraries, reference and research library resources systems,
cooperative library systems, or association libraries, as defined in
this article, may pool surplus funds to be used for the purchase of
certificates of deposit in any bank or trust company, provided that such
certificate of deposit be secured by a pledge of obligations of the
United States of America, or any obligation fully guaranteed or insured
as to interest and principal by the United States of America acting
through an agency, subdivision, department or division thereof, or
obligations of the state of New York. Each participating public library,
Indian library, reference and research library resources system,
cooperative library system or association library shall be entitled to
its pro-rata share of interest earned on such certificates in proportion
to its contribution to the purchase price of such certificates.
 6. The board of trustees of any two, or more, public libraries, public
library systems, reference and research library resources systems, as
defined in this chapter, shall have the power to enter into, amend,
cancel and terminate agreements for performance among themselves or one
for the other of their respective functions, for the purpose of
cooperatively advertising and awarding bids for equipment, supplies and
services, provided:
 a. such advertising and awards have been made in accordance with the
requirements of article five-A of the general municipal law;
 b. the purchasing and making of contracts shall be subject to general
laws applicable thereto; and
 c. that any such agreements shall include a manner of responding for
any liabilities that might be incurred in the operation of the joint
service or agreement.
 § 256. Contracts. 1. Any authority named in section two hundred
fifty-five may, individually or jointly with another municipal or
district body or tribal government, grant money for the support of the
cost of maintaining or the cost of any capital improvements to or
expenditure for one or more: free association libraries, provided such
libraries are registered by the regents; public libraries, provided such
libraries are registered by the regents; and cooperative library systems
approved by the commissioner; or may, individually or jointly with
another municipal or district body or tribal government, contract with
the trustees of a free association library registered by the regents, or
with any municipal or district body having control of such a library, or
with the trustees of the cooperative library system, or with the
trustees of a public library registered by the regents to furnish
library services to the people of the municipality, district or
reservation for whose benefit the contract is made, under such terms and
conditions as may be stated in such contract. The amount agreed to be
paid for such services under such contract shall be a charge upon the
municipal or district bodies or tribal government which agree to make
the payment and shall be paid directly to the treasurer of the free
association library, public library or of the cooperative library
system.
 2. When the municipality agreeing to make the payment or grant is a
town in which there are one or more incorporated villages, which village
or villages jointly with such town contract with the trustees of a
cooperative library system, a free association library or with another
municipal district or body having control of a public library whether or
not such district or body is an incorporated village in such town, the
amount appropriated by the town board in such town shall be a charge
upon the taxable property of that part of the town outside of any such
incorporated village.
 § 257. Acceptance of conditional gift. By majority vote at any
election or at a meeting of the electors, duly held, any municipality or
district or by three-fourths vote of its council any city, or any
library or any designated branch thereof if so authorized by such vote
of a municipality, district or council, or any combination of such
voting bodies, may accept gifts, grants, devises or bequests for library
purposes or for kindred affiliated educational, social and civic
agencies on condition that a specified annual appropriation shall
thereafter be made for the maintenance of a library or branches thereof,
or of such kindred affiliated agencies, by the municipality or district
or combination so authorizing such acceptance, or upon such other
conditions as may be stipulated in the terms of the gift. Such
acceptance when approved by the regents of the university under seal and
recorded in its book of charters shall be a binding contract, and such
municipality or district shall levy and collect yearly in the manner
prescribed for other taxes the amount stipulated and shall maintain any
so accepted gift, grant, devise or bequest intact and make good any
impairment thereof, and shall comply with all other conditions set forth
in the stated terms of the gift.
 § 258. Closing of museum; admission fee during certain hours. The
trustees of any institution supported under this chapter by public
money, in whole or in part, may, so far as consistent with free use by
the public at reasonable or specified hours, close any of its museum
collections at certain other hours, for study, to meet the demands of
special students or for exhibition purposes, and may charge an admission
fee at such hours, provided that all receipts from such fees shall be
paid into the treasury and be used for the maintenance or enlargement of
the institution.
 § 258-a. Purchases by museums, historical societies, zoological
gardens, aquariums, botanical gardens and arboreta through office of
general services. Museums, historical societies, zoological gardens,
aquariums, botanical gardens and arboreta which are chartered or
incorporated by the regents or otherwise formed pursuant to section two
hundred sixteen of this chapter or otherwise pursuant to the laws of
this state and are also non-profit organizations may make purchases of
commodities and services through the office of general services subject
to such rules as may be established from time to time pursuant to
section one hundred sixty-three of the state finance law; provided that
each such purchase shall have a cost of five hundred dollars or more and
that said museum, historical society, zoological garden, aquarium,
botanical garden or arboreta shall accept sole responsibility for any
payment of such cost due the vendor.
 § 259. Library taxes. 1. a. Taxes, in addition to those otherwise
authorized, may be voted for library purposes by any authority named in
section two hundred fifty-five of this part and shall, unless otherwise
directed by such vote, be considered as annual appropriations therefor
until changed by further vote and shall be levied and collected yearly,
or as directed, as are other general taxes. In the case of a school
district the appropriation for library purposes shall be submitted to
the voters of the district as proposed by the library board of trustees
in a separate resolution and shall not be submitted as a part of the
appropriation of the necessary funds to meet the estimated expenditures
of the school district. All moneys received from taxes or other public
sources for library purposes shall be kept as a separate library fund by
the treasurer of the municipality or district making the appropriation
and shall be expended only under direction of the library trustees on
properly authenticated vouchers, except that money received from taxes
and other public sources for the support of a public library or a free
association library or a cooperative library system shall be paid over
to the treasurer of such library or cooperative library system upon the
written demand of its trustees. All such moneys paid over to a public
library treasurer shall be deposited and secured in the manner provided
by section ten of the general municipal law and the library trustees or
the library treasurer, if the trustees shall delegate such duty to him,
may invest such moneys in the manner provided by section eleven of such
law.
 b. (1) Except as provided in subparagraph two of this paragraph,
whenever twenty-five qualified voters of a municipality shall so
petition and the library board of trustees shall endorse, the question
of establishing or increasing the amount of funding of the annual
contribution for the operating budget of a registered public or free
association library by such municipality to a sum specified in said
petition, shall be voted on at the next general election of such
municipality, provided that due public notice of the proposed action
shall have been given. An increase in library funding provided pursuant
to this paragraph shall not apply to a municipal budget adopted prior to
the date of such election.
 (2) Solely for the purposes of this paragraph, the term "municipality"
shall:
 (i) not include a city with a population of one million or more,
 (ii) mean only a county when the public libraries located in such
county are members of a federated public library system whose central
library is located in a city of more than three hundred thousand
inhabitants.
 2. In the case of a joint public library authorized to be established
by two or more municipalities or districts pursuant to section two
hundred fifty-five of this chapter, the governing bodies of the
participating municipalities and districts shall enter into an agreement
designating the treasurer of one of the participating municipalities or
districts to be the treasurer of the joint public library. The agreement
shall be for a period of not less than one year nor more than five years
and the state comptroller and the commissioner of education shall be
notified in writing by the board of library trustees of such agreement
and designation.
 The municipality or district whose treasurer is designated to serve as
treasurer of a joint public library may be compensated for the services
rendered by such official to the library. The amount to be paid for such
services shall be determined by agreement between the governing body of
the municipality or district and the board of library trustees, and
shall be paid at least annually from the public library fund.
 3. The treasurer of a joint public library shall maintain the separate
library fund required by subdivision one of this section and shall
credit to such fund all moneys received. The state aid apportioned to a
joint public library, amounts appropriated by participants toward its
support and all amounts received from other sources shall be paid to the
library treasurer. Appropriations for the library made by the
participating municipalities or districts shall be paid in full to the
library treasurer within sixty days after the beginning of the library
fiscal year.
 Disbursements for purposes of a joint public library shall be made by
the treasurer in the manner prescribed in subdivision one of this
section.
 Within thirty days after the close of the fiscal year the treasurer
shall make an annual report of the receipt and disbursement of library
moneys to the board of library trustees and to the governing body of
each of the participating municipalities or districts.
 4. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivisions one and three of
this section, the library trustees may by resolution establish a petty
cash fund, in such amount as they shall determine, for any employee who
has supervision of any library or branch thereof. Expenditures from such
fund may be made by such employee in advance of audit by the library
trustees, but only after the submission of properly itemized and
authenticated vouchers for materials, supplies or services furnished to
the library or branch thereof and upon terms calling for payment to the
vendor upon the delivery of any such materials or supplies or the
rendering of any such services. At each meeting of the library trustees
a list of all expenditures made from such fund since the last meeting of
the trustees, together with the vouchers supporting such expenditures,
shall be presented by such employee to the library trustees. The
trustees shall direct the treasurer to reimburse such petty cash fund in
an amount equal to the total of such bills which the trustees shall so
allow. Any of such bills or any portion of such bills which the library
trustees shall refuse to allow shall be the personal liability of such
employee and he shall promptly reimburse such petty cash fund in the
amount of such disallowances. If such reimbursement has not been made by
the time of the first payment of salary to such employee after the
action of the library trustees in disallowing an amount so expended,
such amount shall be withheld from such salary payment to such employee
and, if necessary, subsequent salary payments and paid into such petty
cash fund until an amount so disallowed by the library trustees has been
repaid in full to the petty cash fund.
 § 260. Trustees. 1. Public libraries authorized to be established by
action of the voters or their representatives shall be managed by
trustees who shall have all the powers of trustees of other educational
institutions of the university as defined in this chapter; provided that
the number of trustees of county public libraries and Indian libraries
shall not be less than five nor more than fifteen and that the number of
trustees of other public libraries shall not be less than five nor more
than fifteen. The number of trustees of joint public libraries
authorized to be established by two or more municipalities or districts
or any combination thereof shall be not less than five nor more than
twenty-five, as determined by agreement of the voting bodies empowered
to authorize the establishment of such libraries pursuant to subdivision
one of section two hundred fifty-five of this chapter and shall be set
forth in the resolution authorizing the establishment of such joint
public library. Such resolution shall also set forth the number of such
trustees which each of the participating municipalities or districts
shall be entitled to elect or appoint, and the terms of office of the
trustees as determined in accordance with subdivision three of this
section.
 2. The trustees of public libraries authorized to be established by
cities shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the common
council, in counties they shall be appointed by the county board of
supervisors or other governing elective body, in villages they shall be
appointed by the village board of trustees, in towns they shall be
appointed by the town board, in school districts they shall be elected
by the legal voters in the same manner as trustees are elected in the
school district which established said library, and on Indian
reservations they shall be elected at a general tribal election or
otherwise designated by the chiefs or head men of an Indian tribe; that
notwithstanding the fact that county, town or local school district
lines do not penetrate the reservation boundary, Indians residing on
reservations shall be eligible to serve as trustees of public libraries
established in school districts to the same extent as they are qualified
voters pursuant to subdivision three of section twenty hundred twelve of
this chapter; that the first trustees shall determine by lot the year in
which the term of office of each trustee shall expire and that a new
trustee shall be elected or appointed annually to serve for three or
five years to be determined by the entity establishing the public
library. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subdivision,
in any case where a town is a contributor to the support of any such
public library in a village located within the town the appointment of
trustees of such library who reside outside the village but within such
town shall be subject to the approval of the town board of such town.
The charter of any public library granted prior to April thirtieth,
nineteen hundred twenty-one, which provides for trustees, their terms of
office and method of election or appointment in a manner differing from
that hereinbefore provided, shall remain in full force and effect until
the regents, upon application of the library trustees, shall amend the
charter to conform to the provisions of law in effect when such
amendment is made.
 3. The trustees of a joint public library authorized to be established
by two or more municipalities or districts or any combination thereof
shall be appointed or elected by the body authorized by subdivision two
of this section to elect or appoint trustees of public libraries
authorized to be established by such municipality or district. The
number of such trustees to be elected or appointed by each of the
participating municipalities or districts shall be determined as
provided in subdivision one of this section. The term of office of such
trustees shall be three or five years except that the terms of the first
trustees shall be so arranged that the terms of as nearly as possible to
one-third or one-fifth of the members shall expire annually.
 4. No person who is a member of any municipal council or board
authorized by this section to appoint public library trustees in any
municipality shall be eligible for the office of such public library
trustee in such municipality.
 5. The boards of trustees of public, free association and Indian
libraries shall hold regular meetings at least quarterly, and such
boards shall fix the day and hour for holding such meetings.
 6. The board of trustees of a library system or a public or free
association library chartered by the regents of the state of New York
may determine to contribute annually a sum of money to assist the New
York State Association of Library Boards in fostering, encouraging and
promoting the further development of library activities throughout the
state and financing programs in this state which will assist in the
dissemination of information leading to the improvement and extension of
library services.
 7. The board of trustees of a public library established and supported
by a school district shall, in addition to powers conferred by this or
any other chapter, be authorized in its discretion to call, give notice
of and conduct a special district meeting for the purpose of electing
library trustees and of submitting initially a resolution in accordance
with the provisions of subdivision one of section two hundred fifty-nine
of this chapter. Such meeting shall be held prior to the first day of
July but subsequent to the first day of April. Should the board of
trustees of the library determine, in its discretion, not to notice and
conduct such a meeting, then the election and budget vote will be
noticed and conducted by the board of education of the school district
as part of its annual meeting.
 8. Candidates for the office of trustee of a public library
established and supported by a school district shall be nominated by
petition which shall meet the requirements of subdivision a of section
two thousand eighteen of this chapter, except that such candidates shall
be elected in the manner specified in subdivision b of such section
except that the nominating petition filed pursuant to subdivision a or b
of such section shall be signed by a least twenty-five qualified voters
of the library district, or two percent of the voters who voted in the
last previous annual election of members of the library board of
trustees, whichever is greater. The provisions of this subdivision shall
not apply to a charter granted prior to April thirtieth, nineteen
hundred seventy-one that provides for a different procedure.
 9. The board of trustees of a public library established and supported
by a school district, in addition to any other powers conferred by this
chapter, may, in its discretion, call, give notice of and conduct a
special district meeting of the qualified voters of the school district
for any proper library purpose, including the re-submission of a
defeated library appropriation, at a time and place designated by said
board of trustees, except as to those purposes set forth in subdivision
seven of this section.
 10. The board of trustees of a public library established and
supported by a school district, in addition to any other powers
conferred in this chapter, shall have the power to determine the
necessity for construction of library facilities, to select a library
site or sites, to select the architect, and to require that the board of
education call, give notice of and conduct a special district meeting in
accordance with the provisions of subdivision nine of this section for
the purpose of designating and acquiring a site or sites and authorizing
the issuance of obligations of the school district for acquisition and
construction of library facilities, or either.
 11. Whenever the board of trustees of a public library shall call,
give notice of and conduct a special district meeting under subdivision
seven or nine of this section, such meeting shall be established,
noticed and conducted in the same manner and to the same extent as such
meetings were theretofore established, noticed and conducted by the
board of education of the school district, the board of trustees of the
libraries making all the determinations and taking all action in respect
thereto otherwise required of the board of education of the school
district, except that the meeting need not, in the discretion of the
board of trustees of the library, be held in separate election districts
in those school districts where election districts have been established
by the board of education. The board of registration shall meet as
provided in section two thousand fourteen of this chapter and notice of
the meeting shall be given in accordance with the provisions of sections
two thousand four and two thousand seven of this chapter. The cost of
all such meetings and registrations shall be a charge to the library.
 12. The board of trustees of a public, free association or Indian
library which provides public access to the internet shall establish a
policy governing patron use of computer terminals which access the
internet. Verification of such policy shall be included in the annual
report submitted to the department.
 Notwithstanding any other provision of law, prior to the discarding of
used or surplus books or other such reading materials by trustees of a
chartered public, cooperative or free association library which receives
over ten thousand dollars in state aid, such trustees shall offer to
donate such books or materials to a not-for-profit corporation or
political subdivision located within the area of the library system or
offer to sell such books or materials to the general public. The
trustees shall retain any proceeds received from the sale of such books
and materials for the purpose of maintaining and improving library
service within the system.
 § 260-a. Meetings of board of trustees. Every meeting, including a
special district meeting, of a board of trustees of a public library
system, cooperative library system, public library or free association
library, including every committee meeting and subcommittee meeting of
any such board of trustees in cities having a population of one million
or more, shall be open to the general public. Such meetings shall be
held in conformity with and in pursuance to the provisions of article
seven of the public officers law. Provided, however, and
notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision one of section ninety-nine
of the public officers law, public notice of the time and place of a
meeting scheduled at least two weeks prior thereto shall be given to the
public and news media at least one week before such meeting.
 § 260-b. Reduction of salaries for purchase of annuities. Each board
of trustees of a library system, cooperative library system, public
library or free association library in its discretion, may enter into a
written agreement with any employee of such board to reduce the annual
salary as otherwise payable by law of such employee for the purpose of
purchasing an annuity for such employee. Any such agreement may be
terminated at any time upon written notice by either such employee or
such board. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to
diminish or impair any benefits to which such employee or his legal
representatives or beneficiaries would be otherwise entitled had such
salary reduction agreement not been entered into in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
 § 260-c. Reduction of salaries for tax-deferred annuities. The board
of trustees of a library system, cooperative library system, public
library or free association library, in its discretion, may enter into a
written agreement with any of its employees to reduce the annual salary,
as otherwise earned and payable by law, of such employee for the purpose
of providing a tax-deferred annuity for such employee under the
retirement system in which such employee is currently a member, but only
if such retirement system specifically provides for such tax-deferred
annuities, and subject to any provisions and limitations applicable
thereto. Any such agreement may be terminated upon written notice by
either such employee or such board. Nothing contained in this section
shall be construed to diminish or impair any benefits to which such
employee or his legal representatives or beneficiaries would be
otherwise entitled had such salary reduction agreement not been entered
into in accordance with the provisions of this section.
 § 260-d. Board of trustees continuing education. 1. Beginning January
first, two thousand twenty-three, each member, elected or appointed, of
a board of trustees of a public, free association or Indian library
shall be required to complete a minimum of two hours of trustee
education annually, from a provider approved by the commissioner on the
financial oversight, accountability, fiduciary responsibilities and the
general powers and duties of a library trustee. Such trustee education
may be delivered online or in person, and may include lectures,
workshops, regional or national library association programs, or any
other format approved by the commissioner.
 2. Each member shall demonstrate compliance with the requirements of
this section by filing with the president of the board of trustees
evidence of completion of trustee education from an approved provider.
Actual and necessary expenses incurred by a member in complying with
this section shall be a charge against the library. Such evidence shall
include one of the following:
 (a) certificates of completion issued by one or more approved
providers; or
 (b) a signed self-assurance of completion. Such assurance shall
identify the approved trustee education providers, a description of the
format and content of the completed instruction activities, the date and
time such member began and completed each instruction activity and an
explanation of why a certificate of completion was not available from
such approved providers.
 § 261. Incorporation. Within one month after taking office, the first
board of trustees of any such public library or Indian library shall
apply to the regents for a charter in accordance with the vote
establishing the library.
 § 262. Use of public and Indian libraries. Every library established
under section two hundred fifty-five of this chapter shall be forever
free to the inhabitants of the municipality or district or Indian
reservation, which establishes it, subject always to rules of the
library trustees who shall have authority to exclude any person who
wilfully violates such rules; and the trustees may, under such
conditions as they think expedient, extend the privileges of the library
to persons living outside such municipality or district or Indian
reservation.
 § 263. Reports. Every library or museum, other than a school library,
which enjoys any exemption from taxation or receives state aid or other
privilege not usually accorded to business corporations shall make the
report required by section two hundred fifteen of this chapter, and such
report shall relieve the institution from making any report now required
by statute or charter to be made to the legislature or to any
department, court or other authority of the state. These reports shall
be summarized and transmitted to the legislature by the regents with the
annual reports of the university.
 § 264. Injuries to property. Whoever intentionally injures, defaces
or destroys any property belonging to or deposited in any incorporated
library, reading-room, museum or other educational institution, shall be
punished by imprisonment in a state prison for not more than three
years, or in a county jail for not more than one year, or by a fine of
not more than five hundred dollars, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
 § 265. Detention. Whoever wilfully detains any book, newspaper,
magazine, pamphlet, manuscript or other property belonging to any public
or incorporated library, reading-room, museum or other educational
institution, for thirty days after notice in writing to return the same,
given after the expiration of the time which by the rules of such
institution, such article or other property may be kept, shall be
punished by a fine of not less than one nor more than twenty-five
dollars, or by imprisonment in jail not exceeding six months, and the
said notice shall bear on its face a copy of this section.
 § 265-a. Defense of lawful detention. In any action for false arrest,
false imprisonment, unlawful detention, defamation of character,
assault, trespass or invasion of civil rights brought by any person by
reason of having been detained on or in the immediate vicinity of the
premises of a public library or association library for the purpose of
investigation or questioning as to the ownership of any materials, it
shall be a defense to such action that the person was detained in a
reasonable manner and for not more than a reasonable time to permit such
investigation or questioning by a peace officer or by the librarian in
charge, his or her authorized employee or agent, and that such peace
officer, librarian, employee or agent has reasonable grounds to believe
that the person so detained was committing or attempting to commit
larceny on such premises of such materials. As used in this section,
"reasonable grounds" shall include, but not be limited to, knowledge
that a person has concealed, unauthorized possession of material owned
or belonging to the public library or association library, and a
"reasonable time" shall mean the time necessary to permit the person
detained to make a statement or to refuse to make a statement, and the
time necessary to examine employees and records of the public library or
association library relative to the ownership of the materials.
 § 266. Transfer of libraries. By vote similar to that required by
section two hundred fifty-five of this chapter any municipality or
district or tribal government or combination of districts, or by action
of its trustees at a meeting duly held any association library,
incorporated or registered by the regents, may, when such vote or action
has been duly approved by the regents, transfer, conditionally as
provided in section two hundred fifty-seven of this chapter, or
otherwise, the ownership and control of its library with all its
property, real and personal, or any part thereof, to any municipality,
or district, or institution providing for free library service; and the
trustees or body making the transfer shall thereafter be relieved of all
responsibility pertaining to property thus transferred.
 § 267. Local neglect. If the local authorities of any library
supported wholly or in part by state money fail to provide for the
support of such library and the public usefulness of its books, the
regents shall in writing notify the trustees of said library what is
necessary to meet the state's requirements, and on such notice all said
library's rights to further grants of money or books from the state
shall be suspended until the regents certify that the requirements have
been met; and if said trustees shall refuse or neglect to comply with
such requirements within sixty days after service of such notice, the
regents may remove them from office and thereafter all books and other
library property wholly or in part paid for from state moneys shall be
under the full and direct control of the regents who, as shall seem best
for public interests, may appoint new trustees to carry on the library,
or may store it, or distribute its books to other libraries.
 § 268. Abolition. Any library established by public vote of any
municipality or district, or by vote of the common council of any city,
or by vote of the board of trustees of any village, or by action of
school authorities, or by vote of the tribal government of an Indian
reservation, or under section two hundred fifty-five of this chapter,
may be abolished by majority vote at an election, or at a meeting of the
electors duly held, provided that due public notice of the proposed
action shall have been given, or by vote of such tribal government. If
any such library is abolished, its property shall be used first to
return to the regents, for the benefit of other free association or
public or school libraries in that locality, the equivalent of such sums
as it may have received from the state or from other sources as gifts
for public use. After such return any remaining property may be used as
directed in the vote abolishing the library, but if the entire library
property does not exceed in value the amount of such gifts, it may be
transferred to the regents for public use, and the trustees shall
thereupon be free from further responsibility. No abolition of a public
library shall be lawful until the regents grant a certificate that its
assets have been properly distributed and its abolition completed in
accordance with law.
 § 269. Library extension service. By such means, in such manner and
upon such conditions as the regents may prescribe, they shall make
provision for a library extension service for the promotion,
organization and supervision of free libraries; for supplying
information, advice, assistance or instruction on any matter pertaining
to library methods or practice or to the establishment, equipment,
organization or administration of libraries; for the acquisition,
preparation and circulation of traveling libraries and other educational
material; for aiding and encouraging study clubs; and for the employment
of all suitable efforts to bring within the reach of all the people of
the state, and awaken their desire for, increased opportunities and
facilities for reading and study.
 § 270. Acceptance of surplus library books or property. The state
education department is hereby authorized to cooperate with the United
States commissioner of education, the war assets administration, and/or
other federal officers and officials in the administration of any
statute heretofore or hereafter enacted for the disposal of surplus
library books or property, and to accept for and on behalf of the state
of New York or its political subdivisions surplus library books or other
property suitable and necessary to the operation of public and free
libraries and Indian libraries and for the improvement and extension of
library service for New York state, and any funds, which may be made
available to the state of New York by the federal government for these
and related public and Indian library services.
 § 271. Apportionment of state aid to Indian libraries. Any Indian
library chartered by the regents or in the absence of such library any
tribal government contracting for service from a chartered and
registered library or approved library system, shall be entitled to
receive state aid during each calendar year consisting of the following
amounts:
 1. Eighteen thousand dollars, and
 2. The sum of eighteen dollars and twenty cents per capita for persons
residing on the reservation served by the Indian library or contract as
shown by the latest federal census or certified by the New York state
director of Indian services, and
 3. The sum of one dollar and fifty cents per acre of area served by
the Indian library or contract.
 Such sums shall be paid annually to the Indian library board of
trustees for the use of the Indian library, or in the absence of such a
board, to the tribal government for a contract for library service.
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to diminish the
funds, services or supplies provided to any Indian library by a library
system as defined in section two hundred seventy-two of this article.
Increases in appropriations for such purposes during a calendar year
shall be pro rated.
 § 272. Conditions under which library systems are entitled to state
aid. 1. Public library systems. a. The term "public library system" as
used in this article means:
 (1) A library established by one or more counties.
 (2) A group of libraries serving an area including one or more
counties in whole or in part.
 (3) A library of a city containing one or more counties.
 (4) A cooperative library system established pursuant to section two
hundred fifty-five of this chapter, the plan of library service of any
of which shall have been approved by the commissioner.
 b. The "area served" by a public library system for the purposes of
this article shall mean the area which the public library system
proposes to serve in its approved plan of service. In determining the
population of the area served by the public library system the
population shall be deemed to be that shown by the latest federal census
for the political subdivisions in the area served. Such population shall
be certified in the same manner as provided by section fifty-four of the
state finance law except that such population shall include the
reservation and school Indian population and incarcerated individuals of
state institutions under the direction, supervision or control of the
state department of corrections and community supervision, the state
department of mental hygiene and the state department of social welfare.
In the event that any of the political subdivisions receiving library
service are included within a larger political subdivision which is a
part of the public library system the population used for the purposes
of computing state aid shall be the population of the larger political
subdivision, provided however, that where any political subdivision
within a larger political subdivision shall have taken an interim census
since the last census taken of the larger political subdivision, the
population of the larger political subdivision may be adjusted to
reflect such interim census and, as so adjusted, may be used until the
next census of such larger political subdivision. In the event that the
area served is not coterminous with a political subdivision, the
population of which is shown on such census, or the area in square miles
of which is available from official sources, such population and area
shall be determined, for the purpose of computation of state aid
pursuant to section two hundred seventy-three of this part by applying
to the population and area in square miles of such political
subdivision, the ratio which exists between the assessed valuation of
the portion of such political subdivision included within the area
served and the total assessed valuation of such political subdivision.
 c. Members of a public library system shall be those public, free
association, and Indian libraries located within the service area which
have been admitted to membership prior to July first, nineteen hundred
seventy-eight, or which apply for and are granted membership subsequent
to that date with the approval of the commissioner. No public library
system shall be subject to any loss of benefits under these provisions
where such system has made reasonable effort to prevent the unapproved
withdrawal of such library from the system and the system demonstrates,
in a manner satisfactory to the commissioner, that the residents of the
area encompassed by the withdrawing library will continue to benefit
from the library services provided by the public library system.
 d. "Approved plan" as used in this article means a plan of library
service by a public library system approved by the commissioner
subsequent to May first, nineteen hundred fifty-eight.
 e. Approval shall not be given to a public library system unless it
will serve at least two hundred thousand people or four thousand square
miles of area, provided, however, that provisional approval may be given
to a public library system which will serve at least fifty thousand
persons provided the area served includes three or more political
subdivisions and provided further that a satisfactory plan of expansion
of service to be followed during the ensuing five-year period is adopted
by such library system and approved by the commissioner.
 f. The board of trustees of the public library system shall submit to
the commissioner the plan of library service. Such plan shall be
supported by such information as the commissioner may require in the
form prescribed by him.
 g. No such plan of library service shall be approved by the
commissioner unless he finds that it provides for the residents of the
area served thereby a method conforming to the regulations of the
commissioner by which the participating libraries are obligated to
permit the loan of books and material among members of the system for
use on the same basis permitted by the library which owns or controls
them.
 h. The commissioner shall by regulation provide the standard of
service with which such a public library system must comply. Such
regulations shall, among other things, relate to the total book stock;
the diversity of such book stock with respect to general subjects and
type of literature, provided that such regulations shall not, directly
or indirectly, prohibit the inclusion of a particular book, periodical
or material or the works of a particular author or the expression of a
particular point of view; annual additions to book stock; circulation of
book stock; maintenance of catalogues; number and location of libraries
or branch libraries; hours of operation and number and qualifications of
personnel, necessary to enable a public library system to render
adequate service. Such regulations may establish standards which differ
on the basis of population; density of population; the actual valuation
of the taxable property within the area served; the condition of library
facilities in existence on April first, nineteen hundred fifty-seven;
the amount raised by taxation by or for the area served; the relation of
such amount to population and actual value of the property taxed; the
relation of the amount of funds received by a public library sytem from
local taxes to that derived from private contributions; or on such other
basis as the commissioner finds necessary to provide for the equitable
distribution of state aid.
 i. Each public library system receiving state aid pursuant to this
section and section two hundred seventy-three shall furnish such
information regarding its library service as the commissioner may from
time to time require to discharge his duties under such sections. The
commissioner may at any time revoke his approval of a plan of library
service if he finds that the public library system operating under such
plan no longer conforms to the provisions of this section or the
regulations promulgated by the commissioner hereunder; or, in the case
of provisional approval, if such library system no longer conforms to
the agreement, plans or conditions upon which such provisional approval
was based. In such case a public library system shall not thereafter be
entitled to state aid pursuant to this section or section two hundred
seventy-three unless and until its plan of library service is again
approved by the commissioner.
 j. (1) In the event that the sum total of local sponsor support raised
by local taxation exclusive of the sum raised for capital expenditures
for the support of a public library system and participating libraries
in a twelve month period is less than ninety-five per centum of the
average of the amounts raised for such purposes by local taxation for
the two preceding twelve month periods, the state aid to which such
library system would otherwise be entitled shall be reduced by
twenty-five per centum. Such state aid shall likewise be reduced by
twenty-five per centum in the event that the public library system shall
refuse after reasonable notice to make provision for the expansion of
the area served in accordance with the regulations of the commissioner.
Upon receipt of annual systems and participating libraries activity
reports satisfactory to the commissioner, the commissioner shall
determine the amount of any underpayment or overpayments related to
maintenance of effort and shall apply such adjustment to the next annual
payment due such library system. In the first year in which any library
system changes its reporting from the calendar year to a fiscal year
other than the calendar year, it shall file any additional reporting
schedules deemed necessary by the commissioner for the purpose of
determining maintenance of effort as required herein, in order that no
period of time shall be exempt from such requirement.
 (2) In the event that the total sum raised by local taxation,
exclusive of the sum raised for capital expenditures, for the support of
a central library of a public library system in a twelve month period,
is less than ninety-five per centum of the average of the amounts raised
for such purposes by local taxation for the two preceding twelve month
periods, the state aid to which such library system would otherwise be
entitled for the development of its central library shall be reduced by
twenty-five per centum. Upon receipt of annual central library activity
reports satisfactory to the commissioner, the commissioner shall
determine the amount of any underpayment or overpayments related to
maintenance of effort and shall apply such adjustment to the next annual
payment due such library system. In the first year in which any library
system changes its reporting from the calendar year to a fiscal year
other than the calendar year, it shall file any additional reporting
schedules deemed necessary by the commissioner for the purpose of
determining maintenance of effort as required herein, in order that no
period of time shall be exempt from such requirement.
 (3) The commissioner may waive the requirements of subparagraphs one
and two of this paragraph, if the commissioner determines that the
application of such subparagraphs would result in excessive hardship for
the public library system or central library brought about by an
extraordinary change in a local sponsor's economic condition, loss by a
local sponsor of state aid to local governments provided under section
fifty-four of the state finance law, or by a natural disaster. The
commissioner may grant such waiver for a period of up to three
consecutive calendar years. The commissioner shall report any waivers
granted under this subparagraph to the speaker of the assembly, the
temporary president of the senate, the chairs of the legislative fiscal
committees and the director of the division of the budget.
 (4) A "local sponsor" shall mean any municipality, district or school
district, as defined in the general municipal law, or any combination
thereof.
 k. In promulgating regulations and approving, rejecting or revoking
plans of library service pursuant to this section, consideration shall
be given to:
 (1) The prevention of unreasonable discrimination among the persons
served by such public library system.
 (2) The need for rapid expansion of library facilities in areas not
now served.
 (3) The need of each public library system for the professional
services of an adequate number of librarians having, in addition to
general familiarity with literature, special training with respect to
book selection and organization for library use.
 (4) The need for a book stock sufficient in size and varied in kind
and subject matter.
 (5) The need for regular fresh additions to book stock.
 (6) The need for adequate books, materials and facilities for research
and information as well as for recreational reading.
 (7) The need for libraries, branches, and other outlets convenient in
location, and with adequate hours of service.
 (8) The desirability for the integration of existing libraries and new
libraries into systems serving a sufficiently large population to
support adequate library service at a reasonable cost.
 (9) The need for the economic and efficient utilization of public
funds.
 (10) The need for full utilization of local pride, responsibility,
initiative and support of library service and the use of state aid in
their stimulation but not as their substitute.
 (11) The needs of special populations.
 l. Each public library system shall provide access to the internet in
designated libraries located within their systems for the purpose of
connecting residents of this state who are serving in the military on
active duty in a combat theater or combat zone of operations to spouses,
domestic partners, children, including adopted, step, or foster
children, and parents, including those who stood in the relationship of
a parent to the serviceperson for one year or more, at any time prior to
the serviceperson's entry into active military service.
 (1) Each public library system shall assign within its system six
computer terminals with internet access for such use, and shall ensure
that each county within its system has a library with at least one
computer terminal for such use.
 (2) Notwithstanding subparagraph one of this paragraph, in a library
system containing a city with a population of one hundred twenty-five
thousand or more individuals, at least two terminals shall be assigned
within such city in a designated library or libraries that serve such
city. Furthermore, in a city with a population of one million or more,
there shall be at least ten terminals assigned in any county which is
wholly contained within such city.
 (3) When determining which libraries are to be assigned computer
terminals for such purpose, the system shall consider the location and
current availability of computer terminals with internet access. In the
event that within a public library system there are no libraries within
a county that have a computer with internet access, a computer with
internet access shall be provided by the department to the assigned
library within such county. Furthermore, in public library systems with
fewer than six counties, when determining where additional terminals
should be assigned after terminals have been placed in each county
within the system pursuant to subparagraphs one and two of this
paragraph, such systems shall give priority to libraries that serve
areas which support and maintain military bases or to libraries that
serve the largest populations.
 2. Reference and research library resources systems.
 a. The term "reference and research library resources system" as used
in this article means a duly chartered educational institution resulting
from the association of a group of institutions of higher education,
libraries, non-profit educational institutions, hospitals, and other
institutions organized to improve reference and research library
resources service. Such reference and research library resource systems
may be registered upon meeting the standards set forth by the
commissioner.
 b. The "area served" by a reference and research library resources
system for the purposes of this article shall include not less than
seven hundred fifty thousand persons, as based upon the latest approved
federal census, or not less than ten thousand square miles; and the
defined area of service shall:
 (1) Include more than one county; and
 (2) Respect the integrity of the area of service of a public library
system; and
 (3) Constitute a service area effectively related to the availability
of information resources and services and to the area of service of
other reference and research library resources systems, as determined by
the commissioner.
 c. Membership in a reference and research library resources system.
 (1) The membership shall include at least four chartered
degree-granting institutions of higher education of the four year level
whose libraries meet departmental standards.
 (2) Membership shall also include either:
 (i) at least one chartered degree-granting institution of higher
education offering graduate programs for a masters degree whose library
holds not less than two hundred seventy-five thousand volumes and
currently receives not less than three thousand periodical titles, or
 (ii) a public library which holds not less than four hundred thousand
adult volumes and currently receives not less than one thousand five
hundred periodical titles.
 (3) The membership may also include approved public and school library
systems which are within the region served by the reference and research
library resources system.
 (4) A public library in Suffolk or Nassau county that provides service
within the area served by the system except that no such public library
which is not a member of a public library system shall be eligible for
membership in a reference and research library resources system.
 (5) A reference and research library resources system may set its own
minimum standards for membership consistent with regulations of the
commissioner, except that;
 (i) any chartered institution of higher education whose library meets
the departmental standards shall be eligible for membership, and
 (ii) any chartered institution of higher education whose library does
not meet the departmental standards may not be eligible for membership
unless it submits to the department a five-year plan for the realization
of the standards, the plan bearing the signed approval of the head
librarian, the president, and the academic dean of the institution, and
 (iii) any hospital whose library meets the standards established by
the regents in accordance with section two hundred fifty-four of this
article shall be eligible for membership, and
 (iv) any hospital whose library does not meet the standards
established by the regents will not be eligible for membership unless it
submits to the commissioner a five year plan for the realization of the
standards, such plan bearing the signed approval of the head of the
governing board of such hospital.
 (6) The member institutions of each reference and research library
resources system shall be broadly representative of the chartered
educational agencies, nonprofit organizations, hospitals and other
special libraries providing library service within the defined area of
services of the system.
 d. Plan of service.
 (1) The reference and research library resources system shall submit a
plan of service to the commissioner for approval, in a form to be
prescribed by the commissioner to cover resources, needs, proposed
program, budget, contractual agreements, and any other information which
the commissioner may require.
 (2) The plan of service must show the manner in which the reference
and research library resources system will improve the library resources
and services presently available in the area to the research community,
including improved reader access.
 (3) The plan of service shall indicate the manner in which the
reference and research library resources system strengthens the library
programs of its members and the manner in which the system program is
related to appropriate regional programs in higher education.
 (4) The plan of service shall identify the resources and needs of each
hospital library, or library serving hospitals and show the manner in
which the reference and research library resources system will improve
hospital library services and in which it will assist each hospital
library which does not meet the regents' standards to attain such
standards and will assist each non-member hospital library or library
serving a hospital to attain membership in the system.
 e. The commissioner shall by regulation establish the standard of
service to be met by such a reference and research library resources
system.
 f. Each reference and research library resources system receiving
state aid pursuant to this section and section two hundred seventy-three
of this article shall furnish such information regarding its library
service as the commissioner may from time to time require to discharge
his duties under such sections. The commissioner may at any time revoke
his approval of a plan of library service if he finds that the library
system operating under such plan no longer conforms to the provisions of
this section or the regulations promulgated by the commissioner
hereunder. In such case a library system shall not thereafter be
entitled to state aid pursuant to this section and section two hundred
seventy-three of this article unless and until its plan of library
service is again approved by the commissioner.
 g. In promulgating regulations and approving, rejecting or revoking
plans of library service pursuant to this section, consideration shall
be given to:
 (1) The prevention of unreasonable discrimination among the persons
served by such library system;
 (2) The need for regional resources of sufficient size and varied in
kind and subject matter;
 (3) The need for adequate books, materials (print and non-print) and
facilities for research and information;
 (4) The need for outlets convenient in time and place for the sharing
of library materials;
 (5) The need for the economic and efficient utilization of public
funds;
 (6) The need for full utilization of local responsibility, initiative
and support of library service and the use of state aid in their
stimulation but not as their substitute.
 (7) The need for adequate books, materials, including both print and
non-print materials, and facilities for current medical information
services to be provided each hospital.
 § 273. Apportionment of state aid to libraries and library systems. 1.
Any public library system providing service under an approved plan
during a calendar year shall be entitled to receive during that calendar
year state aid consisting of the following amounts:
 a. An annual grant of:
 (1) Ten thousand dollars where the library system serves less than one
county, or
 (2) Twenty thousand dollars where the library system serves one entire
county, or
 (3) Where the library system serves more than one county the system
shall be entitled to receive twenty-five thousand dollars for each
entire county served and/or ten thousand dollars for each county, any
part of which is served by the library system. If an entire county is
served by two or more library systems, each of which serves a part
thereof, each of such library systems shall be entitled to receive a
grant of ten thousand dollars and in addition, a pro rata share of an
additional sum of ten thousand dollars, such share to be computed in
accordance with the ratio which the population of the area of the county
served by such library system bears to the total population of the
county, as determined under subdivision one of section two hundred
seventy-two of this article.
 b. In a library system which submits a plan for further development of
and access to central library services, which plan shall be approved by
the commissioner pursuant to the commissioner's regulations, the amount
of central library services aid shall be:
 (1) thirty-two cents per capita of the population within the chartered
area of service of such library system with a minimum amount of one
hundred five thousand dollars, and
 (2) an additional seventy-one thousand five hundred dollars.
 (3) Ownership of library materials and equipment purchased with such
central library services aid provided by this paragraph shall be vested
in the public library system.
 c. The sum of one dollar and sixty-two cents per capita of population
of the area served.
 d. Each public library system with an automation program to support
bibliographic control and interlibrary sharing of information resources
of member libraries, and to coordinate and integrate the automated
system or systems of such member libraries consistent with regulations
of the commissioner, shall be eligible to receive an amount equal to two
and nine hundred thirty-eight thousandths percent of the amount earned
in paragraph (c) of this subdivision, or seventy-six thousand five
hundred dollars, whichever is more.
 e. The sum of fifty-two dollars per square mile of area served by the
library system in the case of library systems serving one county or
less. Such sum shall be increased by five dollars for each additional
entire county served, provided, however, that no apportionment pursuant
to this paragraph shall exceed seventy-two dollars per square mile of
area served. If an entire county is served by two or more library
systems, each of which serves a part thereof, each of such library
systems shall be entitled to receive, in addition to the aid computed in
accordance with the foregoing provisions of this paragraph, a pro rata
share of an increase of five dollars to be computed as follows: the sum
resulting from the computation of five dollars per square mile of area
served by the one of such library systems which would receive the
largest amount of aid pursuant to this paragraph shall be pro rated
among the library systems serving such county in accordance with the
ratio which the population of the area served by each of such library
systems bears to the population of the county as determined under
subdivision one of section two hundred seventy-two of this article.
 f. (1) Local library services aid. Except in cities with a population
in excess of one million inhabitants, each chartered and registered
public and free association library meeting standards of service
promulgated by the commissioner, and each public or free association
library serving a city with a population of one hundred thousand or more
which merged with the public library system on or before January first,
nineteen hundred seventy-six and which meets standards of service
promulgated by the commissioner, shall be eligible to receive annually
thirty-one cents per capita of the population of the library's chartered
service area as on file with the commissioner on January first of the
calendar year for which aid is payable, or, thirty-one cents per capita
of the population of the city with a population of one hundred thousand
or more whose public or free association library merged with the public
library system on or before January first, nineteen hundred seventy-six,
with a minimum amount of one thousand five hundred dollars, except that
no library shall receive less than the amount of local library services
aid received in two thousand one. Regulations of the commissioner shall
provide a method for establishing changes in chartered service areas or
determining populations thereof. Local library services aid shall be
paid to the system for distribution within thirty days of receipt to its
member libraries in accordance with this subdivision. Notwithstanding
any contrary provisions of this subparagraph, the commissioner shall
establish procedures under which a public or free association library
may apply for a waiver of the requirements of the standards of service;
provided, however, that any such waivers may only be granted in the same
year in which the commissioner has apportioned a reduction adjustment.
 (2) Local services support aid. Except in cities with a population in
excess of one million inhabitants, each public library system operating
under an approved plan of service shall be eligible to receive annually
local services support aid equal to two-thirds of the total dollar
amount paid in local library services aid to the member libraries of the
system plus thirty-one cents per capita of the system's population who
do not reside within the chartered service area of a member library.
 (3) Local consolidated systems aid. In cities with a population in
excess of one million inhabitants, each public library system operating
under an approved plan of service shall be eligible to receive annually
local consolidated system aid equal to the sum of (i) thirty-one cents
per capita of the population served by the system, but not less than the
amount of local library incentive aid received in nineteen hundred
ninety-one as reported on the library's nineteen hundred ninety-one
annual report; and (ii) an additional amount equal to two-thirds of the
total dollar amount computed for the system pursuant to clause (i) of
this subparagraph.
 g. In addition to the sums otherwise provided in paragraphs a, b, c,
d, e, f, h and i of this subdivision, the New York Public Library shall
receive six million four hundred sixteen thousand six hundred dollars
for the general support of its research libraries. In addition to any
other sums provided to such library, the sum of two million dollars
shall be payable annually to the New York Public Library for the general
support of library services provided by the New York Public Library to
the students of the City University of New York and the sum of one
million dollars shall be payable annually to the New York Public Library
for the general support of its science, industry and business library.
 h. (1) Coordinated outreach services. Each public library system which
provides coordinated outreach services, as defined by regulations to be
promulgated by the commissioner, to persons who are educationally
disadvantaged or who are members of ethnic or minority groups in need of
special library services, or who are unemployed and in need of job
placement assistance, or who live in areas underserved by a library, or
who are blind, physically disabled, have developmental or learning
disabilities, or who are aged or confined in institutions, or who are
at-risk youth from birth to age twenty-one, shall be entitled to receive
annually forty-three thousand dollars and thirteen cents per capita of
the total population of the area served.
 (2) In addition, each system serving a population of two million
inhabitants or more shall receive an additional amount of forty-six
thousand three hundred thirty-three dollars and each system serving a
population of four hundred thousand inhabitants and less than two
million inhabitants shall receive an additional amount of twenty-three
thousand dollars and each system serving a population of less than four
hundred thousand inhabitants shall receive an additional amount of
fourteen thousand dollars.
 i. In addition to any other sums provided for such purposes, the New
York Public Library shall receive annually the sum of seven hundred
thirty-four thousand dollars for the program of the Schomburg center for
research in black culture, and the additional sum of nine hundred
eighty-four thousand dollars for the program of the library for the
blind and physically handicapped.
 j. In addition to any other sums provided to such library, the sum of
two hundred fifty thousand dollars shall be paid annually to the New
York Historical Society for making its library services available to the
public.
 k. In addition to any other sums provided to such library the sum of
three hundred fifty thousand dollars shall be payable annually to the
Brooklyn Public Library for its business library for each calendar year.
 l. In addition to any other sums provided to such library, the sum of
fifty thousand dollars shall be payable annually to the Buffalo and Erie
County Public Library for a continuity of service project approved by
the commissioner for each calendar year.
 m. In addition to any other sums provided to such library system, the
sum of thirty thousand dollars shall be payable annually to the Nassau
library system for a continuity of service project approved by the
commissioner for each calendar year.
 n. The minimum annual grant available to a library system under
paragraphs a, c and e of this subdivision shall be six hundred
seventy-five thousand dollars.
 2. Within the amounts appropriated therefor moneys paid out pursuant
to this section shall be paid out of the state treasury on vouchers
certified by the commissioner after audit by and upon the warrant of the
comptroller.
 3. The commissioner may waive the requirement that a public library
system serve an entire county to earn the maximum annual grant under
subparagraphs two and three of paragraph a of subdivision one of this
section and paragraphs b, c, e and h of subdivision one of this section
where the commissioner deems reasonable effort has been made by the
system to encourage membership by all libraries in the county.
 4. Reference and research library resources system. a. (1) Any
reference and research library resources system providing service under
an approved plan during a calendar year shall be entitled to receive
annual state aid consisting of an annual grant of:
 (i) Two hundred seventy thousand dollars plus the sum of one dollar
and fifty cents per square mile of area served plus the sum of six cents
per capita of the population of the area served; and
 (ii) Two hundred thousand dollars plus the sum of two cents per capita
of the population of the area served.
 (2) Each system may annually appropriate funds received under this
subdivision to obtain matching funds from the National Endowment for the
Humanities and other federal programs.
 (3) The annual amount payable to each approved system under this
paragraph shall be payable on or before July first, provided that, upon
receipt of annual system activity reports satisfactory to the
commissioner, the commissioner shall determine the amount of any underor overpayments and shall apply such adjustment to the next annual
payment due such system.
 b. The commissioner is hereby authorized to expend up to five hundred
six thousand dollars annually in each state fiscal year to provide
formula grants to approved reference and research library resources
systems for provision of consumer health and medical information
services for all types of libraries and library systems. Such grants
shall assist libraries in providing access to timely and accurate
medical and health information for medical personnel and for the general
public. In addition to any other sum provided in this subdivision, each
reference and research library resources system providing service under
an approved plan with a consumer health and medical library information
services program for all types of libraries and library systems shall be
eligible to receive an annual formula grant. Such formula grants shall
be determined on the basis of criteria to be prescribed by the
commissioner. The commissioner shall provide the annual amount payable
to each approved system under this paragraph in the following manner:
 (1) Funds shall be available to each reference and research library
resources system in such manner as to insure that the ratio of the
amount each system is eligible to receive equals the weighted ratio of
the total number of institutions as defined in subparagraph two of this
paragraph in the region served by the system to the total number of such
institutions in the state.
 (2) For the purposes of determining the amount of funds available to
each system, institutions and their weightings are as follows:
 (i) not-for-profit hospitals licensed by the New York state health
department, with a weighting of two;
 (ii) for-profit teaching hospitals licensed by the New York state
health department, with an additional weighting of one; and
 (iii) member institutions of a reference and research library
resources system, excluding public and hospital libraries, with a
weighting of one.
 c. (1) The commissioner is hereby authorized to expend up to one
million three hundred ninety-six thousand dollars in each state fiscal
year to provide formula grants to approved reference and research
library resources systems for provision of services to member hospital
libraries in not-for-profit hospitals licensed by the New York state
health department, or to member libraries serving such hospitals. Such
formula grants shall be determined on the basis of criteria to be
developed by the commissioner and shall assist member hospital libraries
or member libraries serving hospitals in meeting the standards
established by the regents in accordance with section two hundred
fifty-four of this article. Such formula grants shall support
integration of member hospital libraries or member libraries serving
hospitals into existing networks.
 (2) The commissioner shall provide grants to the reference and
research library resources systems in the following manner:
 (a) an amount equal to seventy-five cents per square mile of area
served by the reference and research library resource system in
furtherance of the purposes of this paragraph, and
 (b) the remainder for library services to hospitals in accordance with
regulations of the commissioner adopted for such purpose.
 5. Coordinated collection development program for public and nonprofit
independent colleges and universities.
 a. Libraries of public and nonprofit independent colleges and
universities are entitled to receive annual funding for a coordinated
collection development grant if they meet the following conditions:
 (1) Membership in a reference and research library resources system,
 (2) Their resources are made available to the public, through full
participation in the interlibrary loan and other resource sharing
programs of the reference and research library resources system of which
they are members, and
 (3) They meet the requirements set forth in regulations adopted by the
commissioner including but not confined to
 (a) maintenance of effort,
 (b) relationships between reference and research library resources
systems' programs and the regional higher education master plan,
 (c) submission of interlibrary loan statistics, and such other reports
as may be required by the commissioner.
 b. Public and nonprofit independent colleges and universities with
libraries which meet the criteria of paragraph a of this subdivision are
eligible for annual grants as follows:
 (1) Four thousand four hundred dollars for each institution, and
 (2) One dollar and four cents for each full-time equivalent student
enrolled in each qualifying institution, in the academic year completed
prior to the state fiscal year. For purposes of this section, a
full-time equivalent shall be calculated as follows:
 (i) one full-time undergraduate student shall be considered one
full-time equivalent student;
 (ii) one part-time undergraduate student shall be considered one-third
of a full-time equivalent student;
 (iii) one part-time graduate student shall be considered one full-time
equivalent student; and
 (iv) one full-time graduate student shall be considered one and
one-half of a full-time equivalent student.
 c. Funds for the support of this program shall be appropriated to the
department, except that funds for the state-operated institutions of the
state university of New York and the senior colleges of the city
university of New York, shall be appropriated to the state university of
New York out of any moneys in the state treasury in the general fund to
the credit of the state purposes fund not otherwise appropriated, and
funds shall be appropriated to the city university of New York out of
any moneys in the state treasury in the general fund to the credit of
the local assistance fund not otherwise appropriated, and shall be
subject to the same distribution formula as provided in paragraph b of
this subdivision.
 6. Conservation and preservation of library research materials. a.
The commissioner shall award in any academic year, an annual formula
grant of one hundred fifty-eight thousand dollars for a program of
conservation and/or preservation of library research materials to each
of the following comprehensive research libraries: Columbia university
libraries, Cornell university libraries, New York state library, New
York university libraries, university of Rochester libraries, Syracuse
university libraries, the research libraries of the New York public
library, state university of New York at Albany library, state
university of New York at Binghamton library, state university of New
York at Buffalo library, and state university of New York at Stony Brook
library.
 b. To be eligible for such formula grants, each such comprehensive
research library must submit both a five-year plan and an annual program
budget. The plan must satisfy criteria to be established by the
commissioner in regulations relating to the identification of library
research materials, the need for their preservation, and the means of
their conservation.
 c. Other agencies and libraries, as defined in regulations promulgated
by the commissioner, which are not eligible for funding under paragraph
a of this subdivision, may receive separate grants the sum of which
shall not exceed five hundred thousand dollars in any academic year to
support the preservation and/or conservation of unique library research
materials. Such agencies and libraries shall submit project proposals.
Approval of such project proposals, and determination of funding level,
shall be based upon, but not limited to, factors such as: the research
value of materials to be preserved and/or conserved; appropriateness of
conservation and preservation techniques in accordance with statewide
planning and national standards; institutional capacity for successful
completion of the project, including facilities, experience, and
technical expertise; availability of staff with appropriate training and
expertise; contribution of the institution to the project in matching
funds and staff resources; and the volume of interlibrary lending and
access to holdings by the public. Ninety percent of each such grant
shall be payable upon approval by the department and the remaining ten
percent shall be payable upon project completion.
 d. Funds made available under the provisions of this section may be
used by comprehensive research libraries and other agencies eligible for
funding to obtain matching funds from the national endowment for the
humanities preservation program and other federal programs.
 e. The commissioner shall establish an office for coordination of
conservation and/or preservation of library research materials to
identify the conservation and/or preservation needs of libraries within
the state, to assess the technology available for such conservation and
preservation, and to coordinate the conservation and preservation
efforts resulting from this legislation.
 7. New York state talking book and braille library. The New York state
talking book and braille library shall be entitled to receive annually
an amount equal to the product of the aid ceiling multiplied by the
number of registered borrowers of such materials of such library as of
the November report for the November immediately preceding the state
fiscal year for which the payment will be made. Such amount shall be
used to improve the quality of services provided to such borrowers. For
aid payable in each state fiscal year, the aid ceiling per registered
borrower shall be nineteen dollars. Notwithstanding any other provision
of law, the New York state talking book and braille library shall be the
successor in interest to the New York state library for the blind and
visually handicapped for all purposes, or the library for the blind and
physically handicapped, and the change in name shall not affect the
rights or interests of any party. Except where the context indicates a
contrary intent, any reference in any other general or special law to
the New York state library for the blind and visually handicapped or the
library for the blind and physically handicapped shall be deemed a
reference to the New York state talking book and braille library.
 8. State aid for a coordinated program of library and archival
services at The Center for Jewish History, Inc. a. In addition to any
other sums provided to The Center for Jewish History, Inc., the
commissioner shall award in any state fiscal year an annual grant of two
hundred thousand dollars for a coordinated program of library and
archival services that will increase public access to the library and
archival collections of The Center for Jewish History, Inc. and its
member institutions.
 b. The Center for Jewish History, Inc. is hereby admitted to the
University of the State of New York and shall, as a condition of
continued receipt of aid, maintain such status in accordance with
regulations of the commissioner. Such regulations may include submission
of a five-year plan and annual program budget.
 9. State aid for summer reading programs. The commissioner is hereby
authorized to expend the funds of the love your library fund,
established in section ninety-nine-l of the state finance law, which
shall provide grants for participation in statewide summer reading
programs as coordinated by the state library to public library systems
on the basis of criteria to be developed by the commissioner. Upon a
determination by the commissioner that there is adequate revenue
available for a grant program in the upcoming fiscal year, grants shall
be awarded as follows:
 a. sixty percent of the funds appropriated pursuant to this section
shall be made available to public library systems for use by member
libraries by the commissioner in such manner as to insure that the ratio
of the amount received within each system to the whole of the aid made
available pursuant to this paragraph is no greater than the ratio of the
population served by such system to the population of the state; and
 b. forty percent of the funds appropriated pursuant to this section
shall be made available to library systems for use by their member
libraries within each system by the commissioner in such manner as to
insure that an equal amount is received within each system in the state.
 10. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, each
year commencing with the two thousand six calendar year, no library or
library system shall receive less aid pursuant to this section or
section two hundred seventy-one or two hundred seventy-two of this part
than it would have been eligible to receive for the two thousand one
calendar year solely by reason of a decrease in the population of the
area served as a result of the latest approved federal census.
 11. The commissioner is hereby authorized to expend funds annually for
formula grants to public library systems, reference and research library
resources systems, and school library systems operating under an
approved plan of service. Such formula grants shall be provided for the
period commencing July first and ending on June thirtieth next
following. Such formula grants will be distributed in the following
manner:
 a. Each public library system established pursuant to sections two
hundred fifty-five and two hundred seventy-two of this part and
operating under a plan approved by the commissioner is entitled to
receive annually thirty-nine thousand dollars and an amount equal to ten
and ninety-four hundredths percent of the amount of state aid received
for the current year by such system under paragraphs a, c, d, e and n of
subdivision one of this section;
 b. Each reference and research library resources system established
pursuant to section two hundred seventy-two of this part and operating
under a plan approved by the commissioner is entitled to receive
annually thirty-nine thousand dollars and an amount equal to ten and
ninety-four hundredths percent of the amount of state aid received for
the current year under clause (i) of subparagraph one of paragraph a of
subdivision four of this section; and
 c. Each school library system established pursuant to section two
hundred eighty-two of this part and operating under a plan approved by
the commissioner is entitled to receive annually thirty-nine thousand
dollars and an amount equal to ten and ninety-four hundredths percent of
the amount of state aid received for the current year by such system
under paragraphs a, b, c, d, e and f of subdivision one of section two
hundred eighty-four of this part.
 § 273-a. State aid for library construction. 1. State aid shall be
provided for up to fifty percent of the total project approved costs,
excluding feasibility studies, plans or similar activities, for projects
for the installation and infrastructure of broadband services, and for
the acquisition of vacant land and the acquisition, construction,
renovation or rehabilitation, including leasehold improvements, of
buildings of public libraries and library systems chartered by the
regents of the state of New York or established by act of the
legislature subject to the limitations provided in subdivision six of
this section and upon approval by the commissioner, except that state
aid may be provided for up to ninety percent of the total project
approved costs for buildings of public libraries that are located in an
economically disadvantaged community. Provided however that the state
liability for aid paid pursuant to this section shall be limited to
funds appropriated for such purpose. Aid shall be provided on approved
expenses incurred during the period commencing July first and ending
June thirtieth for up to six years, or until the project is completed,
whichever occurs first. Fifty percent of such aid shall be payable to
each system or library upon approval of the application by the
department. Forty percent of such aid shall be payable in the next state
fiscal year. The remaining ten percent shall be payable upon project
completion.
 2. Each single building project application for state aid shall be
submitted by the board of trustees of the library or library system
responsible for the operation of the subject building to the
commissioner for the commissioner's review and approval, after having
been reviewed and approved by the governing board of the public library
system of which such library is a member. Each single building project
application shall:
 a. demonstrate that resources are or shall be available to provide for
maximum utilization of the project if approved;
 b. contain verification in such form as may be acceptable to the
commissioner that the total cost of the project, exclusive of state aid,
has been or will be obtained;
 c. demonstrate that library operations would be made more economical
as a consequence of approval;
 d. be limited to one project concerning such building, provided that
no building shall be the subject of more than one single building
project application per year;
 e. contain documentation, where such an application requests state aid
in an amount greater than seventy-five percent, demonstrating how the
project will address the service needs of one or more economically
disadvantaged communities. Such documentation may demonstrate need
through poverty rates, concentrations of English language learners, low
high school graduation rates, limited fiscal capacity or other relevant
factors; and
 f. provide such other information as may be required by the
commissioner.
 3. Coordinated applications for state aid allocated under paragraph b
of subdivision six of this section shall be submitted by the public
library system. The public library system shall be responsible for
managing all coordinated projects. Each coordinated project application
shall be approved by the board of trustees of each participating library
and library system responsible for the operation of the said buildings.
Coordinated project applications shall be submitted to the commissioner
for the commissioner's review and approval, after having been reviewed
and approved by the governing board of the public library system of
which such libraries are members. Each coordinated project application
shall:
 a. demonstrate that resources are or shall be available to provide for
maximum utilization of the project if approved;
 b. contain verification in such form as may be acceptable to the
commissioner that the total cost of the project, exclusive of state aid,
has been or will be obtained;
 c. demonstrate that library operations would be made more economical
as a consequence of approval;
 d. provide that no one building shall be the subject of more than one
coordinated project application per year;
 e. contain documentation, where such an application requests state aid
in an amount greater than seventy-five percent, demonstrating how the
project will address the service needs of one or more economically
disadvantaged communities. Such documentation may demonstrate need
through poverty rates, concentrations of English language learners, low
high school graduation rates, limited fiscal capacity or other relevant
factors; and
 f. provide such other information as may be required by the
commissioner.
 4. In approving any single or coordinated building project application
that would receive state aid beyond seventy-five percent of the total
project approved costs, the board of trustees of the library system
shall give particular attention to addressing the library service needs
of economically disadvantaged communities as provided for in paragraph e
of subdivision two of this section or paragraph e of subdivision three
of this section, as applicable.
 5. In approving any new single building or coordinated project
application the commissioner shall consider the condition of existing
libraries and, where appropriate, the needs of isolated or economically
disadvantaged communities, provided that no application shall be
approved for a project that is deemed by the commissioner to have been
completed prior to the date of the application.
 6. Aid shall be distributed pursuant to this section as follows:
 a. sixty percent of the funds appropriated pursuant to this section
shall be made available to libraries within each system by the
commissioner in such manner as to insure that the ratio of the amount
received within each system to the whole of the aid made available
pursuant to this paragraph is no greater than the ratio of the
population served by such system to the population of the state;
 b. forty percent of the funds appropriated pursuant to this section
shall be made available to library systems or libraries within each
system by the commissioner in such manner as to insure that an equal
amount is received within each system in the state;
 c. any funds made available pursuant to paragraph a or b of this
subdivision which by April first of each succeeding fiscal year, are
declined by such libraries or library systems for any reason, or which
cannot otherwise be used by such libraries or library systems for any
reason, shall be made available by the commissioner to other eligible
libraries within such system, or if no such library can use such funds
shall be reallocated among the other library systems and their libraries
in a manner that will to the extent possible provide from such
reallocated funds an equal amount to each such system.
 7. The commissioner shall adopt rules and regulations as are necessary
to carry out the purposes and provisions of this section.
 8. The commissioner shall submit to the temporary president of the
senate and the speaker of the assembly an annual report describing those
projects that have received state funding of greater than fifty percent
of project costs and the communities to be served by those projects.
 § 274. Use and care of school library. The school library shall be a
part of the school equipment and shall be kept in the school building at
all times. Such library shall be devoted to the exclusive use of the
school, except as otherwise provided by the rules of the commissioner of
education and except in a district where there is no free library, in
which case such school library shall be a circulating library for the
use of the residents of the district.
 The commissioner of education shall prescribe rules regulating
 1. The purchase, recording, safekeeping and loaning of books in school
libraries, and the use of such books by pupils and teachers in the
public schools.
 2. The conditions under which books in a school library may be used by
the public in a district in which a free library is situated.
 3. The management of school libraries and their use as circulating
libraries by the residents of the district in which they are situated.
 4. The contents and submission of reports of school librarians,
teachers and other school authorities as to school libraries.
 § 275. Librarians of school libraries. In a school district
maintaining an academic department or high school the board of education
may employ, and fix the compensation of, a person to act as school
librarian who may be engaged for all or a part of the time in
performance of the duties of the position as may be directed by the said
board. The person so employed, who may be the librarian of the free
library, shall be possessed of the qualifications prescribed by the
commissioner of education. In all other districts the trustees or board
of education may appoint a competent person to act as librarian. In
case of a failure of a city or union free school district maintaining an
academic department or high school to employ a librarian as above
provided, the teacher of English in such school shall be the librarian.
In case of a failure to appoint a librarian in any other district, the
teacher, or if there be more than one teacher the principal teacher,
shall act as librarian. The trustees or board of education shall report
to the commissioner of education the name and address of the person
employed or appointed as librarian.
 § 276. Existing rules continued in force. All existing provisions of
law and rules established by the commissioner of education for the
management of public school libraries shall hold good as to the
management of such school libraries until altered by or in pursuance of
law.
 § 277. Authority to raise and receive money for school library. Each
city and school district in the state is hereby authorized to raise
moneys by tax in the same manner as other school moneys are raised, or
to receive moneys by gift or devise, for starting, extending or caring
for the school library.
 § 278. Authority to transfer school library property to a free
library. The board of education in any city or union free school
district or the electors of any other district, by legal vote duly
approved by the regents, may give to any free library any of the books
or other public school library property not required in such school
library, provided such free library is registered by the regents and
situated in such city or district; and the school authorities or body
making the transfer shall thereafter be relieved of all responsibility
pertaining to the property so transferred.
 § 279. Fees. A fee of five dollars shall be paid for each public
librarian's certificate or school librarian's certificate issued under
part two of this article.
 § 280. Penalty for disobedience to library law, rules or orders. The
commissioner of education is hereby authorized to withhold its share of
public school moneys from any city or district which uses school library
moneys for any other purpose than that for which they are provided, or
for any wilful neglect or disobedience of the law or the rules or orders
of said commissioner in the premises.
 § 281. Loans and extensions of credit to infants. A contract hereafter
made by an infant after he has attained the age of sixteen years in
relation to obtaining a loan or extension of credit from an institution
of the university of the state of New York in connection with such
infant's attendance upon a course of instruction offered by such
institution, or from a bank, trust company or national bank having a
principal, branch or trust office in this state for the purpose of
defraying all or a portion of the expenses of such infant's attendance
upon a course of instruction in an institution of the university of the
state of New York or any other institution for higher education without
this state which is a member of or accredited by an accrediting agency
recognized by the department, may not be disaffirmed by him on the
ground of infancy.
 § 282. Establishment of school library systems. The commissioner is
authorized to approve the establishment of school library systems, each
system to be composed of school districts which are located within a
board of cooperative educational services area, or a school district
serving a city with a population of one hundred twenty-five thousand or
more, or combinations thereof. The systems may include non-public school
libraries as defined in regulations to be promulgated by the
commissioner. Upon establishment, such school library systems shall be
governed by either their respective boards of cooperative educational
services, by boards of education in school districts serving cities with
populations of one hundred twenty-five thousand or more, or by a
governing body established under the plan to be submitted to the
commissioner in cases of systems serving a combination of areas.
 § 283. Functions of school library systems. The functions of school
library systems shall include but not be limited to: (a) creating and
developing a union catalog of materials listing the resources of each
participating school library; (b) developing a plan which will aid each
participating school library in cooperative collection development; (c)
adopting and implementing an interlibrary loan policy and program among
participating school libraries; (d) assuring a method of effective
delivery of library materials within the system; (e) promoting
development programs and continuing education for staff of participating
schools; (f) encouraging awareness of the resources and services
available in participating school libraries; and (g) cooperating with
other library systems in resource sharing and other activities.
 § 284. State aid for school library systems. 1. Each school library
system established pursuant to section two hundred eighty-two of this
part and operating under a plan approved by the commissioner shall be
eligible to receive funding under this section consisting of the
following amounts:
 a. Each school library system with a public and nonpublic school
enrollment of less than one hundred thousand students shall receive a
base grant of eighty-three thousand dollars;
 b. Each school library system with a public and nonpublic school
enrollment of one hundred thousand students but less than two hundred
thousand students shall receive a base grant of ninety thousand dollars;
 c. Each school library system with a public and nonpublic school
enrollment of two hundred thousand students but less than five hundred
thousand students shall receive a base grant of one hundred twenty-three
thousand dollars; and
 d. Each school library system with a public and nonpublic school
enrollment of more than five hundred thousand students shall receive a
base grant of eight hundred ninety-seven thousand dollars.
 e. In addition to the base grant provided in paragraph a, b, c or d of
this subdivision, each school library system shall receive annually:
 (1) twenty-nine cents per student enrolled in the public and nonpublic
schools located within such system, and
 (2) five hundred dollars per public school district located within
such system, and a minimum of four thousand three hundred dollars per
system located within a board of cooperative educational services area,
or five thousand dollars per city school district of a city with a
population of one hundred twenty-five thousand inhabitants or more, and
 (3) two dollars and forty-five cents per square mile of the school
library system.
 f. In addition to any other sum provided in this subdivision, any
school library system formed through an act of merger since January
first, nineteen hundred eighty-four shall receive fifty thousand dollars
annually for each approved act of merger, provided, however, that any
school library system formed through an act of merger on or after April
first, two thousand eight shall receive ninety thousand dollars annually
for each approved act of merger.
 g. In addition to any other sum provided in this subdivision, each
school library system shall be eligible to receive annually an
automation grant amounting to ten percent of the total aid produced for
that system by adding the base grant provided by paragraph a, b, c or d
of this subdivision to the additional aid provided by paragraphs e and f
of this subdivision.
 2. Before a school library system shall be entitled to receive
operating funds, such system shall submit a plan of library service to
the commissioner for approval. The commissioner shall establish
standards of service for school library systems by regulation. Such
regulations shall contain standards relating to: system staffing; union
catalog and data-base development; interlibrary loan; communications and
delivery; governance and advisory committees; membership criteria and
the means of relating district library resources and programs to those
of the system; non-public school participation; and procedures for
submission and approval of plans and certification of membership.
 3. The moneys made available pursuant to this section shall be
distributed to each school library system whose plan of service has been
approved under the provisions of subdivision two of this section.
 4. Each school library system receiving state aid pursuant to this
section shall furnish such information regarding its library service as
the commissioner may from time to time require to determine whether it
is operating in accordance with its plan and the standards of service
the commissioner has established. The commissioner may at any time after
affording notice and an opportunity to be heard, revoke approval of a
plan of library service if the commissioner finds that the school
library system no longer conforms to its approved plan, the provisions
of this section or the regulations promulgated by the commissioner
hereunder; or, in the case of provisional approval, if such school
library system no longer conforms to the agreement, plans or conditions
upon which such provisional approval was based. In such case a school
library system shall not thereafter be entitled to state aid pursuant to
this section unless and until its plan of library service is again
approved by the commissioner.
 § 285. State aid for cooperation with correctional facilities. 1. Each
public library system operating under an approved plan of service which
has a state correctional facility or facilities within its area of
service shall be awarded an annual grant of nine dollars twenty-five
cents per capita for the incarcerated individual population of such
facility or facilities to make available to the incarcerated individual
population of such facility or facilities, in direct coordination with
the correctional facilities libraries, the library resources of such
system. The commissioner shall adopt any regulations necessary to carry
out the purposes and provisions of this subdivision.
 2. The commissioner is authorized to expend up to one hundred
seventy-five thousand dollars annually to provide grants to public
library systems operating under an approved plan of service for
provision of services to county jail facilities. Such formula grants
shall assist the library system in making available to the incarcerated
individual population of such facility or facilities the library
resources of such system. Such grants shall be available to each public
library system in such manner as to insure that the ratio of the amount
each system is eligible to receive equals the ratio of the number of
incarcerated individuals served by the county jail facility to the total
number of incarcerated individuals served by county jail facilities in
the state as of July first of the year preceding the calendar year in
which the state aid to public library systems is to be paid.
Incarcerated individual populations shall be certified by the New York
state commission of correction. The commissioner shall adopt any
regulations necessary to carry out the purposes and provisions of this
subdivision.
 PART III
 FEDERAL FUNDS FOR VOCATIONAL EDUCATION
 § 290. Acceptance of law of the United States. The state of New York
hereby accepts all of the provisions and the benefits of an act passed
by the senate and house of representatives of the United States of
America, in congress assembled, entitled "An act to provide for the
promotion of vocational education; to provide for cooperation with the
states in the promotion of such education in agriculture and the trades
and industries; to provide for co-operation with the states in the
preparation of teachers of vocational subjects; and to appropriate money
and regulate its expenditure," approved February twenty-third, nineteen
hundred seventeen.
 § 291. Custodian of funds. The state commissioner of taxation and
finance and the state comptroller are hereby constituted and appointed
the joint custodians of the moneys paid to the state of New York for
vocational education, under the provisions of such act, and such moneys
shall be paid out in the manner provided by such act for the purposes
therein specified.
 § 292. Board of regents to co-operate with federal board. The regents
of The University of the State of New York are hereby designated as the
state board for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of
such act, and are hereby authorized and directed to co-operate with the
federal board of vocational education in the administration and
enforcement of its provisions, and to perform such official acts and
exercise such powers as may be necessary to entitle the state to receive
its benefits.
 ARTICLE 6
Section 293. Establishment of interstate library district.
 294. Appointment of members of governing board of interstate
 library district.
 295. Support of interstate library district.
 296. Compact administrator.
 297. Withdrawal.
 § 293. Establishment of interstate library district. One or more
incorporated public libraries of this state, by majority action of the
board of trustees thereof, may enter into an agreement with one or more
public library agencies in another state or states which have adopted
the interstate library compact for the purpose of establishing and
maintaining an interstate library district. For the purposes of this
act, a cooperative library system established under article five of this
chapter shall be deemed to be a public library.
 § 294. Appointment of members of governing board of interstate library
district. (a) The board of trustees of each public library which is a
party to an agreement establishing an interstate library district
pursuant to section two hundred ninety-three of this article, shall
appoint a member or members to represent such library on the governing
board of such interstate library district. The number of such
representatives shall be determined by the agreement establishing such
interstate library district.
 (b) The governing board of such interstate library district shall be a
body corporate.
 (c) Such governing board shall administer such interstate library
district as provided in this act.
 § 295. Support of interstate library district. Any library, library
system, county, city, village, town or school district of this state may
provide funds, including funds received from local taxation for state
aid for the support and operation of an interstate library district
established as provided herein, in accordance with the terms of the
agreement establishing the same provided that such agreement together
with the plan of library service thereunder has been approved by the
commissioner.
 § 296. Compact administrator. The commissioner of education shall be
the administrator for the interstate library compact pursuant to article
ten of the compact.
 § 297. Withdrawal. The commissioner of education is hereby designated
as the official who is authorized to send and receive the notices
provided in article eleven of the compact in the event of withdrawal of
this state or any other state from the compact.
 ARTICLE 7
 COMMISSIONER OF EDUCATION
Section 301. Commissioner of education continued.
 302. How chosen.
 303. Term of office.
 304. Expenses.
 305. General powers and duties.
 306. Removal of school officers; withholding public money.
 307. Acquisition of real property.
 308. Other powers.
 309. Schools of union free school districts and cities.
 309-a. Twenty-first century schools program.
 310. Appeals or petitions to commissioner of education and
 other proceedings.
 311. Powers of commissioner upon appeals or petitions, et
 cetera.
 312. Filed papers and copies thereof.
 313. Unfair educational practices.
 313-a. Prohibition against the use of certain material in
 questionnaires and applications for admission to
 educational institutions.
 314. State plan for school district reorganization.
 315. School district names.
 316. Teacher resource and computer training centers.
 317. General education development exam.
 318. Distribution of surplus computers.
 319. Establishment of dual enrollment program policy.
 319*2. Center for dyslexia and dysgraphia.
 § 301. Commissioner of education continued. The office of
commissioner of education is hereby continued. Subject to the general
direction and control of the regents of the university, he shall
continue to have, exercise and perform the functions, powers and duties
conferred or imposed by law upon the commissioner of education. He shall
continue to exercise the judicial functions conferred by law upon the
commissioner of education and, subject to rules of the regents, to make,
execute and issue in the name of the department such determinations,
decisions, orders, notices and certificates as may be required for the
exercise and performance of the functions, powers and duties conferred
or imposed upon the department. With the approval of the board of
regents, he shall continue to prepare the annual estimates and requests
for appropriations for operation, maintenance and construction of the
New York state school for the blind. All moneys appropriated for the
New York school for the blind, or derived from other sources in the
course of the administration thereof, shall be expended upon vouchers
approved by the commissioner of education, when and in the manner
authorized by the board of regents. The regents may adopt rules
conferring and imposing upon the commissioner of education such
additional powers and duties as may be required for the effective
administration of the department and of the state system of education.
 § 302. How chosen. The commissioner of education shall be elected by
a majority vote of the regents. Residence without the state of New York
shall not disqualify him from election.
 § 303. Term of office. The commissioner of education shall serve
during the pleasure of the board of regents.
 § 304. Expenses. The commissioner shall be paid his necessary
traveling and other expenses. However, notwithstanding any law, rule,
regulation or agreement to the contrary, the commissioner shall not be
provided an official residence, nor shall the salary plan for the
president of the university of the state of New York, as provided in
subdivision three of section one hundred sixty-nine of the executive
law, make provision for an official residence. The commissioner of the
office of general services is authorized to sell at fair market value
any official residence formerly provided to the commissioner or to the
president of the university of the state of New York, as well as all
state-owned appurtenances associated with such residence. The proceeds
from such sale shall be deposited to the credit of the general fund.
 § 305. General powers and duties. The commissioner of education is
hereby charged with the following powers and duties:
 1. He is the chief executive officer of the state system of education
and of the board of regents. He shall enforce all general and special
laws relating to the educational system of the state and execute all
educational policies determined upon by the board of regents.
 2. He shall have general supervision over all schools and institutions
which are subject to the provisions of this chapter, or of any statute
relating to education, and shall cause the same to be examined and
inspected, and shall advise and guide the school officers of all
districts and cities of the state in relation to their duties and the
general management of the schools under their control. Additionally, he
shall cause to be prepared and distributed to school officers of all
districts, nonpublic schools and cities of the state timely notice as to
alternate sources of funding for specific programs or purposes such as,
but not limited to, grants to be awarded on the basis of competitive
proposals by state or federal agencies or from an approved private
source. Such notice shall include information as to proposal submission
deadlines, eligibility standards and other relevant information to
assist school officers in making application for such alternate sources
of funding. The commissioner shall not be liable for any damages
resulting from failure to give notice under this subdivision.
 3. He shall have general supervision of industrial schools, trade
schools and schools of agriculture, mechanic arts and home making; he
shall prescribe regulations governing the licensing of the teachers
employed therein; and he is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to
provide for the inspection of such schools, to take necessary action to
make effectual the provisions therefor, and to advise and assist boards
of education in the several cities and school districts in the
establishment, organization and management of such schools.
 4. He shall also have general supervision over the state teachers
colleges and state colleges for teachers which have been, or which may
hereafter be, established as required by the provisions of this chapter.
 5. He shall be ex officio a trustee of Cornell university.
 6. He shall be responsible for the safe keeping and proper use of the
department and university seal and of the books, records and other
property in charge of the regents, and for the proper administration and
discipline of the various officers and divisions of the education
department.
 7. The commissioner may annul upon cause shown to his or her
satisfaction any certificate of qualification granted to a teacher by
any authority whatever or declare any diploma issued by a state teachers
college and state colleges for teachers ineffective and null as a
qualification to teach a public school within this state, and the
commissioner may reconsider and reverse his or her action in any such
matter. In a proceeding brought pursuant to this subdivision on charges
against a certified teacher, the commissioner shall also be authorized
to impose as a penalty:
 a. suspension of a teaching certificate or license:
 (1) wholly for a fixed period of time; or
 (2) partially, until the teacher successfully completes a course of
retraining in the area to which the suspension applies; or
 (3) wholly, until the teacher successfully completes a course of
therapy or treatment;
 b. limitation of the scope of a teaching certificate through
revocation of an extension to teach additional subjects or grades;
 c. a fine not to exceed five thousand dollars; or
 d. a requirement that the teacher pursue a course of continuing
education or training.
 The attorney general shall, at the request of the commissioner or the
director of the division of the budget, bring an action in the name of
the people of the state of New York to enforce and collect any fine
imposed pursuant to this subdivision. In any such action, the findings
and determination of the hearing officer or hearing panel or of the
commissioner shall be admissible evidence and shall be conclusive proof
of the violation and the penalty assessed. For purposes of this
subdivision, the term "teacher" shall mean any professional educator
holding a teaching certificate or license, including but not limited to
a classroom teacher, teaching assistant, pupil personnel services
professional, school administrator or supervisor or superintendent of
schools.
 7-a. a. In addition to the authority to revoke and annul a certificate
of qualification of a teacher in a proceeding brought pursuant to
subdivision seven of this section, the commissioner shall be authorized,
and it shall be his or her duty, to revoke and annul in accordance with
this subdivision the teaching certificate of a teacher convicted of a
sex offense for which registration as a sex offender is required
pursuant to article six-C of the correction law or of any other violent
felony offense or offenses committed against a child when such child was
the intended victim of such offense.
 b. As used in this subdivision, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
 (1) "conviction" means any conviction whether by plea of guilty or
nolo contendere or from a verdict after trial or otherwise;
 (2) "sex offense" means an offense set forth in subdivision two or
three of section one hundred sixty-eight-a of the correction law,
including an offense committed in any jurisdiction for which the
offender is required to register as a sex offender in New York;
 (3) "teacher" means any professional educator holding a teaching
certificate as defined in subparagraph four of this paragraph, including
but not limited to a classroom teacher, teaching assistant, pupil
personnel services professional, school administrator or supervisor or
superintendent of schools;
 (4) "teaching certificate" means the certificate or license or other
certificate of qualification granted to a teacher by any authority
whatsoever; and
 (5) "violent felony offense" means any offense as defined in
subdivision one of section 70.02 of the penal law.
 c. Upon receipt of a certified copy of a criminal history record
showing that a teacher has been convicted of a sex offense or sex
offenses or a violent felony offense or offenses committed against a
child when such child was the intended victim of such offense or upon
receipt of notice of such a conviction as provided in paragraph d of
this subdivision, the commissioner shall automatically revoke and annul
the teaching certificate of such teacher without the right to a hearing.
The commissioner shall mail notice of the revocation and annulment
pursuant to this subdivision by certified mail, return receipt
requested, and by first-class mail directed to the teacher at such
teacher's last known address and, if different, the last address filed
by the certificate holder with the commissioner and to the teacher's
counsel of record in the criminal proceeding as reported in the notice
pursuant to paragraph d of this subdivision. Such notice shall inform
the teacher that his or her certificate has been revoked and annulled,
identify the sex offense or sex offenses or violent felony offense or
offenses committed against a child when such child was the intended
victim of such offense of which the teacher has been convicted and shall
set forth the procedure to follow if the teacher denies he or she is the
person who has been so convicted. If such teacher notifies the
commissioner in writing within twenty-five days after the date of
receipt of the notice that he or she is not the same person as the
convicted offender identified in the criminal record or identified
pursuant to paragraph d of this subdivision, provides proof to
reasonably support such claim and the commissioner is satisfied the
proof establishes such claim, the commissioner shall, within five
business days of the receipt of such proof, restore such teacher's
teaching certificate retroactive to the date of revocation and
annulment.
 d. Upon conviction of a teacher of a sex offense defined in this
subdivision, the district attorney or other prosecuting authority who
obtained such conviction shall provide notice of such conviction to the
commissioner identifying the sex offense or sex offenses or violent
felony offense or offenses committed against a child when such child was
the intended victim of such offense of which the teacher has been
convicted, the name and address of such offender and other identifying
information prescribed by the commissioner, including the offender's
date of birth and social security number, to the extent consistent with
federal and state laws governing personal privacy and confidentiality of
information. Such notice shall also include the name and business
address of the offender's counsel of record in the criminal proceeding.
 e. Upon receipt of proof that the conviction or convictions that
formed the basis for revocation and annulment of the teacher's teaching
certificate pursuant to this subdivision have been set aside upon appeal
or otherwise reversed, vacated or annulled, the commissioner shall be
required to conduct a due process hearing pursuant to subdivision seven
of this section and part eighty-three of title eight of the New York
codes, rules and regulations prior to making a determination as to
whether to reinstate the teacher's original teaching certificate. Such
determination shall be made within ninety days after such proof has been
received.
 f. Except as provided in paragraph g of this subdivision, and
notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, a teacher
shall be reinstated to his or her position of employment in a public
school, with full back pay and benefits from the date his or her
certificate was revoked or annulled to the date of such reinstatement,
under the following circumstances:
 (i) The termination of employment was based solely on the conviction
of a sex offense, or conviction of a violent felony offense or offenses
committed against a child when such child was the intended victim of
such offense or the revocation or annulment of a certificate based on
such conviction, and such conviction has been set aside on appeal or
otherwise reversed, vacated or annulled and the commissioner has
reinstated the teacher's certification pursuant to paragraph e of this
subdivision; or
 (ii) The termination of employment was based solely on the conviction
of a sex offense or violent felony offense or offenses committed against
a child when such child was the intended victim of such offense and it
has been determined that the teacher is not the same person as the
convicted offender.
 g. If a teacher's employment was terminated as a result of a
disciplinary proceeding conducted pursuant to section three thousand
twenty-a of this chapter or other disciplinary hearing conducted
pursuant to any collective bargaining or contractual agreement on one or
more grounds other than conviction of a sex offense, or the revocation
or annulment of a certificate based on such conviction, then nothing in
paragraph f of this subdivision shall require a school district to
reinstate employment of such teacher or be liable for back pay or
benefits.
 h. No provision of this article shall be deemed to preclude the
following: (i) the commissioner from conducting a due process hearing
pursuant to subdivision seven of this section and part eighty-three of
title eight of the New York codes, rules and regulations; or (ii) a
school district or employing board from bringing a disciplinary
proceeding pursuant to section three thousand twenty-a or three thousand
twenty-b of this chapter; or (iii) a school district or employing board
from bringing an alternative disciplinary proceeding conducted pursuant
to a collective bargaining or contractual agreement.
 i. The commissioner shall be authorized to promulgate any regulations
necessary to implement the provisions of this subdivision.
 7-b. a. In addition to the authority to revoke and annul a certificate
of qualification of a teacher in a proceeding brought pursuant to
subdivisions seven and seven-a of this section, the commissioner shall
be authorized, and it shall be his or her duty, to revoke and annul in
accordance with this subdivision the certificate of a school
administrator or supervisor convicted of an offense listed under
subparagraph two of paragraph b of this subdivision.
 b. As used in this subdivision, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
 (1) "conviction" means any conviction whether by plea of guilty or
nolo contendere or from a verdict after trial or otherwise;
 (2) "offense" means defrauding the government as defined in section
195.20 of the penal law, and any such offense in any other jurisdiction
which includes all of the elements of such felony and for which a
sentence to a term of imprisonment in excess of one year was authorized
and is authorized in such state, irrespective of whether such sentence
was imposed;
 (3) "school administrator or supervisor" means any professional school
district administrator, school administrator or supervisor, or school
business administrator holding a certificate as defined in subparagraph
four of this paragraph; and
 (4) "certificate" means the certificate or license or other
certificate of qualification granted to qualify an individual to serve
as a school administrator or supervisor by any authority whatsoever.
 c. Upon receipt of a certified copy of a criminal history record
showing that a school administrator or supervisor has been convicted of
an offense as defined in subparagraph two of paragraph b of this
subdivision or upon receipt of notice of such a conviction as provided
in paragraph d of this subdivision, the commissioner shall automatically
revoke and annul the certificate of such school administrator or
supervisor without the right to a hearing. The commissioner shall mail
notice of the revocation pursuant to this subdivision by certified mail,
return receipt requested, and by first-class mail directed to the school
administrator's or supervisor's last known address and, if different,
the last address filed by the certificate holder with the commissioner
and to the school administrator's or supervisor's counsel of record in
the criminal proceeding as reported in the notice pursuant to paragraph
d of this subdivision. Such notice shall inform the school administrator
or supervisor that his or her certificate has been revoked and annulled,
identify the offense of which the school administrator or supervisor has
been convicted and shall set forth the procedure to follow if the school
administrator or supervisor denies he or she is the person who has been
so convicted. If such school administrator or supervisor notifies the
commissioner in writing within twenty-five days after the date of
receipt of the notice that he or she is not the same person as the
convicted offender identified in the criminal record, or identified
pursuant to paragraph d of this subdivision, provides proof to
reasonably support such claim and the commissioner is satisfied the
proof establishes such claim, the commissioner shall, within five
business days of the receipt of such proof, restore such school
administrator's or supervisor's teaching certificate retroactive to the
date of revocation and annulment.
 d. Upon conviction of a school administrator or supervisor of an
offense defined in subparagraph two of paragraph b of this subdivision,
the district attorney or other prosecuting authority who obtained such
conviction shall provide notice of such conviction to the commissioner
identifying the offense of which the school administrator or supervisor
has been convicted, the name and address of such offender and other
identifying information prescribed by the commissioner, including the
offender's date of birth and social security number, to the extent
consistent with federal and state laws governing personal privacy and
confidentiality of information. Such district attorney or other
prosecuting authority shall include in such notice the name and business
address of the offender's counsel of record in the criminal proceeding.
 e. Upon receipt of proof that the conviction or convictions that
formed the basis for revocation and annulment of the school
administrator's or supervisor's certificate pursuant to this subdivision
have been set aside upon appeal or otherwise reversed, vacated or
annulled, the commissioner shall be required to conduct a due process
hearing pursuant to subdivision seven of this section and part
eighty-three of title eight of the New York codes, rules and regulations
prior to making a determination as to whether to reinstate the school
administrator's or supervisor's original certificate. Such determination
shall be made within ninety days after such proof has been received.
 f. Except as provided in paragraph g of this subdivision, and
notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, a school
administrator or supervisor shall be reinstated to his or her position
of employment in a public school or public school district, with full
back pay and benefits from the date his or her certificate was revoked
or annulled to the date of such reinstatement, under the following
circumstances:
 (1) The termination of employment was based solely on the conviction
of an offense defined in subparagraph two of paragraph b of this
subdivision, or the revocation or annulment of a certificate based on
such conviction, and such conviction has been set aside on appeal or
otherwise reversed, vacated or annulled and the commissioner has
reinstated the school administrator's or supervisor's certification
pursuant to paragraph e of this subdivision; or
 (2) The termination of employment was based solely on the conviction
of an offense defined in subparagraph two of paragraph b of this
subdivision and it has been determined that the school administrator or
supervisor is not the same person as the convicted offender.
 g. If a school administrator's or supervisor's employment was
terminated as a result of a disciplinary proceeding conducted pursuant
to section three thousand twenty-a of this chapter or other disciplinary
hearing conducted pursuant to any collective bargaining or contractual
agreement on one or more grounds other than conviction of an offense
defined in subparagraph two of paragraph b of this subdivision, or the
revocation or annulment of a certificate based on such conviction, then
nothing in paragraph f of this subdivision shall require a school
district to reinstate the employment of such school administrator or
supervisor or be liable for back pay or benefits.
 h. No provision of this article shall be deemed to preclude the
following: (1) the commissioner from conducting a due process hearing
pursuant to subdivision seven of this section and part eighty-three of
title eight of the New York codes, rules and regulations; or (2) a
school district or employing board from bringing a disciplinary
proceeding pursuant to section three thousand twenty-a of this chapter;
or (3) a school district or employing board from bringing an alternative
disciplinary proceeding conducted pursuant to a collective bargaining or
contractual agreement.
 i. The commissioner shall be authorized to promulgate any regulations
necessary to implement the provisions of this subdivision.
 8. He shall cause to be prepared and keep in his office records of all
persons who have received, or shall receive, certificates of
qualification to teach or diplomas of the state teachers colleges, and
state colleges for teachers, with the dates thereof, and shall note
thereon all annulments of such certificates and diplomas, and reversals
thereof, with the dates and causes thereof, together with such other
particulars as he may deem expedient.
 9. The commissioner shall procure with the consent of the federal
authorities complete lists giving the names, ages and destination within
the state of all noncitizen children of school age and such other facts
as will tend to identify them, and shall deliver copies of such lists to
the several boards of education and school boards in the respective
localities within the state to which said children shall be destined, to
aid in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter relative to the
compulsory attendance at school of children of school age.
 10. He may administer oaths and take affidavits concerning any matter
relating to the duties of his office or pertaining in any way to the
schools of the state or any part thereof.
 11. He is hereby authorized to furnish, by means of pictorial or
graphic representations, additional facilities for instruction in
geography, history, science and kindred subjects, to the schools,
institutions and organizations under the supervision of the regents.
Material collected for this purpose may, under regents' general rules,
be lent for a limited time to responsible institutions and organizations
for the benefit of artisans, mechanics and other citizens of the several
communities of the state. He may from time to time enter into contracts
necessary for carrying out this provision.
 12. The commissioner of education is authorized and directed to
establish and provide for the maintenance and conduct of courses of
study or training in state teachers colleges and state colleges for
teachers and in colleges and universities and other educational
institutions and in connection with other educational agencies for the
purpose of training teachers in principles and methods of instruction,
and to give them knowledge to fit them to instruct foreign born and
native adults and minors over sixteen years of age in evening,
extension, factory, home and community classes. Such courses of study
shall be prescribed by the commissioner of education and shall continue
for a period of not less than one year. No teacher employed to instruct
foreign born and native adults and minors over sixteen years of age
shall be employed by the state or compensated in whole or in part by the
state, unless he shall have completed such course of study or training
or shall have an equivalent thereof to be determined under the
regulations of the commissioner of education. A special certificate
shall be issued to teachers who have completed such course of study or a
course of instruction which is equivalent thereto, provided, however,
that temporary permits may be issued by the commissioner of education to
teachers who are qualified to give such instruction pending the
completion of such a course of study or training.
 12-a. The commissioner shall evaluate the effectiveness of all teacher
preparation programs in the state, and the timelines and costs of
developing or modifying data systems to collect the necessary data. Such
study shall consider measuring the effectiveness of such programs based
on the academic performance of their students and graduates and through
other measures. The commissioner shall consult with the chancellors of
the state university of New York and the city university of New York,
and other representatives of institutions of higher education. Upon
completion of such study, the commissioner shall make recommendations to
the board of regents on implementation of such methodologies.
 13. The commissioner of education or the board of education or
trustees of any city or school district may provide for the
establishment of courses of instruction or study and schools in
connection with factories, places of employment, or in such other places
as he or they may deem advisable, for the purpose of giving instruction
to foreign-born and native adults and minors over the age of sixteen
years. Such course of instruction or study shall include instruction in
English, history, civics and other subjects tending to promote good
citizenship and to increase vocational efficiency. Such course of
instruction and study shall be prescribed by the regents of the
university of the state of New York, and shall be in conformity with
rules to be adopted by them.
 14. a. All contracts for the transportation of school children, all
contracts to maintain school buses owned or leased by a school district
that are used for the transportation of school children, all contracts
for mobile instructional units, and all contracts to provide, maintain
and operate cafeteria or restaurant service by a private food service
management company shall be subject to the approval of the commissioner,
who may disapprove a proposed contract if, in his opinion, the best
interests of the district will be promoted thereby. Except as provided
in paragraph e of this subdivision, all such contracts involving an
annual expenditure in excess of the amount specified for purchase
contracts in the bidding requirements of the general municipal law shall
be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, which responsibility shall
be determined by the board of education or the trustee of a district,
with power hereby vested in the commissioner to reject any or all bids
if, in his opinion, the best interests of the district will be promoted
thereby and, upon such rejection of all bids, the commissioner shall
order the board of education or trustee of the district to seek, obtain
and consider new proposals. All proposals for such transportation,
maintenance, mobile instructional units, or cafeteria and restaurant
service shall be in such form as the commissioner may prescribe.
Advertisement for bids shall be published in a newspaper or newspapers
designated by the board of education or trustee of the district having
general circulation within the district for such purpose. Such
advertisement shall contain a statement of the time when and place where
all bids received pursuant to such advertisement will be publicly opened
and read either by the school authorities or by a person or persons
designated by them. All bids received shall be publicly opened and read
at the time and place so specified. At least five days shall elapse
between the first publication of such advertisement and the date so
specified for the opening and reading of bids. The requirement for
competitive bidding shall not apply to an award of a contract for the
transportation of pupils or a contract for mobile instructional units,
if such award is based on an evaluation of proposals in response to a
request for proposals pursuant to paragraph e of this subdivision. The
requirement for competitive bidding shall not apply to annual, biennial,
or triennial extensions of a contract nor shall the requirement for
competitive bidding apply to quadrennial or quinquennial year extensions
of a contract involving transportation of pupils, maintenance of school
buses or mobile instructional units secured either through competitive
bidding or through evaluation of proposals in response to a request for
proposals pursuant to paragraph e of this subdivision, when such
extensions (1) are made by the board of education or the trustee of a
district, under rules and regulations prescribed by the commissioner,
and, (2) do not extend the original contract period beyond five years
from the date cafeteria and restaurant service commenced thereunder and
in the case of contracts for the transportation of pupils, for the
maintenance of school buses or for mobile instructional units, that such
contracts may be extended, except that power is hereby vested in the
commissioner, in addition to his existing statutory authority to approve
or disapprove transportation or maintenance contracts, (i) to reject any
extension of a contract beyond the initial term thereof if he finds that
amount to be paid by the district to the contractor in any year of such
proposed extension fails to reflect any decrease in the regional
consumer price index for the N.Y., N.Y.-Northeastern, N.J. area, based
upon the index for all urban consumers (CPI-U) during the preceding
twelve month period; and (ii) to reject any extension of a contract
after ten years from the date transportation or maintenance service
commenced thereunder, or mobile instructional units were first provided,
if in his opinion, the best interests of the district will be promoted
thereby. Upon such rejection of any proposed extension, the commissioner
may order the board of education or trustee of the district to seek,
obtain and consider bids pursuant to the provisions of this section. The
board of education or the trustee of a school district electing to
extend a contract as provided herein, may, in its discretion, increase
the amount to be paid in each year of the contract extension by an
amount not to exceed the regional consumer price index increase for the
N.Y., N.Y.-Northeastern, N.J. area, based upon the index for all urban
consumers (CPI-U), during the preceding twelve month period, provided it
has been satisfactorily established by the contractor that there has
been at least an equivalent increase in the amount of his cost of
operation, during the period of the contract.
 b. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph a of this subdivision,
in the case of any emergency arising out of an accident or other
unforeseen occurrence or condition affecting pupil transportation
services within a district, and requiring immediate action which cannot
await competitive bidding, interim contracts for pupil transportation
services may be let by the board of education or the trustee of such
district for a period not to exceed one month, pending the award of a
contract for such services in compliance with the provisions of
paragraph a of this subdivision.
 c. Each board of education, or the trustees, of a school district
which elected or elects to extend one or more pupil transportation
contracts may extend a contract in an amount which is in excess of the
maximum increase allowed by use of the CPI referenced in paragraph a of
this subdivision. Such excess amount shall not be greater than the sum
of the following: (i) the sum of the actual cost of qualifying criminal
history and driver licensing testing fees attributable to special
requirements for drivers of school buses pursuant to articles nineteen
and nineteen-A of the vehicle and traffic law plus the actual cost of
any diagnostic tests and physical performance tests that are deemed to
be necessary by an examining physician or the chief school officer to
determine whether an applicant to drive a school bus under the terms of
the contract has the physical and mental ability to operate a school
transportation conveyance and to satisfactorily perform the other
responsibilities of a school bus driver pursuant to regulations of the
commissioner; (ii) in a school district located in a city with at least
one million inhabitants, the actual cost of clean air technology filters
and Global Positioning System (GPS) technology; (iii) in a school
district located in a city with at least one million inhabitants, with
respects only to any extension beginning in fiscal year two thousand
five--two thousand six, the sum of the actual cost of providing school
bus attendants including the actual cost of criminal history record
checks for school bus attendant applicants and training and instruction
for school bus attendants pursuant to section twelve hundred
twenty-nine-d of the vehicle and traffic law plus up to five percent of
such cost for necessary administrative services; and (iv) the actual
cost of equipment or vehicle modification, or training required, by any
state or local legislation or regulation promulgated or effective on or
after June first, two thousand five. Such costs shall be approved by the
commissioner upon documentation provided by the school district and
contractor as required by the commissioner.
 * d. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs a, b and c of this
subdivision, the board of education or the trustee of a district and a
contractor providing pupil transportation services to such district may
amend a contract for pupil transportation services upon a finding that
such amendment is necessary to comply with any federal, state or local
law, rule or regulation imposed after the execution of such contract, or
to enhance the safety of pupil transportation, as determined by the
board or trustee subject to the approval of the commissioner pursuant to
regulations which shall require demonstrable enhancements in pupil
safety and/or increased savings consistent with maintaining pupil
safety. Such amendment shall cause no additional cost to the state,
locality or school district. The commissioner shall not approve such an
amendment if the commissioner finds that it circumvents the competitive
bidding requirements contained in paragraph a of this subdivision, or
otherwise violates this section or any other provision of law, or fails
to increase or maintain the safety of pupil transportation.
 * NB Repealed January 1, 2028
 e. Notwithstanding the provisions of any general, special or local law
or charter, a board of education or a trustee of a district, pursuant to
rules and regulations promulgated by the commissioner, may award a
contract for the transportation of pupils or a contract for mobile
instructional units involving an annual expenditure in excess of the
amount specified for purchase contracts in the bidding requirements of
the general municipal law in compliance with the provisions of paragraph
a of this subdivision or subsequent to an evaluation of proposals
submitted in response to a request for proposals prepared by or for the
board of education or trustee of a district. The commissioner, in
addition to his existing statutory authority to approve or disapprove
transportation contracts, may reject any award of a transportation
contract or a contract for mobile instructional units that is based on
an evaluation of proposals submitted in response to a request for
proposals if he finds that (1) the contractor is not the most responsive
to the request for proposals, or (2) that the best interests of the
district will be promoted thereby.
 f. When a board of education or a trustee of a school district elects
to receive proposals submitted in response to a request for proposals,
such board of education or trustee shall evaluate each proposal from a
responding contractor according to criteria established by the
commissioner. For evaluation of proposals related to contracts for pupil
transportation services, such criteria shall include at a minimum (i)
the previous experience of the contractor in transporting pupils, (ii)
the name of each transportation company the contractor has been an owner
or a manager and previous experience, (iii) a description of any safety
programs implemented by the contractor, (iv) a record of accidents in
motor vehicles under the control of the contractor, (v) driving history
of employees of the contractor, (vi) inspection records and model year
of the motor vehicles under the control of the contractor, (vii)
maintenance schedule of the motor vehicles under the control of the
contractor, (viii) financial analysis of the contractor, and (ix)
compliance with insurance requirements. For evaluation of proposals
related to contracts for mobile instructional units, such criteria shall
include at a minimum (1) the previous experience of the contractor in
providing mobile instructional units for use by public school districts,
(2) the name of each transportation company or manufacturer in which the
contractor or any of the contractor's officers has been an owner or a
manager or has had a controlling interest, (3) a description of any
vehicle safety standards included in the design standards for the mobile
instructional units under the control of the contractor that exceed
applicable standards defined in statute or regulations, (4) inspection
records and model year of the mobile instructional units under the
control of the contractor, (5) maintenance schedule of the mobile
instructional units under the control of the contractor, (6) financial
analysis of the contractor and (7) compliance with insurance
requirements.
 g. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subdivision, section one
hundred three of the general municipal law, or any other provision of
law to the contrary, the board of education shall be authorized to enter
into a piggyback contract with another school district that transports
students pursuant to a contract with a private transportation
contractor, provided that the board finds that the contract cost is
appropriate and entry into a piggyback contract will result in a cost
savings to the school district. For purposes of this paragraph, a
"piggyback contract" means a contract for the transportation of students
that: (1) provides transportation to a location outside the students'
school district of residence to which another school district is already
providing transportation to its own students through an existing
contract with a private transportation contractor, other than a
cooperatively bid contract; (2) is entered into by the private
transportation contractor and each school district involved; and (3)
provides for transportation in accordance with the terms and conditions
of such existing transportation contract.
 15. The extension industrial teacher training courses heretofore
established are continued under the jurisdiction and control of the
education department. Members of the faculty to teach such courses shall
be appointed by the commissioner of education and, subject to the
approval of the director of the budget, shall be classified, allocated
and paid in accordance with the schedules contained in section three
hundred fifty-five-a of this chapter.
 16. The commissioner shall cooperate with the commissioner of health
to facilitate the timely establishment and maintenance of current
records of courses in advanced emergency medical technology.
 17. Whenever a mistake has been made, or an honest dispute exists, as
to the location of the division line between land owned by the state,
which is under the jurisdiction, care, custody or control of the
department of education, and adjoining privately owned land, the
commissioner of education, acting for and on behalf and in the name of
the people of the state of New York, may enter into a boundary line
agreement, fixing and determining the division line between such lands,
subject to the approval of the attorney general as to form, content and
manner of execution.
 18. The commissioner shall cooperate with the superintendent of
financial services and the commissioner of commerce in the creation of
educational programs to be offered in conjunction with and in support of
the export finance awareness program of the department of financial
services and the department of commerce. Such assistance may include,
but shall not be limited to, the development of specific training
programs, identification of potential training needs, provision of
facilities for training and the identification of potential trainees.
Further activity by the commissioner shall require that a designee of
the commissioner attend each and every export awareness advisory board
meeting, formally report to the commissioner, and have the commissioner
contact the superintendent of financial services and the commissioner of
commerce so that the superintendent of financial services may coordinate
the activities of each of these components in the area of training.
 19. The commissioner is authorized and directed to require all
elementary and secondary schools to store all chemicals present in their
science facilities in locked and secure storage rooms and cabinets. The
schools shall provide for the placement, spacing, arrangement,
ventilation and fire protection of such stored chemicals in accordance
with guidelines promulgated by the commissioner of education. The
commissioner shall also require all elementary and secondary schools to
prepare at least annually an inventory of such chemicals, including the
chemical's name, the chemical abstracts service registry number, a
hazard warning code, the generally accepted method or methods of
disposal, a compatible storage code, the date received, the scheduled
date of disposal, the quantity received, the quantity remaining and its
location. The inventory must be kept in a secure location and be
available for inspection by the commissioner.
 20. He shall also have and execute such further powers and duties as
he shall be charged with by the regents.
 21. a. For the purposes of the computation of the apportionment of aid
under any of the provisions of this chapter or any other law, the
commissioner shall promulgate regulations to provide where not otherwise
provided by law, for the use of whole numbers, fractions or decimals.
Such regulations shall specify when such numbers shall be rounded or
truncated. Such regulations may provide that under each apportionment
the amount of aid to be paid pursuant to the applicable section of law
may be paid in whole dollars.
 b. The commissioner shall periodically prepare an updated electronic
data file containing actual and estimated data relating to
apportionments due and owing during the current school year and
projections of such apportionments for the following school year to
school districts and boards of cooperative educational services from the
general support for public schools, growth and boards of cooperative
educational services appropriations on the following dates: November
fifteenth, or such alternative date as may be requested by the director
of the budget for the purpose of preparation of the executive budget;
February fifteenth, or such alternative date as may be jointly requested
by the chair of the senate finance committee and the chair of the
assembly ways and means committee; and May fifteenth. For the purposes
of using estimated data for projections of apportionments for the
following school year, when no specific apportionment has yet been made
for such school year, but such apportionment has a history of annual
reauthorization, the commissioner shall estimate the apportionment at
the same level as the preceding school year, subject to the annual
approval of the director of the budget, the chairperson of the senate
finance committee and the chairperson of the assembly ways and means
committee.
 c. The commissioner shall transmit a report in support of the general
support for public schools appropriation to the director of the budget
and each such committee chair containing schedules displaying such
apportionments then due and owing, including updated data for the
current audit year, seven preceding audit years and the estimated year,
to coincide with each such update and by September first with respect to
payments due for the preceding school year.
 d. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law to the contrary,
for the purposes of (i) determining the base year level of general
support for public schools pursuant to paragraph b of this subdivision
for the two thousand seventeen--two thousand eighteen school year and
thereafter, the commissioner is directed to include the state-funded
grant amounts allocated pursuant to subdivision ten of section
thirty-six hundred two-e of this chapter where such state-funded grants
had previously been allocated to districts by means other than general
support for public schools, and (ii) for the purposes of determining
both the base year and current year levels of general support for public
schools pursuant to paragraph b of this subdivision for the two thousand
nineteen--two thousand twenty school year and thereafter, the
commissioner is also directed to include grant amounts pursuant to
section thirty-six hundred two-ee of this chapter, provided that,
notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, such base year
grant amounts shall not be included in: (1) the allowable growth amount
computed pursuant to paragraph dd of subdivision one of section
thirty-six hundred two of this chapter, (2) the preliminary growth
amount computed pursuant to paragraph ff of subdivision one of section
thirty-six hundred two of this chapter, and (3) the allocable growth
amount computed pursuant to paragraph gg of subdivision one of section
thirty-six hundred two of this chapter, and shall not be considered, and
shall not be available for interchange with, general support for public
schools.
 e. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law to the contrary,
in preparing an electronic data file pursuant to paragraph b of this
subdivision, for the purposes of using estimated data for projections of
apportionments for the following school year, the commissioner shall (i)
calculate the negative difference, if any, of the allowable growth
amount computed pursuant to subdivision one of section thirty-six
hundred two of this chapter less the preliminary growth amount pursuant
to such subdivision, and (ii) include such negative difference as the
"growth cap adjustment" in any file that aggregates apportionments of
general support for public schools for the purpose of determining the
amounts necessary in the state fiscal years associated with the school
year estimates, provided that the commissioner shall not allocate any
amount of such growth cap adjustment to any school district.
 22. The commissioner shall establish the procedures for a statewide
system of assigning unique student identification numbers for all
students in public and nonpublic schools within the state for purposes
of student tracking and for state reporting purposes. Students shall
retain their numbers until they attain the age of twenty-one. As new
students enter schools in New York, they shall be assigned a unique
number. The commissioner shall include in such system appropriate
procedures for insuring security and confidentiality of student
information. The commissioner shall adopt regulations to provide for the
implementation of such statewide system by school districts and
nonpublic schools.
 23. The commissioner shall have primary responsibility for the
development and implementation of integrated employment opportunities
including short-term and intensive supported employment services and, as
appropriate, long-term extended support services and shall coordinate
with the commissioner of social services, the commissioner of the office
of mental health and the commissioner of the office for people with
developmental disabilities under an integrated employment implementation
plan, pursuant to article twenty-one of this chapter.
 24. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this chapter, the
commissioner may, by regulation, provide for a system whereby schools,
school districts and municipalities submit required certifications
electronically or in any other media form which the commissioner
reasonably determines offers the same degree of accountability and
control provided by paper certifications. The certifications described
in this subdivision shall constitute written instruments, computer data
or statements within the meaning of articles one hundred seventy, one
hundred seventy-five and one hundred seventy-six of the penal law.
 25. The commissioner shall conduct periodic fiscal audits of boards of
cooperative educational services as defined in section nineteen hundred
fifty of this chapter and, to the extent sufficient resources are
provided the department for such purpose, shall assure that each such
board of cooperative educational services is audited at least once every
three years.
 26. The commissioner is authorized and directed to promulgate rules
and regulations to require that any statement prepared to satisfy the
provisions of sections sixteen hundred eight, seventeen hundred sixteen
and twenty-six hundred one-a of this chapter, any district-wide mailing
distributed which in whole or part related to such statement, and any
report prepared to satisfy the requirements of sections sixteen hundred
ten, seventeen hundred twenty-one and twenty-five hundred twenty-eight
of this chapter, commencing in the nineteen hundred
ninety-seven--ninety-eight school year, be in plain language and that
categorization of and format for revenue including payments in lieu of
taxes, property tax refunds from certiorari proceedings, expenditure,
transfer, and fund balance information and changes in such data from the
prior year and, in the case of a resubmitted or amended budget, changes
in such information from the prior year's submitted budget, shall be
complete and accurate and set forth in such a manner as to best promote
public comprehension and readability.
 27. The commissioner shall promulgate regulations in consultation with
the New York state energy research and development authority concerning
the development and approval of energy performance contracts for school
districts and boards of cooperative educational services in accordance
with subdivision eight of section 9-103 of the energy law.
 28. On or before April first, two thousand, the commissioner shall
develop and implement an automated board of cooperative educational
services state aid reporting system for the purpose of tracking and
reporting state and local expenditures for aidable shared services
pursuant to subdivision five of section nineteen hundred fifty of this
chapter. Such system shall track state and local expenditures in the
manner prescribed by the commissioner, provided that, at a minimum, such
system shall report such expenditures by board of cooperative
educational services, by type of cooperative service agreement (CO-SER)
and by component school district. In addition, such system shall report
expenses and aid totals, as well as expenditures and aid per resident
weighted average daily attendance.
 29. The commissioner shall develop a program whereby any veteran of
the armed forces who served in world war II and who was unable, for any
reason, to complete a secondary education, may be awarded a high school
diploma based on knowledge and experience gained while in service.
 29-a. The commissioner shall develop a program whereby any veteran of
the armed forces who served in the Korean conflict and who was unable,
for any reason, to complete a secondary education, may be awarded a high
school diploma based on knowledge and experience gained while in
service.
 29-b. The commissioner shall develop a program whereby any veteran of
the armed forces who served in the Vietnam war and who was unable, for
any reason, to complete a secondary education, may be awarded a high
school diploma based on knowledge and experience gained while in
service.
 29-c. The commissioner shall develop a program whereby any veteran of
the armed forces who has served on active duty in the United States
Armed Forces, and who was unable, for any reason, to complete a
secondary education, may be awarded a high school diploma based on
knowledge and experience gained while in service.
 30. (a) The commissioner, in cooperation with the division of criminal
justice services and in accordance with all applicable provisions of
law, shall promulgate rules and regulations to require the
fingerprinting of prospective employees, as defined in section eleven
hundred twenty-five of this chapter, of school districts, charter
schools and boards of cooperative educational services and authorizing
the fingerprinting of prospective employees of nonpublic and private
elementary and secondary schools, and for the use of information derived
from searches of the records of the division of criminal justice
services and the federal bureau of investigation based on the use of
such fingerprints. The commissioner shall also develop a form for use by
school districts, charter schools, boards of cooperative educational
services, and nonpublic and private elementary and secondary schools in
connection with the submission of fingerprints that contains the
specific job title sought and any other information that may be relevant
to consideration of the applicant. The commissioner shall also establish
a form for the recordation of allegations of child abuse in an
educational setting, as required pursuant to section eleven hundred
twenty-six of this chapter. No person who has been fingerprinted
pursuant to section three thousand four-b of this chapter or pursuant to
section five hundred nine-cc or twelve hundred twenty-nine-d of the
vehicle and traffic law and whose fingerprints remain on file with the
division of criminal justice services shall be required to undergo
fingerprinting for purposes of a new criminal history record check. This
subdivision and the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto
shall not apply to a school district within a city with a population of
one million or more.
 (b) The commissioner, in cooperation with the division of criminal
justice services, shall promulgate a form to be provided to all such
prospective employees of school districts, charter schools, boards of
cooperative educational services, and nonpublic and private elementary
and secondary schools that elect to fingerprint and seek clearance for
prospective employees that shall:
 (i) inform the prospective employee that the commissioner is required
or authorized to request his or her criminal history information from
the division of criminal justice services and the federal bureau of
investigation and review such information pursuant to this section, and
provide a description of the manner in which his or her fingerprint
cards will be used upon submission to the division of criminal justice
services;
 (ii) inform the prospective employee that he or she has the right to
obtain, review and seek correction of his or her criminal history
information pursuant to regulations and procedures established by the
division of criminal justice services.
 (c) The prospective employer shall obtain the signed, informed consent
of the prospective employee on such form supplied by the commissioner
which indicates that such person has:
 (i) been informed of the right and procedures necessary to obtain,
review and seek correction of his or her criminal history information;
 (ii) been informed of the reason for the request for his or her
criminal history information;
 (iii) consented to such request for a report;
 (iv) supplied on the form a current mailing or home address for the
prospective employee;
 (v) been informed that he or she may withdraw his or her application
for employment pursuant to this section, without prejudice, at any time
before employment is offered or declined, regardless of whether the
prospective employee or employer has reviewed such prospective
employee's criminal history information;
 (vi) where the applicant is to be fingerprinted pursuant to section
three thousand thirty-five of this chapter, the process for seeking a
waiver of the fees associated with conducting a criminal history records
check, pursuant to paragraph (b) of subdivision four of section three
thousand thirty-five of this chapter,
 (vii) been informed that in the event his or her employment is
terminated and such person has not become employed in the same or
another school district, charter school, board of cooperative
educational services, or nonpublic or private elementary or secondary
school within twelve-months of such termination, the commissioner shall
notify the division of criminal justice services of such termination,
and the division of criminal justice services shall destroy the
fingerprints of such person. Such person may request that the
commissioner notify the division of criminal justice services that his
or her fingerprints shall be destroyed prior to the expiration of such
twelve month period in which case the commissioner shall notify the
division of criminal justice services and the division shall destroy the
fingerprints of such person promptly upon receipt of the request; and
 (viii) been informed of the manner in which he or she may submit to
the commissioner any information that may be relevant to the
consideration of his or her application for clearance including, where
applicable, information in regard to his or her good conduct and
rehabilitation.
 (d) The commissioner shall develop forms to be provided to all school
districts, charter schools, boards of cooperative educational services,
and to all nonpublic and private elementary and secondary schools that
elect to fingerprint their prospective employees, to be completed and
signed by prospective employees when conditional appointment or
emergency conditional appointment is offered.
 (e) The commissioner may promulgate rules and regulations regarding
the conditional appointment and emergency conditional appointment of a
prospective employee.
 * 31. The commissioner shall direct that each school district, charter
school, and private elementary and secondary school appoint a designated
educational official for the purposes set forth in section 380.90 of the
criminal procedure law, subdivision seventeen of section 301.2 and
subdivision three of section 380.1 of the family court act. In addition,
the commissioner shall promulgate rules and regulations, in consultation
with the office of court administration, to facilitate electronic access
by the courts to the names and addresses of such designated educational
officials.
 * NB There are 2 sub 31's
 * 31. The commissioner shall cooperate with the commissioner of
agriculture and markets in establishing a farm-to-school program and
coordinating New York Harvest For New York Kids Week as described in
subdivision five-b of section sixteen of the agriculture and markets
law. The commissioner's responsibilities shall include, but not be
limited to, compiling information for the department of agriculture and
markets from school districts and other educational institutions under
the department's jurisdiction interested in purchasing New York farm
products and disseminating to those districts and institutions
information from the department of agriculture and markets about the
availability of New York farm products, and contact information for
farmers and other businesses marketing such products. The commissioner
shall report to the legislature about the need for changes in law to
facilitate the purchase of such products by schools and other
institutions.
 * NB There are 2 sub 31's
 34. The commissioner is hereby authorized and directed to apply school
bus safety practices instruction and retraining requirements prescribed
pursuant to the provisions of section thirty-six hundred twenty-four of
this chapter to drivers who operate transportation which is owned,
leased or contracted for by private and parochial schools to the same
extent as such requirements shall apply to drivers who operate
transportation which is owned, leased or contracted for by public school
districts. The chief school administrator of every private and parochial
school shall approve the employment of each driver for each school bus
operated for such private or parochial school and shall ensure that each
such driver shall meet the school bus safety practices instruction and
retraining requirements prescribed pursuant to section thirty-six
hundred twenty-four of this chapter. Nothing in this subdivision shall
be construed to apply such provisions to volunteer drivers who transport
pupils on other than a regularly established route on an occasional
basis.
 * 35. The commissioner shall develop guidelines by which school
districts may establish a program to make available to parents or
persons in parental relation of children attending schools in such
districts, an internet based electronic communications system to provide
for the transmission of individual personalized messages or group
communication over the internet, to communicate with the teachers of
such children.
 * NB There are 2 sb 35's
 * 35. The commissioner shall, in cooperation with the commissioner of
mental health, develop guidelines for voluntary implementation by school
districts, that incorporate social and emotional development into
elementary and secondary school educational programs as prescribed in
paragraph (b) of subdivision one of section three of the children's
mental health act of 2006.
 * NB There are 2 sb 35's
 36. The commissioner shall ensure that by July first, two thousand
eight, a student progress report, written in plain English and in a form
prescribed by the commissioner, is prepared for all students. Such
progress report shall provide parents or persons in parental relation
with information on their child's performance on state assessments over
multiple years of testing and shall also explain the process by which
parents or persons in parental relation may inquire further about their
child's progress. All school districts and charter schools shall prepare
and disseminate the student progress report to parents or persons in
parental relation in a timely manner.
 37. The commissioner shall develop methods to support educators in the
use of performance data to assist in student learning, which shall be
periodically improved based on feedback from educators.
 38. The commissioner shall develop informational materials to assist
parents or persons in parental relation and teachers in understanding
the regents learning standards and the results of state assessments.
 39. The commissioner shall develop a school leadership report card and
a separate school progress report card to assist boards of education,
the state and the public in assessing the performance of school leaders,
including superintendents of schools and building principals, and the
schools that they lead. The report cards shall include an assessment of
the school's progress in achieving standards of excellence. By January
first, two thousand nine, the commissioner shall develop such standards
of excellence which shall include, but not be limited to, parent
involvement, curriculum, teacher quality, and accountability measures as
set forth in section two hundred eleven-a of this title. The
commissioner shall promulgate regulations requiring the trustees or
boards of education of every common, union free, central, central high
school and city school district, and the chancellor of a city school
district in a city of one million or more inhabitants, to attach copies
of such report cards to the statement of estimated expenditures pursuant
to section sixteen hundred eight or seventeen hundred sixteen of this
chapter, where applicable, and to otherwise make the report cards
publicly available in the same manner as a school district report card.
 40. The board of regents shall explore the development of a
prekindergarten through postsecondary (P-16) data system that tracks
student performance from prekindergarten through attendance at public
colleges in this state and links students to teachers or instructors.
The commissioner shall consult with other relevant state departments,
agencies and instrumentalities of the state about the feasibility of
linking the system to other data collection systems containing
information relevant to the education of children, including but not
limited to social services information; and to identify barriers to the
exchange of data between the P-16 system and social services and other
systems under their control and collaborate to facilitate the free
exchange of data. Such data system shall be maintained consistent with
applicable confidentiality requirements, so as to prevent disclosures
that would constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy. The
commissioner shall report to the board of regents on activities
conducted pursuant to this subdivision.
 41. The commissioner shall establish a program to evaluate various
methods used by schools to identify students receiving a free or reduced
price meal under programs authorized by the National School Lunch Act,
as amended, or the Child Nutrition Act of 1966, as amended. The
commissioner shall identify methodologies and practices utilized by
schools and school districts, within the state and nationally, to:
 a. simplify student access to meal programs; and
 b. identify students through an electronic payment system, or through
other means, in order to eliminate the overt identification of students
receiving a free or reduced price meal.
On or before July first, two thousand nine, the commissioner shall
disseminate detailed information on the best practices utilized by such
schools and school districts which simplify access and eliminate the
distinction between students receiving a free or reduced price meal and
those paying full price so as to more effectively operate the program.
The commissioner shall also submit a report containing such information
to the legislature on or before such date.
 42. a. The commissioner, in conjunction with the commissioner of
health, shall promulgate and review as necessary rules and regulations
relating to pupils who suffer mild traumatic brain injuries, also
referred to as a "concussion," while receiving instruction or engaging
in any school sponsored or related activity. In developing such rules
and regulations, the commissioner shall consider comments from
stakeholders and other interested parties including but not limited to
parents, teachers, students, school administrators, school athletic
trainers, sport coaches, medical and health professionals, the public
schools athletic league (PSAL), the New York state public high school
athletic association (NYSPHSAA), and other athletic associations. Such
regulations shall include, but not be limited to:
 (i) requiring a course of instruction relating to recognizing the
symptoms of mild traumatic brain injuries and monitoring and seeking
proper medical treatment for pupils who suffer mild traumatic brain
injuries. Such course of instruction shall be required to be completed
on a biennial basis by all school coaches, physical education teachers,
nurses and athletic trainers. The course of instruction required by this
subparagraph shall include, but not be limited to, the definition of a
"concussion," signs and symptoms of mild traumatic brain injuries, how
such injuries may occur, practices regarding prevention, and the
guidelines for the return to school and to certain school activities
after a pupil has suffered a mild traumatic brain injury regardless of
whether such injury occurred outside of school. Such training may be
completed by means of courses of instruction, including but not limited
to, courses provided online and by teleconference approved by the
department;
 (ii) providing that the department and the department of health shall
post on their internet websites information relating to mild traumatic
brain injuries, which shall include but not be limited to, the
definition of a "concussion," signs and symptoms of mild traumatic brain
injuries, how such injuries may occur, and the guidelines for the return
to school and to certain school activities after a pupil has suffered a
mild traumatic brain injury regardless of whether such injury occurred
outside of school. Schools shall be required to include such information
in any permission form or parent or person in parental relation consent
form or similar document that may be required for a pupil's
participation in interscholastic sports and shall also include such
information, or reference how to obtain such information from the
department and the department of health internet websites, on the
school's internet website, if one exists;
 (iii) requiring the immediate removal from athletic activities of any
pupil believed to have sustained or who has sustained a mild traumatic
brain injury. In the event that there is any doubt as to whether a pupil
has sustained a concussion, it shall be presumed that he or she has been
so injured until proven otherwise. No such pupil shall resume athletic
activity until he or she shall have been symptom free for not less than
twenty-four hours, and has been evaluated by and received written and
signed authorization from a licensed physician. Such authorization shall
be kept on file in the pupil's permanent health record. Furthermore,
such rules and regulations shall provide guidelines for limitations and
restrictions on school attendance and activities for pupils who have
sustained mild traumatic brain injuries, consistent with the directives
of the pupil's treating physician.
 (iv) authorizing each school or school district, in its discretion, to
establish a concussion management team which may be composed of the
athletic director (if any), a school nurse, the school physician, a
coach of an interscholastic team, an athletic trainer or such other
appropriate personnel as designated by the school or school district.
The concussion management team shall oversee the implementation of the
rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this subdivision as it
pertains to their associated school including the requirement that all
school coaches, physical education teachers, nurses and athletic
trainers that work with and provide instruction to pupils engaged in
school sponsored athletic activities complete training relating to mild
traumatic brain injuries. Furthermore, every concussion management team
may establish and implement a program which provides information on mild
traumatic brain injuries to parents and persons in parental relation
throughout each school year.
 b. The rules and regulations established pursuant to this subdivision
shall be deemed to be the minimum standards that must be complied with
by every public school and nonpublic school relating to mild traumatic
brain injuries. Nothing in this subdivision shall prohibit any public
school or nonpublic school from adopting and implementing more stringent
standards.
 43. The commissioner shall make available, on the department internet
website, materials on problem gambling among school-age youth identified
or developed by the office of alcoholism and substance abuse services in
consultation with the department, pursuant to subdivision (j) of section
19.07 of the mental hygiene law.
 44. The commissioner shall prohibit the administration of traditional
standardized tests, as defined in regulations issued by the
commissioner, in pre-kindergarten programs and in grades kindergarten
through second grade; provided, however, that nothing herein shall
prohibit assessments in which students perform real-world tasks that
demonstrate application of knowledge and skills or assessments that are
otherwise required to be administered by federal law.
 45. The commissioner shall provide that no school district or board of
cooperative educational services may place or include on a student's
official transcript or maintain in a student's permanent record any
individual student score on a state administered standardized English
language arts or mathematics assessment for grades three through eight,
provided that nothing herein shall be construed to interfere with
required state or federal reporting or to excuse a school district from
maintaining or transferring records of such test scores separately from
a student's permanent record, including for purposes of required state
or federal reporting.
 46. The commissioner shall provide that any test results on a state
administered standardized English language arts or mathematics
assessment for grades three through eight sent to parents or persons in
parental relation to a student include a clear and conspicuous notice
that such results will not be included on the student's official
transcript or in the student's permanent record and are being provided
to the student and parents for diagnostic purposes.
 47. The commissioner shall provide that no school district shall make
any student promotion or placement decisions based solely or primarily
on student performance on the state administered standardized English
language arts and mathematics assessments for grades three through
eight. However, a school district may consider student performance on
such state assessments provided that the school district uses multiple
measures in addition to such assessments and that such assessments do
not constitute the major factor in such determinations. In addition, the
commissioner shall require every school district to annually notify the
parents and persons in parental relation to the students attending such
district of the district's grade promotion and placement policy along
with an explanation of how such policy was developed. Such notification
may be provided on the school district's website, if one exists, or as
part of an existing informational document that is provided to parents
and persons in parental relation.
 * 48. The commissioner shall issue regulations:
 a. allowing students with disabilities who are not eligible for the
New York state alternate assessment and whose cognitive and intellectual
disabilities preclude their meaningful participation in chronological
grade level instruction to be assessed based on instructional level
rather than chronological age;
 b. allowing English language learners to be assessed with a
state-administered assessment that measures the English language
development of such students rather than the English language arts exam
for their first two years of enrollment; and
 c. ensuring accountability for the performance of such students in
appropriate ways.
 * NB Effective upon and to the extent allowed by a federal waiver
issued by the U.S. department of education
 49. The commissioner shall promulgate such standards and regulations
as may be necessary to ensure:
 a. that the amount of time devoted to state-administered required
assessments developed by the state directly or by contract for each
grade does not exceed, in the aggregate, one percent of the minimum
required annual instructional hours for such grade.
 b. that, for each school district, the amount of time devoted to
standardized assessments that are not specifically required by state or
federal law for each grade does not exceed, in the aggregate, one
percent of the minimum required annual instructional hours for such
grade.
 c. that, for each school district, the amount of time devoted to test
preparation under standardized testing conditions for each grade does
not exceed, in the aggregate, two percent of the minimum required annual
instructional hours for such grade.
 Time devoted to teacher administered classroom quizzes or exams,
portfolio reviews, or performance assessments shall not be counted
towards the limits established by this subdivision. In addition, nothing
in this subdivision shall be construed to supersede the requirements of
a section of the 504 plan of a qualified student with a disability or
federal law relating to English Language Learners or the individualized
education program of a student with disabilities.
 50. The commissioner shall provide instructional tools and outreach
materials for parents and families to assist parents and families in
understanding the purposes, elements and instructional changes relating
to implementation of next generation learning standards as well as how
to best support their child's educational progress and outcomes. Such
tools and outreach shall include, but not be limited to, online
resources with linguistically and culturally appropriate materials,
community outreach, and the dissemination of materials through schools,
non-profit organizations, libraries, and other partners.
 51. The commissioner shall, in order to assist school districts and
boards of cooperative educational services in developing next generation
training programs for teachers and principals, develop professional
development tools, resources and materials that school districts, boards
of cooperative educational services, teachers and principals may
utilize. The commissioner may collaborate with the state university of
New York, the city university of New York, and independent colleges and
universities to offer effective, data-informed professional development
and coaching to meet the needs of implementing the next generation
learning standards. Such professional development and coaching shall
include necessary materials, age appropriate instruction and resources
that provide best practices for the effective implementation of the next
generation learning standards. Such support shall be available for the
purpose of providing professional development for teachers and
principals, as well as preparation programs for participating school
districts, boards of cooperative educational services, charter schools
and communities at large, and may include recommendations for how
teachers and principals can collaborate on strategies, including but not
limited to study groups and coaching, to improve classroom practices.
The commissioner shall also identify regional examples of school
districts that have successfully implemented the next generation
learning standards, where such examples exist, and shall invite such
districts to serve on a voluntary basis as models that principals,
teachers and other school professionals within the region may visit and
observe. In addition, the commissioner shall include opportunities for
teachers and other content-area experts to provide feedback and
recommendations for the continuous improvement and development of
voluntary next generation curriculum modules offered by the department.
 51-a. On or before June first, two thousand fifteen, and each year
thereafter, the commissioner shall release the test questions, test
answers, and corresponding correct answers from each of the most
recently administered English language arts and mathematics examinations
in grades three through eight of that year. The commissioner may limit
the number of questions and answers released only to the extent
necessary to avoid hindering or impairing the validity and/or
reliability of future examinations and must provide enough of an
overview of each examination so that teachers, administrators,
principals, parents and students can be provided with sufficient
feedback on the types of questions administered and, by July first, two
thousand fifteen, and each year thereafter, the commissioner shall
release the general student success rate in answering such questions
correctly.
 52. a. The commissioner shall make recommendations to the board of
regents relating to the adoption of instruction in cardiopulmonary
resuscitation and the use of automated external defibrillators (AEDs) in
senior high schools.
 b. Prior to making the recommendations to the board of regents, the
commissioner shall:
 (i) seek the recommendations of teachers, school administrators,
teacher educators and others with educational expertise in the proposed
curriculum;
 (ii) seek comment from parents, students and other interested parties;
 (iii) consider the amount of instructional time such curriculum will
require and whether such time would detract from other mandated courses
of study;
 (iv) consider the fiscal impact, if any, on the state and school
districts; and
 (v) consider any additional factors the commissioner deems relevant.
 c. No later than one hundred eighty days after the effective date of
this subdivision, the commissioner shall provide a recommendation to the
board of regents to either adopt and promulgate appropriate rules and
regulations implementing such curriculum or reject the implementation of
such curriculum. Upon receiving a recommendation from the commissioner,
pursuant to this subdivision, the board of regents shall vote to either
accept or reject the commissioner's recommendation no later than sixty
days after receiving such recommendation.
 d. If the board of regents adopts such curriculum, the curriculum
requirement shall take effect no later than the next school year after
such curriculum has been adopted.
 e. If the board of regents rejects such curriculum, the commissioner
shall provide a report as to the determination of the board to the
governor, the temporary president of the senate, the speaker of the
assembly and the chairs of the senate and assembly committees on
education providing the reasons for such rejection not later than thirty
days after the board of regents rejects such curriculum.
 53. The commissioner is authorized and directed to establish a content
review committee for the purposes of reviewing all standardized test
items and/or selected passages used on English language arts and
mathematics state assessments for grades three through eight to ensure:
(a) they are grade level appropriate, in general; (b) they are presented
at a readability level that is grade-level appropriate; (c) they are
within grade-level expectations; and (d) they appropriately measure the
learning standards approved by the board of regents applicable to such
subject and/or grade level. The review of such items and passages shall
be conducted prior to their use in such assessments provided however,
for the two thousand fifteen--two thousand sixteen school year only, if
such requirement would prevent the ability of such assessments to be
administered, then items or passages that have not been reviewed may be
used. Provided further, the content review committee shall review any
new standardized test items and/or selected passages prior to their use
in such assessments. Such committee shall also ensure that any new test
items and/or selected passages are fair and appropriately measure the
learning standards approved by the board of regents applicable to such
subject and/or grade level. Such committee shall also ensure that
adequate and appropriate time is given to students for the
administration of such assessments, provided however that subdivision
forty-nine of this section must be complied with. The content review
committee shall include classroom teachers and experienced educators in
the content area and/or grade level of the items/passages being
reviewed, including teachers of students with disabilities and English
language learners.
 54. Notwithstanding any law, rule or regulation to the contrary, no
teacher, principal, or superintendent shall be required to sign a
confidentiality agreement with their respective school district, board
of cooperative educational services, or the department that prevents
such teacher, principal, or superintendent from discussing the contents
of any items on the English language arts and mathematics assessments in
grades three through eight after such items have been released by the
department pursuant to subdivision fifty-one-a of this section or after
such items have been publicly disclosed by the department or other
appropriate entity. The commissioner shall amend and/or modify any
current confidentiality agreement inconsistent with this subdivision and
shall promulgate regulations consistent with this subdivision.
 55. The commissioner, in collaboration with the commissioner of health
and the commissioner of environmental conservation shall develop
instructional tools and materials for school districts and libraries to
assist in the education and awareness program to protect children from
lyme disease and tick-borne infections. Resources and materials shall be
age-appropriate for school-age students and provide information on the
identification of ticks, recommended procedures for safe tick removal
and best practices to provide protection from ticks. Such materials may
include but not be limited to video productions, pamphlets, and
demonstration programs to illustrate the various sizes of ticks before
and after it has engorged to assist with the identification of a tick
and the reaction on the skin that may occur as a result of a tick bite.
Materials and instructional tools to advance and promote education
awareness on tick identification and protection shall be made available
to school districts and libraries upon request at no charge.
 * 56. The commissioner shall issue a guidance memorandum in
cooperation with stakeholders and other interested parties, to every
school district and board of cooperative educational services to inform
them of the unique educational needs of students with dyslexia,
dyscalculia and dysgraphia and to clarify that school districts may
reference or use the terms dyslexia, dyscalculia, and dysgraphia in
evaluations, eligibility determinations, or in developing an
individualized education program (IEP) under the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) pursuant to part 300 of title 34 of
the code of federal regulations, as such regulations may, from time to
time, be amended.
 * NB There are 4 sb 56's
 * 56. The commissioner, in consultation and cooperation with the
commissioner of agriculture and markets, may develop guidelines to
encourage school districts and institutions of higher education to
donate excess, unused, edible food from meals served at such educational
facilities to local voluntary food assistance programs including, but
not limited to, community food pantries, soup kitchens, and other
community and not-for-profit organizations that distribute food to the
poor and disadvantaged. Such guidelines developed concerning donated
food shall comply with all federal, state and local public health laws,
rules and regulations that govern food safety and food donation.
 Such guidelines may include, but not be limited to:
 a. a procedure to provide information to school districts,
institutions of higher education and local voluntary food assistance
programs of the provisions of such guidelines;
 b. notification to educational institutions of their ability to elect
to donate excess, unused, edible food to local voluntary food assistance
programs; and
 c. information and technical assistance on how school districts and
institutions of higher education may best donate excess food in a safe
and sanitary manner.
 The commissioner shall coordinate the implementation of such
guidelines with the farm-to-school program established pursuant to
subdivision five-b of section sixteen of the agriculture and markets
law.
 * NB There are 4 sb 56's
 * 56. a. The commissioner shall consult and collaborate with the
commissioner of health and organizations that promote sepsis awareness,
prevention and education, as well as other interested parties, to
establish and develop a sepsis awareness, prevention and education
program within the department. Such program shall be defined by the
commissioner in regulations after consultation with the department of
health and be designed to educate students, parents and school personnel
about sepsis awareness and prevention. Such program shall include, but
not be limited to:
 (i) age-appropriate model curriculum, exemplar lesson plans, and best
practice instructional resources for students, parents and school
personnel designed to promote awareness and prevention methods against
sepsis. Such model curriculum, lesson plans and instructional resources
shall include but not be limited to guidelines and methods of
prevention, including recommendations for the reduction of exposure to
sepsis and an appropriate course of action for sepsis treatment;
 (ii) instructional tools and materials for students, parents and
school personnel developed in collaboration with the commissioner of
health, which shall include updated data and information on sepsis
awareness and prevention, with a review of such data and information to
occur periodically, at intervals deemed appropriate by the commissioner
and the commissioner of health; and
 (iii) public availability of all materials related to the sepsis
awareness, prevention and education program on a dedicated webpage on
the department's internet website, and provided at no cost to every
school district, board of cooperative educational services, charter
school and nonpublic school upon request.
 b. The commissioner shall issue a guidance memorandum to every school
district, board of cooperative educational services, charter school and
nonpublic school, to inform them of the availability of the sepsis
awareness, prevention and education program and to encourage them to
develop policies and procedures, in consultation with their director of
school health services, or the substantial equivalent as determined by
the commissioner in regulations, regarding when parents and persons in
parental relations are to be notified of illness or injuries occurring
in school which affects their child, in accordance with article nineteen
of this chapter. The commissioner shall annually remind school
districts, boards of cooperative educational services, charter schools
and nonpublic schools, of the availability of sepsis awareness and
prevention materials as part of sepsis awareness month.
 * NB There are 4 sb 56's
 * 56. The commissioner shall provide to the council on children and
families, in a format identified by the council, information regarding
all recipients of grants awarded or administered by the department for
the purposes of providing afterschool programs, or extended learning
time, including but not limited to grants for such purposes awarded
under section thirty-six hundred forty-one of this chapter. For each
program the program's name, the address at which the program is offered,
and the phone number for the program will be provided to the council no
less than once a year.
 * NB There are 4 sb 56's
 58. a. No later than June first, two thousand nineteen, the
commissioner shall prepare and submit to the governor, the temporary
president of the senate and the speaker of the assembly a report that
provides an overview of teacher diversity throughout the state. Such
report shall:
 (i) study the potential barriers to: achieving diversity within
teacher preparation programs; obtaining an initial certificate in the
classroom teaching service; and obtaining teacher certification as a
teacher aide or teaching assistant;
 (ii) include available data on race, ethnicity, gender, and age; the
efforts higher education institutions with teacher preparation programs
are taking to recruit and retain a diverse student population into such
programs; and the efforts that the state and schools are taking to
attract, hire, and retain certified teachers who reflect the diversity
within New York state's schools; and
 (iii) make recommendations on programs, practices and policies that
may be implemented by schools and teacher preparation programs to
improve teacher diversity throughout the state.
 b. The commissioner shall consult with stakeholders and other
interested parties when preparing such report. The state university of
New York, the city university of New York, the commission on independent
colleges and universities, and the proprietary college sector with
registered teacher education programs in this state shall, to the extent
practicable, identify and provide representatives to the department, at
the request of the commissioner, in order to participate in the
development and drafting of such report.
 59. The commissioner shall make available educational materials
developed pursuant to subdivision two of section three hundred seventy-c
of the social services law to every school district, charter school,
nonpublic school, approved preschool, approved preschool special
education program, approved private residential or non-residential
school for the education of students with disabilities, state-supported
school in accordance with article eighty-five of this chapter, and board
of cooperative educational services for the purpose of educating
parents, guardians and other authorized individuals responsible for the
child's care about adverse childhood experiences, the importance of
protective factors, and the availability of services for children at
risk for or experiencing adverse childhood experiences. The commissioner
shall provide that such educational materials are made available online
pursuant to subdivision two of section three hundred seventy-c of the
social services law.
 * 60. The commissioner, in consultation with institutions of higher
education, shall issue guidance for school districts and boards of
cooperative educational services to use to develop grow your own
initiatives aimed at attracting underrepresented candidates into the
teaching profession. Such guidance shall include but not be limited to:
 (a) ways to recruit underrepresented candidates, including those who
are current teaching assistants and current students in teacher
preparation programs;
 (b) initiatives aimed at creating an early recruitment pipeline
beginning in secondary school;
 (c) how to establish partnerships between school districts,
community-based organizations, and institutions of higher education to
encourage and support underrepresented candidates to enter and remain in
the teaching profession; and
 (d) ways to identify existing funding sources available to school
districts to attract and retain underrepresented candidates into the
teaching profession.
 * NB There are 2 sb 60's
 * 60. The commissioner shall promulgate rules and regulations
prohibiting a teacher, administrator, officer, employee or agent of any
school within the state from using corporal punishment.
 * NB There are 2 sb 60's
 61. a. The commissioner shall require each school district to ensure
verification of one of the following from the parent or guardian of each
student or from the student if the student is eighteen years of age or
older or legally emancipated, during the school year in which the
student is a senior enrolled in such school district: (1) completion of
either the free application for federal student aid for such student or,
if applicable, the Jose Peralta New York State DREAM Act application; or
(2) completion of a waiver form promulgated by the department indicating
that the parent or guardian or, if the student is eighteen years of age
or older or legally emancipated, the student understands what the free
application for federal student aid or, if applicable, the Jose Peralta
New York State DREAM Act application are and has chosen not to file an
application pursuant to the provisions of subparagraph one of this
paragraph. For purposes of this subdivision, verification of completion
of either the free application for federal student aid or the Jose
Peralta New York State DREAM Act application shall not require a parent,
guardian, or student to identify which type of application was
completed.
 b. On and after July first, two thousand twenty-five, each school
district shall annually report to the department the following data for
all seniors enrolled in such school district, aggregated by high school:
(1) the total number of students that have completed either the free
application for federal student aid or, if applicable, the Jose Peralta
New York State DREAM Act application; (2) the number of students who
completed a waiver pursuant to paragraph a of this subdivision; and (3)
the total number of seniors enrolled.
 c. The commissioner shall promulgate rules and regulations necessary
to implement this subdivision, including requiring each school district
to notify each high school senior, no less than two times during each
school year, of the state-sponsored scholarships, financial aid and
assistance available to students attending college or post-secondary
education, and to provide referrals for support or assistance to
complete the free application for federal student aid or, if applicable,
the Jose Peralta New York State DREAM Act application.
 d. A student shall not be penalized or punished if the student's
parent or guardian or the student, if the student is eighteen years of
age or older or legally emancipated, does not fulfill the requirements
of this subdivision and this subdivision shall not affect a student's
ability to graduate.
 * 62. a. The commissioner shall promulgate rules and regulations to
establish uniform statewide protocols for diapering and toileting of
students in public schools. Such protocols shall include but not be
limited to: requiring schools to provide students and staff with safe
and accessible facilities for diapering and toileting; requiring schools
to provide the proper equipment and supplies to maintain a safe and
sanitary area for diapering and toileting; and defining basic procedures
to promote a safe and healthy environment.
 b. For the purposes of this subdivision, "school" shall be deemed to
include a school district, public school, board of cooperative
educational services, special act school district as defined in section
four thousand one of this chapter, approved private residential or
non-residential school for the education of students with disabilities
including private schools established under chapter eight hundred
fifty-three of the laws of nineteen hundred seventy-six, and a
state-supported school in accordance with article eighty-five of this
chapter.
 * NB Effective March 27, 2026
 § 306. Removal of school officers; withholding public money. 1.
Whenever it shall be proved to his satisfaction that any trustee, member
of a board of education, clerk, collector, treasurer, district
superintendent, superintendent of schools or other school officer is a
member of an organization listed as subversive by the board of regents
pursuant to the provisions of section three thousand twenty-two of this
chapter, or has been guilty of any wilful violation or neglect of duty
under this chapter, or any other act pertaining to common schools or
other educational institution participating in state funds, or wilfully
disobeying any decision, order, rule or regulation of the regents or of
the commissioner of education, said commissioner, after a hearing at
which the school officer shall have the right of representation by
counsel, may, by an order under his hand and seal, which order shall be
recorded in his office, remove such school officer from his office.
 2. Said commissioner of education may also withhold from any district
or city its share of the public money of the state for wilfully
disobeying any provision of law or any decision, order or regulation as
aforesaid.
 § 307. Acquisition of real property. 1. The commissioner of
education, when an appropriation therefor has been made by the
legislature, may acquire any real property which he may deem necessary
for the purposes of a state educational institution by purchase or
pursuant to the provisions of the eminent domain procedure law the title
to which shall be taken in the name of and be vested in the people of
the state of New York; provided, however, that no real property shall be
so acquired by purchase unless the title thereto shall be approved by
the attorney general.
 2. Whenever real property is to be so acquired pursuant to the
provisions of the eminent domain procedure law, by appropriation, the
commissioner of education shall cause to be made by the state department
of transportation an accurate acquisition map. With respect to any real
property or any easement to be so acquired for state university
purposes, the state university trustees may cause the map, description
and survey contemplated by this subdivision, and any changes,
alterations or modifications in such map contemplated by subdivision
five of this section, to be made by the state department of
transportation or, with the approval of the director of the budget, by a
licensed professional engineer or a licensed land surveyor, and the
state commissioner of transportation and the state university trustees
may each authorize the state university construction fund to act as
agent in making such map, description and survey.
 3. On the approval of such map by the commissioner, the original
tracing of such map shall be filed in the main office of the department
pursuant to the provisions of the eminent domain procedure law. With
respect to any real property or easement to be so acquired for state
university purposes, the original tracing of such map shall be filed in
the office of the state university trustees.
 4. If the commissioner shall determine, prior to the filing of such
map in the office of the clerk or register of the county, that changes,
alterations or modifications of such map as filed in the main office of
the department should be made, he or she shall, subject to the
provisions of article two of the eminent domain procedure law, if
applicable, direct the preparation by the department of transportation
of an amended map. On the approval of such amended map by the
commissioner, it shall be filed in the main office of the department and
the amended map shall thereupon in all respects and for all purposes
supersede the map previously filed. With respect to any real property or
any easement to be so acquired for state university purposes, upon the
approval of such amended map by the state university trustees, it shall
be filed in the office of the state university trustees and the amended
map shall thereupon in all respects and for all purposes supersede the
map previously filed.
 5. If the commissioner shall determine, prior to the filing of a copy
of such acquisition map in the office of the county clerk or register as
provided in section four hundred two of the eminent domain procedure
law, that such map should be withdrawn, he or she may file a certificate
of withdrawal in the offices of the department and of the department of
law. Upon the filing of such certificate of withdrawal, the map to
which it refers shall be cancelled and all rights thereunder shall cease
and determine.
 6. The commissioner shall deliver to the attorney general a copy of
such acquisition map, whereupon it shall be the duty of the attorney
general to advise and certify to the commissioner the names of the
owners of the property, easements, interests or rights described in the
said acquisition map, including the owners of any right, title or
interest therein, pursuant to the requirements of section four hundred
three of the eminent domain procedure law.
 7. If, at or after the vesting of title to such property in the
people of the state of New York, as provided in the eminent domain
procedure law, the commissioner of education shall deem it necessary to
cause the removal of an owner or occupant from any real property so
acquired, he may cause such owner or occupant to be removed therefrom by
proceeding in accordance with section four hundred five of the eminent
domain procedure law. The proceeding shall be brought in the name of
the commissioner of education as agent of the state and the attorney
general shall represent the petitioner in the proceedings. No execution
shall issue for costs, if any, awarded against the state or the
commissioner of education, but they shall be part of the costs of the
acquisition of the real property and be paid in like manner.
Proceedings may be brought separately against one or more of the owners
or occupants of any such property, or one proceeding may be brought
against all or several of the owners or occupants of any or all such
property within the territorial jurisdiction of the same court, justice
or judge; a final judgment shall be made for immediate removal of
persons defaulting in appearance or in answering, or withdrawing their
answers, if any, without awaiting the trial or decision of issues raised
by contestants, if any.
 8. Upon making any agreement provided for in section three hundred
four of the eminent domain procedure law the commissioner of education
or such trustees of the state university of New York, as the case may
be, shall deliver to the comptroller such agreement and a certificate
stating the amount due such owner or owners thereunder on account of
such appropriation of his or their property and the amount so fixed
shall be paid out of the state treasury after audit by the comptroller
from moneys appropriated for the acquisition of such real property, but
not until there shall have been filed with the comptroller a certificate
of the attorney general showing the person or persons claiming the
amount so agreed upon to be legally entitled thereto.
 9. Application for reimbursement of incidental expenses as provided
in section seven hundred two of the eminent domain procedure law shall
be made to the commissioner upon forms prescribed by him and shall be
accompanied by such information and evidence as the commissioner may
require. Upon approval of such application, the commissioner shall
deliver a copy thereof to the comptroller together with a certificate
stating the amount due thereof, and the amount so fixed shall be paid
out of the state treasury after audit by the comptroller from monies
appropriated for the acquisition of property under this section.
 10. The commissioner of education and the trustees of the state
university of New York, with the approval of the director of the budget,
shall establish and may from time to time amend rules and regulations
authorizing the payment of actual reasonable and necessary moving
expenses of occupants of property acquired pursuant to this section; of
actual direct losses of tangible personal property as a result of moving
or discontinuing a business or farm operation, but not exceeding an
amount equal to the reasonable expenses that would have been required to
relocate such property, as determined by the commissioner of education
and the trustees of the state university of New York; and actual
reasonable expenses in searching for a replacement business or farm; or
in hardship cases for the advance payment of such expenses and losses.
For the purposes of making payment of such expenses and losses only the
term "business" means any lawful activity conducted primarily for
assisting in the purchase, sale, resale, manufacture, processing or
marketing of products, commodities, personal property or services by the
erection and maintenance of an outdoor advertising display or displays,
whether or not such display or displays are located on the premises on
which any of the above activities are conducted. Such rules and
regulations may further define the terms used in this subdivision. In
lieu of such actual reasonable and necessary moving expenses, any such
displaced owner or tenant of residential property may elect to accept a
moving expense allowance, plus a dislocation allowance, determined in
accordance with a schedule prepared by the commissioner of education and
the trustees of the state university of New York and made a part of such
rules and regulations. In lieu of such actual reasonable and necessary
moving expenses, any such displaced owner or tenant of commercial
property who relocates or discontinues his business or farm operation
may elect to accept a fixed relocation payment in an amount equal to the
average annual net earnings of the business or farm operation, except
that such payment shall be not less than two thousand five hundred
dollars nor more than ten thousand dollars. In the case of a business,
no such fixed relocation payment shall be made unless the commissioner
of education or, in the case of an acquisition, for the purposes of the
state university, the trustees of the state university of New York find
and determine that the business cannot be relocated without a
substantial loss of its existing patronage, and that the business is not
a part of a commercial enterprise having at least one other
establishment, which is not being acquired by the state or the United
States, which is engaged in the same or similar business. In the case
of a business which is to be discontinued but for which the findings and
determinations set forth above cannot be made, the commissioner or the
trustees of the state university of New York may prepare an estimate of
what the actual reasonable and necessary moving expenses, exclusive of
any storage charges, would be if the business were to be relocated and
enter into an agreed settlement with the owner of such business for an
amount not to exceed such estimate in lieu of such actual reasonable and
necessary moving expenses. Application for payment under this
subdivision shall be made to the commissioner of education or, in the
case of an acquisition for the purposes of the state university, to the
trustees of the state university of New York and shall be accompanied by
such information and evidence as the commissioner or such trustees, as
the case may be, may require. Upon approval of such application, the
commissioner or such trustees, as the case may be, shall deliver a copy
thereof to the comptroller together with a certificate stating the
amount due thereunder, and the amount so fixed shall be paid out of the
state treasury after audit by the comptroller from moneys appropriated
for the acquisition of property under this section. As used in this
subdivision the term "commercial property" shall include property owned
by an individual, family, partnership, corporation, association or a
nonprofit organization and includes a farm operation. As used in this
subdivision the term "business" means any lawful activity, except a farm
operation, conducted primarily for the purchase, sale, lease and rental
of personal and real property, and for the manufacture, processing, or
marketing of products, commodities, or any other personal property; for
the sale of services to the public; or by a nonprofit organization.
 11. Authorization is hereby given to the commissioner of education or
in the case of an acquisition for the purposes of the state university
to the trustees of the state university of New York to make supplemental
relocation payments, separately computed and stated, to displaced owners
and tenants of residential property acquired pursuant to this section
who are entitled thereto, as determined by the commissioner of education
or such trustees, as the case may be. The commissioner of education and
the trustees of the state university of New York may, with the approval
of the director of the budget, establish and from time to time amend
rules and regulations providing for such supplemental relocation
payments. Such rules and regulations may further define the terms used
in this subdivision. In the case of property acquired pursuant to this
section which is improved by a dwelling actually owned and occupied by
the displaced owner for not less than one hundred eighty days
immediately prior to initiation of negotiations for the acquisition of
such property, such payment to such owner shall not exceed fifteen
thousand dollars. Such payment shall be the amount, if any, which, when
added to the acquisition payment equals the average price, established
by the commissioner of education or such trustees, as the case may be,
on a class, group or individual basis, required to obtain a comparable
replacement dwelling that is decent, safe and sanitary to accommodate
the displaced owner, reasonably accessible to public services and places
of employment and available on the private market, but in no event shall
such payment exceed the difference between acquisition payment and the
actual purchase price of the replacement dwelling. Such payment shall
include an amount which will compensate such displaced owner for any
increased interest costs which such person is required to pay for
financing the acquisition of any such comparable replacement dwelling.
Such amount shall be paid only if the dwelling acquired pursuant to this
section was encumbered by a bona fide mortgage which was a valid lien on
such dwelling for not less than one hundred eighty days prior to the
initiation of negotiations for the acquisition of such dwelling. Such
amount shall be equal to the excess in the aggregate interest and other
debt service costs of that amount of the principal of the mortgage on
the replacement dwelling which is equal to the unpaid balance of the
mortgage on the acquired dwelling, over the remainder term of the
mortgage on the acquired dwelling, reduced to discounted present value.
The discount rate shall be the prevailing interest rate paid on savings
deposits by commercial banks in the general area in which the
replacement dwelling is located. Any such mortgage interest
differential payment shall, notwithstanding the provisions of section
twenty-six-b of the general construction law, be in lieu of and in full
satisfaction of the requirements of such section. Such payment shall
include reasonable expenses incurred by such displaced owner for
evidence of title, recording fees and other closing costs incident to
the purchase of the replacement dwelling, but not including prepaid
expenses. Such payment shall be made only to a displaced owner who
purchases and occupies a replacement dwelling which is decent, safe and
sanitary within one year subsequent to the date on which he is required
to move from the dwelling acquired pursuant to this section or the date
on which he receives from the state final payment of all costs of the
acquired dwelling, whichever occurs later, except advance payment of
such amount may be made in hardship cases. In the case of property
acquired pursuant to this section from which an individual or family,
not otherwise eligible to receive a payment pursuant to the above
provisions of this subdivision, is displaced from any dwelling thereon
which has been actually and lawfully occupied by such individual or
family for not less than ninety days immediately prior to the initiation
of negotiations for the acquisition of such property, such payment to
such individual or family shall not exceed four thousand dollars. Such
payment shall be the amount which is necessary to enable such individual
or family to lease or rent for a period not to exceed four years, a
decent, safe, and sanitary dwelling of standards adequate to accommodate
such individual or family in areas not generally less desirable in
regard to public utilities and public and commercial facilities and
reasonably accessible to his place of employment, but shall not exceed
four thousand dollars, or to make the down payment, including reasonable
expenses incurred by such individual or family for evidence of title,
recording fees, and other closing costs incident to the purchase of the
replacement dwelling, but not including prepaid expenses, on the
purchase of a decent, safe and sanitary dwelling of standards adequate
to accommodate such individual or family in areas not generally less
desirable in regard to public utilities and public and commercial
facilities, but shall not exceed four thousand dollars, except if such
amount exceeds two thousand dollars, such person must equally match any
such amount in excess of two thousand dollars, in making the down
payment. Such payments may be made in installments as determined by the
commissioner of education or such trustees, as the case may be.
Application for payment under this subdivision shall be made to the
commissioner of education or such trustees, as the case may be, and
shall be accompanied by such information and evidence as the
commissioner or such trustees, as the case may be, may require. Upon
approval of such application, the commissioner or such trustees, as the
case may be, shall deliver a copy thereof to the comptroller, together
with a certificate stating the amount due thereunder, and the amount so
fixed shall be paid out of the state treasury after audit by the
comptroller from moneys appropriated for the acquisition of property
under this section.
 12. The owner of any real property so acquired may present to the
court of claims, pursuant to section five hundred three of the eminent
domain procedure law, a claim for the value of such property acquired
and for legal damages caused by such acquisition, as provided by law for
the filing of claims with the court of claims. Awards and judgments of
the court of claims shall be paid in the same manner as awards and
judgments of that court for the acquisition of lands generally and shall
be paid out of the state treasury after audit by the comptroller from
moneys appropriated for the acquisition of such real property.
 13. If the commissioner of education shall determine subsequent to
the acquisition of a temporary easement in any real property that the
purposes for which such easement right was acquired have been
accomplished and that the exercise of such easement is no longer
necessary, he shall make his certificate that the exercise of such
easement is no longer necessary and that such easement right is
therefore terminated, released and extinguished. The commissioner of
education shall cause such certificate to be filed in the office of the
department of state and upon such filing all rights acquired by the
state in such property shall cease and determine. The commissioner of
education shall cause a certified copy of such certificate as so filed
in the office of the department of state to be mailed to the owner of
the property affected, as certified by the attorney general, if the
place of residence of such owner is known or can be ascertained by a
reasonable effort and such commissioner of education shall cause a
further certified copy of such certificate to be filed in the office of
the recording officer of each county in which the property affected or
any part thereof is situated. On the filing of such certified copy of
such certificate with such recording officer, it shall be his duty to
record the same in his office in the books used for recording deeds and
to index the same against the name of the people of the state of New
York as grantor.
 14. Whenever the state university trustees determine that property
under their jurisdiction, heretofore or hereafter acquired for state
university purposes pursuant to this section, or any interest therein,
is unnecessary for the present or foreseeable future needs of the state
university and that any such property or interest may be sold, exchanged
or released on terms beneficial to the state to the former owner from
whom such property or interest was acquired or, in the case of an
interest in such property, to the owner of the servient estate, or to
their respective heirs, successors in interest or assigns, the state
university trustees may sell, exchange or release such property or
interest, to such owner, his heirs, successors in interest or assigns,
with the approval of the director of the budget and notwithstanding the
provisions of any general, special or local law, at the fair market
value thereof or in partial or full settlement of any claim which such
owner, or his heirs, successors in interest or assigns, may have for
damages resulting from the acquisition of such property or interest. In
order to carry any such sale, exchange or release into effect, the state
university trustees are hereby authorized to exchange and deliver in the
name of the people of the state of New York a quitclaim of, or a grant
in and to, any such property or interest. Each such instrument of
conveyance or release shall be prepared by the attorney general and
before delivery thereof, shall be approved by him as to form and manner
of execution.
 § 308. Other powers. The commissioner of education shall also have
power and it shall be his duty to cause to be instituted such
proceedings or processes as may be necessary to properly enforce and
give effect to any provision in this chapter or in any other general or
special law pertaining to the school system of the state or any part
thereof or to any school district or city. He shall possess the power
and authority to likewise enforce any rule or direction of the regents.
 § 309. Schools of union free school districts and cities. The schools
of every union free school district and of every city in all their
departments shall be subject to the visitation of the commissioner of
education. He is charged with the general supervision of their boards
of education and their management and conduct of all departments of
instruction.
 § 309-a. Twenty-first century schools program. 1. Twenty-first century
schools plans. The commissioner is authorized to designate as
"twenty-first century schools," schools which are implementing approved
plans to achieve substantial improvement in student achievement.
Applications for designation as a twenty-first century school may be
submitted on behalf of an individual school, a subset of schools within
a school district or all schools within a school district. Each
application for designation as a twenty-first century school shall be
made in a form prescribed by the commissioner and shall set forth a
five-year plan to enable all students to achieve levels of educational
achievement that are competitive with high international standards
through implementation of innovative instructional strategies and
restructuring of school management and programs. Such application shall
be submitted by April first next preceding the school year in which
operation as a twenty-first century school would commence. The
twenty-first century school plan shall be developed through consultation
with teachers, administrators, parents and other interested parties and
shall be approved by the board of education at a public meeting. Such
consultation shall be conducted in accordance with plans for
school-based planning and shared decision making adopted in accordance
with regulations of the commissioner. A school designated as a
twenty-first century school may revise its plan, subject to approval by
the commissioner and subject to all requirements governing initial
development and approval of a plan. A twenty-first century school plan
shall contain such information as the commissioner may require,
including but not limited to:
 a. identification of the school or schools included within the plan;
 b. high, internationally competitive academic content and student
achievement standards and mechanisms for assessing student achievement
that are fair, reliable and valid, that have been selected or developed
in conjunction with teachers, principals, parents and representatives of
employers, organized labor, higher education institutions and community
organizations and are consistent with standards and assessment practices
developed by the department, by national organizations of subject-matter
experts or by others;
 c. specific actions to be undertaken to assure that all students,
regardless of economic background, race, gender, ethnicity, disability
or limited English proficiency, will have a fair opportunity to achieve
the knowledge and skills described in the student achievement standards
pursuant to paragraph b of this subdivision;
 d. specific improvements in student achievement that the plan is
expected to produce including, but not limited to, improvements in
student achievement as reflected in grades, test scores, portfolio
assessments and student demonstrations of skills or competencies and
improvements in attendance and completion rates;
 e. certifications by the superintendent of schools and the principal
of each school included in the plan that the school will comply with all
requirements of this chapter, rules of the board or regulations of the
commissioner listed by the commissioner pursuant to subdivision three of
this section;
 f. a description of the staff development, training and support for
teachers and other personnel that will be necessary to implement the
plan;
 g. any changes in school governance or management, work rules or
assignment restrictions, pursuant to collective negotiations where
applicable, needed in order to effectively focus and assist schools in
preparing students to meet the achievement standards described in
paragraph b of this subdivision;
 h. any actions to be undertaken to assist families of students in
addressing pressing needs that affect student achievement, including,
but not limited to, forming partnerships with public and private
agencies to increase the access of students and families to quality
coordinated services;
 i. any actions to be undertaken to facilitate the transition from
school to work or to postsecondary education for all students including,
for example, integration of workplace readiness skills and career
information into curricula, provision of school-structured work
experiences, cooperation with local employers and articulation of school
and college programs; and
 j. a plan for evaluation of the effectiveness of the program.
 2. Criteria for approval. The commissioner may designate a total of up
to two hundred fifty twenty-first century schools by the nineteen
hundred ninety-nine--two thousand school year. The commissioner shall
promulgate criteria for the designation of twenty-first century schools
which shall include, but not be limited to:
 a. certifications by the commissioner that: (i) the student
achievement standards described pursuant to paragraph b of subdivision
one of this section represent high, internationally competitive
standards for student knowledge and skills, (ii) that the mechanisms for
assessing student achievement pursuant to such paragraph b are fair,
reliable and valid; and (iii) the plan is designed to provide all
students with educational services of a quality at least as high as
those offered under existing practices, without regard to economic
background, race, gender, ethnicity, disability or limited English
proficiency;
 b. the potential of the school plan for use as a model to be
replicated by other similarly situated schools and the probability of
success in substantially improving levels of achievement for all
students, without regard to economic background, race, gender,
ethnicity, disability or limited English proficiency;
 c. evidence and strength of support for the proposal among teachers,
parents and staff;
 d. use of nationally recognized school restructuring and improvement
models and reliance upon research-based strategies for improving student
achievement; and
 e. changes in local policies to provide the school or schools with
additional enhanced flexibility.
 The commissioner shall designate twenty-first century schools after
consultation with the twenty-first century schools committee established
pursuant to subdivision six of this section. The commissioner shall, to
the extent practicable, provide for designation of schools located in a
mixture of urban, rural and suburban settings. The commissioner shall
take specific actions to encourage applications from schools located in
economically and socially distressed communities.
 3. Exemption from regulation. A school designated as a twenty-first
century school shall:
 a. be exempt from complying with rules of the board and regulations of
the commissioner to the extent necessary to implement an approved
twenty-first century school plan and except as provided in paragraphs b
and c of this subdivision;
 b. be authorized, as part of a twenty-first century school plan or
revision thereto, to request approval by the commissioner to be exempted
from specific requirements of this chapter except as provided in
paragraph c of this subdivision and provided that the school shall
continue to meet the underlying purposes of the statute to the
satisfaction of the commissioner and that the exemption shall be granted
only to the extent necessary to implement an approved twenty-first
century school plan in the affected school or schools and provided
further, that within thirty days of granting an exemption pursuant to
this paragraph, the commissioner shall provide written notice of such
action to the governor, the temporary president of the senate and the
speaker of the assembly; and
 c. not be exempt from complying with requirements of this chapter,
rules of the board or regulations of the commissioner that (i) protect
the health, safety and civil rights of students and staff, (ii)
implement the requirements of federal law or regulation, (iii) provide
for teacher, staff and parent participation and involvement, maintenance
of effort or equitable participation of students and staff in nonpublic
schools, (iv) require the use of certified teachers, or (v) pertain to
attendance of pupils; further, nothing herein shall be construed to
exempt a twenty-first century school or its governing district from
complying with the provisions of titles two and four of this chapter,
with the requirement to offer students the opportunity to meet all the
requirements for and receive a regents high school diploma or with
requirements to reporting data necessary for the computation of state
aid.
 On or by October first, nineteen hundred ninety-four, the commissioner
shall promulgate and provide to the governor, the temporary president of
the senate and the speaker of the assembly a preliminary list of all
requirements from which twenty-first century schools shall be required
to request specific exemption as provided in paragraph b of this
subdivision and with which twenty-first century schools shall be
required to comply as provided in paragraph c of this subdivision. The
commissioner shall promulgate a final list of all such requirements on
November first, nineteen hundred ninety-four. The commissioner shall
revise such list as needed and, in each case, shall provide a
preliminary revised list to the governor, the temporary president of the
senate and the speaker of the assembly at least thirty days prior to
promulgating a final revised list.
 4. School evaluations and reports. Each school designated as a
twenty-first century school shall annually review its effectiveness in
improving student performance and enabling all students to achieve to
high internationally competitive standards and shall report the results
of this review to the commissioner by September first next succeeding
each year of operation as a twenty-first century school. Prior to the
start of a school's third year of operation as a twenty-first century
school, the school and the commissioner shall jointly review the
school's performance to identify areas in need of improvement and to
develop revisions to the school's twenty-first century school plan to
remedy the identified shortcomings. If, as a result of such review, the
commissioner determines that the school is unlikely to produce
improvement in student achievement, he or she shall commence action to
revoke the school's designation as a twenty-first century school in
accordance with the provisions of subdivision five of this section. The
trustees or board of education of each district operating a twenty-first
century school shall arrange for an independent evaluation of such
school's effectiveness in substantially improving student achievement.
Such independent evaluation shall be completed and transmitted to the
commissioner within ninety days after completion of the fourth year of
the school's operation as a twenty-first century school. Such
independent evaluation shall be conducted by an agency selected by the
trustees or board of education of the district and approved by the
commissioner.
 5. Duties of the commissioner and department. The commissioner shall
promulgate guidelines to implement the provisions of this section, shall
annually review the performance of all schools designated as
twenty-first century schools, shall provide technical assistance and
support, as appropriate, to all such schools, and shall submit to the
regents, the legislature and the governor, no later than February first,
an annual report describing the effectiveness of the twenty-first
century schools program, recommending changes in the program and
recommending changes in laws and regulations affecting all schools based
upon the experiences of twenty-first century schools. The first such
report shall be submitted no later than June first, nineteen hundred
ninety-five and shall detail the steps undertaken to implement the
provisions of this section. Each such annual report shall list and
summarize all exemptions requested, granted and denied pursuant to
paragraph b of subdivision three of this section. The commissioner may,
acting either upon complaint or upon his or her own initiative, revoke a
school's designation as a twenty-first century school for good cause
shown and after affording the school an opportunity to present arguments
against revocation.
 6. Twenty-first century schools committee. There is hereby established
the twenty-first century schools committee. The committee shall advise
and assist the commissioner in developing guidelines to implement the
provisions of this section, selecting schools for designation as
twenty-first century schools, reviewing the performance of such schools,
evaluating the overall effectiveness of the twenty-first century schools
program and recommending changes to the program and to laws, rules and
regulations affecting all schools based upon the experiences of
twenty-first century schools. The committee shall consist of thirteen
members, appointed by the governor, of whom three shall be appointed on
the recommendation of the commissioner, two on the recommendation of the
temporary president of the senate, two on the recommendation of the
speaker of the assembly, one on the recommendation of the minority
leader of the senate and one on the recommendation of the minority
leader of the assembly. The commissioner shall designate the chair. The
appointing authorities shall attempt to assure that the membership of
the committee includes representatives of parents, teachers, school
board members and school administrators as well as representatives of
their own institutions.
 § 310. Appeals or petitions to commissioner of education and other
proceedings. Any party conceiving himself aggrieved may appeal by
petition to the commissioner of education who is hereby authorized and
required to examine and decide the same; and the commissioner of
education may also institute such proceedings as are authorized under
this article. The petition may be made in consequence of any action:
 1. By any school district meeting.
 2. By any district superintendent and other officers, in forming or
altering, or refusing to form or alter, any school district, or in
refusing to apportion any school moneys to any such district or part of
a district.
 3. By a county treasurer or other distributing agent in refusing to
pay any such moneys to any such district.
 4. By the trustees of any district in paying or refusing to pay any
teacher, or in refusing to admit any scholar gratuitously into any
school or on any other matter upon which they may or do officially act.
 5. By any trustees of any school library concerning such library, or
the books therein, or the use of such books.
 6. By any district meeting in relation to the library or any other
matter pertaining to the affairs of the district.
 6-a. By a principal, teacher, owner or other person in charge of any
school in denying a child admission to, or continued attendance at, such
school for lack of proof of required immunizations in accordance with
section twenty-one hundred sixty-four of the public health law.
 7. By any other official act or decision of any officer, school
authorities, or meetings concerning any other matter under this chapter,
or any other act pertaining to common schools.
 § 311. Powers of commissioner upon appeals or petitions, et cetera.
The commissioner, in reference to such appeals, petitions or
proceedings, shall have power:
 1. To regulate the practice therein.
 2. To determine whether an appeal shall stay proceedings, and
prescribe conditions upon which it shall or shall not so operate.
 3. To decline to entertain or to dismiss an appeal, when it shall
appear that the appellant has no interest in the matter appealed from,
and that the matter is not a matter of public concern, and that the
person injuriously affected by the act or decision appealed from is
incompetent to appeal.
 4. To make all orders, by directing the levying of taxes or otherwise,
which may, in his judgment, be proper or necessary to give effect to his
decision.
 § 312. Filed papers and copies thereof. The commissioner shall file,
arrange in the order of time, and keep in his office, so that they may
be at all times accessible, all the proceedings on every appeal or
petition to him under this article, including his decision and orders
founded thereon; and copies of all such papers and proceedings,
authenticated by him under his seal of office, shall be evidence equally
with the originals.
 § 313. Unfair educational practices. (1) Declaration of policy. (a)
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the state that the American
ideal of equality of opportunity requires that students, otherwise
qualified, be admitted to educational institutions and be given access
to all the educational programs and courses operated or provided by such
institutions without regard to race, color, sex, religion, creed,
marital status, age, sexual orientation as defined in section two
hundred ninety-two of the executive law, gender identity or expression
as defined in section two hundred ninety-two of the executive law, or
national origin, except that, with regard to religious or denominational
educational institutions, students, otherwise qualified, shall have the
equal opportunity to attend therein without discrimination because of
race, color, sex, marital status, age, sexual orientation as defined in
section two hundred ninety-two of the executive law, gender identity or
expression as defined in section two hundred ninety-two of the executive
law, or national origin. It is a fundamental American right for members
of various religious faiths to establish and maintain educational
institutions exclusively or primarily for students of their own
religious faith or to effectuate the religious principles in furtherance
of which they are maintained. Nothing herein contained shall impair or
abridge that right.
 (b) It is hereby further declared to be the policy of the state that
individuals who withdraw from postsecondary educational institutions in
order to serve on active duty in the armed forces of the United States
in time of war and who seek to return to such educational institutions
shall be allowed to do so without the imposition of any penalty,
academic or financial, for their withdrawal, and that any express or
implied contractual provision which imposes any such penalty shall be
void and unenforceable as against public policy.
 (2) Definitions. (a) Educational institution means any educational
institution of post-secondary grade subject to the visitation,
examination or inspection by the state board of regents or the state
commissioner of education and any business or trade school in the state.
 (b) Religious or denominational educational institution means an
educational institution which is operated, supervised or controlled by a
religious or denominational organization and which has certified to the
state commissioner of education that it is a religious or denominational
educational institution.
 (3) Unfair educational practices. It shall be an unfair educational
practice for an educational institution after September fifteenth,
nineteen hundred forty-eight:
 (a) To exclude or limit or otherwise discriminate against any person
or persons seeking admission as students to such institution or to any
educational program or course operated or provided by such institution
because of race, religion, creed, sex, color, marital status, age,
sexual orientation as defined in section two hundred ninety-two of the
executive law, gender identity or expression as defined in section two
hundred ninety-two of the executive law, or national origin; except that
nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect, in any way, the right
of a religious or denominational educational institution to select its
students exclusively or primarily from members of such religion or
denomination or from giving preference in such selection to such members
or to make such selection of its students as is calculated by such
institution to promote the religious principles for which it is
established or maintained. Nothing herein contained shall impair or
abridge the right of an independent institution, which establishes or
maintains a policy of educating persons of one sex exclusively, to admit
students of only one sex.
 (b) To penalize any individual because he or she has initiated,
testified, participated or assisted in any proceedings under this
section.
 (c) To accept any endowment or gift of money or property conditioned
upon teaching the doctrine of supremacy of any particular race.
 (d) With respect to any individual who withdraws from attendance to
serve on active duty in the armed forces of the United States in time of
war, including any individual who withdrew from attendance on or after
August second, nineteen hundred ninety to serve on active duty in the
armed forces of the United States in the Persian Gulf conflict: (i) to
deny or limit the readmission of such individual to such institution or
to any educational program or course operated or provided by such
institution because of such withdrawal from attendance or because of the
failure to complete any educational program or course due to such
withdrawal; (ii) to impose any academic penalty on such person because
of such withdrawal or because of the failure to complete any educational
program or course due to such withdrawal; (iii) to reduce or eliminate
any financial aid award granted to such individual which could not be
used, in whole or part, because of such withdrawal or because of the
failure to complete any educational program or course due to such
withdrawal; or (iv) to fail to provide a credit or refund of tuition and
fees paid by such individual for any semester, term or quarter not
completed because of such withdrawal or because of the failure to
complete any program or course due to such withdrawal.
 (e) It shall not be an unfair educational practice for any educational
institution to use criteria other than race, religion, creed, sex,
color, marital status, age, sexual orientation as defined in section two
hundred ninety-two of the executive law, gender identity or expression
as defined in section two hundred ninety-two of the executive law, or
national origin in the admission of students to such institution or to
any of the educational programs and courses operated or provided by such
institution.
 (f) No educational institution shall require an individual to provide
a copy of his or her criminal history record that he or she obtained
pursuant to the rules and regulations of the division of criminal
justice services.
 (4) Certification of religious and denominational institutions. An
educational institution operated, supervised or controlled by a
religious or denominational organization may, through its chief
executive officer, certify in writing to the commissioner that it is so
operated, controlled or supervised, and that it elects to be considered
a religious or denominational educational institution, and it thereupon
shall be deemed such an institution for the purposes of this section.
 (5) Procedure. (a) Any person seeking admission as a student who
claims to be aggrieved by an alleged unfair educational practice,
hereinafter referred to as the petitioner, may himself, or by his parent
or guardian, make, sign and file with the commissioner of education a
verified petition which shall set forth the particulars thereof and
contain such other information as may be required by the commissioner.
The commissioner shall thereupon cause an investigation to be made in
connection therewith; and after such investigation if he shall determine
that probable cause exists for crediting the allegations of the
petition, he shall attempt by informal methods of persuasion,
conciliation or mediation to induce the elimination of such alleged
unfair educational practice.
 (b) Where the commissioner has reason to believe that an applicant or
applicants have been discriminated against, except that preferential
selection by religious or denominational institutions of students of
their own religion or denomination shall not be considered an act of
discrimination, he may initiate an investigation on his own motion.
 (c) The commissioner shall not disclose what takes place during such
informal efforts at persuasion, conciliation or mediation nor shall he
offer in evidence in any proceeding the facts adduced in such informal
efforts.
 (d) A petition pursuant to this section must be filed with the
commissioner within one year after the alleged unfair educational
practice was committed.
 (e) If such informal methods fail to induce the elimination of the
alleged unfair educational practice, the commissioner shall have power
to refer the matter to the board of regents which shall issue and cause
to be served upon such institution, hereinafter called the respondent, a
complaint setting forth the alleged unfair educational practice charged
and a notice of hearing before the board of regents, at a place therein
fixed to be held not less than twenty days after the service of said
complaint.
 Any complaint issued pursuant to this section must be issued within
two years after the alleged unfair educational practice was committed.
 (f) The respondent shall have the right to answer the original and any
amended complaint and to appear at such hearing by counsel, present
evidence and examine and cross-examine witnesses.
 (g) The commissioner and the board of regents shall have the power to
subpoena witnesses, compel their attendance, administer oaths, take
testimony under oath and require the production of evidence relating to
the matter in question before it or them. The testimony taken at the
hearing, which shall be public shall be under oath and shall be reduced
to writing and filed with the board of regents.
 (h) After the hearing is completed the board of regents shall file an
intermediate report which shall contain its findings of fact and
conclusions upon the issues in the proceeding. A copy of such report
shall be served on the parties to the proceeding. Any such party within
twenty days thereafter, may file with the regents exceptions to the
findings of fact and conclusions, with a brief in support thereof, or
may file a brief in support of such findings of fact and conclusions.
 (i) If, upon all the evidence, the regents shall determine that the
respondent has engaged in an unfair educational practice, the regents
shall state their findings of fact and conclusions and shall issue and
cause to be served upon such respondent a copy of such findings and
conclusions and an order requiring the respondent to cease and desist
from such unfair educational practice, or such other order as they deem
just and proper.
 (j) If, upon all the evidence, the regents shall find that a
respondent has not engaged in any unfair educational practice, the
regents shall state their findings of fact and conclusions and shall
issue and cause to be served on the petitioner and respondent, a copy of
such findings and conclusions, and an order dismissing the complaint as
to such respondent.
 (6) Judicial review and enforcement. (a) Whenever the board of regents
has issued an order as provided in this section it may apply to the
supreme court for the enforcement of such order by a proceeding brought
in the supreme court within the third judicial district. The board of
regents shall file with the court a transcript of the record of its
hearing, and the court shall have jurisdiction of the proceeding and of
the questions determined therein, and shall have power to make an order
annulling or confirming, wholly or in part, or modifying the
determination reviewed. The order of the supreme court shall be subject
to review by the appellate division of the supreme court and the court
of appeals, upon the appeal of any party to the proceeding, in the same
manner and with the same effect as provided on an appeal from a final
judgment made by the court without a jury.
 (b) Any party to the proceeding, aggrieved by a final order of the
board of regents, may obtain a judicial review thereof by a proceeding
under article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules, which
shall be brought in the appellate division of the supreme court for the
third judicial department.
 (7) Regents empowered to promulgate rules and regulations. The regents
from time to time may adopt, promulgate, amend or rescind rules and
regulations to effectuate the purposes and provisions of this section.
 (8) The commissioner shall include in his annual report to the
legislature (1) a resume of the nature and substance of the cases
disposed of through public hearings, and (2) recommendations for further
action to eliminate discrimination in education if such is needed.
 § 313-a. Prohibition against the use of certain material in
questionnaires and applications for admission to educational
institutions. No application for admission to any educational
institution in the state of New York shall contain any questions
requiring the involuntary disclosure of the marital status of the
parents of those applying for admission.
 § 314. State plan for school district reorganization 1. The
commissioner of education is hereby authorized to continue the
investigations, study and review carried on by the joint legislative
committee on the state education system in order to bring up to date the
state plan for school district reorganization (legislative document
number twenty-five of nineteen hundred forty-seven, formerly referred to
as the Master Plan for School District Reorganization in New York
State); to make such studies and surveys as are necessary to review
periodically and maintain such plan currently; to hold hearings in
relation to affected areas for the purpose of eliciting the expression
of opinion, cooperation and assistance of the inhabitants of such areas;
and to make recommendations for school district reorganization so as to
assure the most efficient and economical provision of education
facilities for such areas and in the best educational interests of the
children in the area. Such recommendations shall be principally directed
toward the reorganization of areas in and around the city school
districts of cities having less than one hundred twenty-five thousand
inhabitants, the reorganization of the remaining common and union free
school districts not included in such urban and suburban areas and the
reorganization of the smaller central school districts.
 2. At any such time as the commissioner shall determine that an area
or areas should be reorganized to assure and provide the best, most
efficient and most economical educational facilities for such area or
areas and that the best educational interests of the children in the
area will be served by such reorganization, the commissioner shall
formally announce or reaffirm such plan of reorganization stating his
reason therefor by orders made by him and entered in his office. Such
order shall identify the affected school districts and shall designate
all school districts by name, number or such other description as the
commissioner shall deem proper. The commissioner shall forward a copy of
such order to the clerk or in the event there is no clerk, the trustee
or trustees of such school district located in the affected area or
areas.
 3. (a) Any school district scheduled for reorganization, and not
reorganized, desiring a change in the established plan of reorganization
as promulgated pursuant to subdivision two hereof, may petition to the
commissioner for a formal public hearing stating the changes desired
with the supporting papers, data and information. Such petition shall be
filed with the commissioner by the board of education of a city school
district or by the trustee or board of trustees or board of education in
other types of school districts upon the motion of a majority of the
voters of such school district, present and voting at an annual or
special school district meeting or election adopting a resolution
directing the school board or trustees to file such petition.
 (b) The commissioner within thirty days after receipt of such a
petition for a formal public hearing shall designate by written notice
the place of such hearing and fix a date therefor not less than thirty
nor more than sixty days from the date of such notice. Such notice shall
include (1) the time and place of the formal public hearing, (2) set
forth the petitioner's proposed change or changes, (3) the established
plan of reorganization.
 (c) Upon receipt of such notice of such hearing from the commissioner,
the petitioning district shall publish a copy of such notice in one
newspaper having a general circulation in such district, such
publication to be at least twenty days before such hearing, but if there
be no such newspaper, a copy of said notice shall be posted in at least
twenty public places in said district twenty days before such hearing.
 (d) Hearing. The formal public hearing shall be held at the time and
place specified in such notice or amended or republished notice. Such
hearing may be had before the commissioner or a person designated by him
as a hearing officer. The commissioner or such person so designated
shall hear the petitioning school district, the department and all
districts and parties appearing, each of whom may present testimony
under oath, supporting exhibits, departmental records and all data,
maps, sketches and argument, concerning the petition. The petitioner
shall have the burden of showing that the proposed change or changes to
the existing state plan assures and provides equally efficient and
economical educational facilities to such area or other areas affected
and that the educational interests of the school children in the area
will be at least equally served by such proposed change or changes, and
that such change or changes will create school districts in the area or
areas affected which by reason of actual or reasonably to be expected
growth, will be of adequate size, and financial resources to provide
equally efficient and economical educational facilities to such area or
areas to serve the educational interests of the children resident
therein in all grades from kindergarten through the twelfth year.
 (e) Within sixty days after such hearing is concluded and all papers
in relation thereto are submitted, the commissioner shall render a
preliminary finding recommending whether a change is warranted, setting
forth his findings and conclusions which shall be based exclusively on
the evidence presented at the hearing. The commissioner shall recommend
the amendment or confirmation of the state plan in accordance with his
preliminary finding by a report made by him and entered in his office.
The commissioner shall serve a copy of such preliminary finding upon the
clerk or in the event that there is no clerk, the trustee or trustees of
the school districts located in the affected area or areas. In the event
that such districts do not agree with such preliminary findings, the
school districts affected by the terms of such preliminary finding may
within thirty days apply to the chancellor of the board of regents for
the appointment of a committee of the regents to review the proposed
amendment or confirmation of the state plan. In the event that an
application to the chancellor is not made within thirty days for the
appointment of a committee of the regents, the preliminary finding shall
become an order without further action of the commissioner.
 (f) Upon receipt of such application, the chancellor shall appoint a
committee of three members of the regents, one of whom shall be a regent
whose judicial district includes all or part of the areas affected. The
committee of regents shall review the proposed amendment or confirmation
of the state plan. In the event the committee is unable to resolve the
differences between the commissioner and such school districts, it shall
within sixty days from the date of the appointment of such committee,
make an order reversing, affirming, or modifying, wholly or in part,
such preliminary finding of the commissioner and amending or confirming
the state plan setting forth the committee's findings and conclusions
which shall be based exclusively on the evidence presented at the
commissioner's hearing and any additional evidence presented at the
committee's review. The committee shall have the discretion to permit
additional evidence to be presented by any party. The commissioner shall
serve a copy of such order upon the clerk or in the event there is no
clerk, the trustee or trustees of the school districts located in the
affected area or areas.
 (g) Such order of the committee of the regents shall be binding and
final and subject to review pursuant to article seventy-eight of the
civil practice law and rules. The scope of review shall include the
question whether the determination is on the entire record supported by
substantial evidence.
 (h) The commissioner shall establish and promulgate rules of practice
and procedures in connection with such hearings, shall provide for the
attendance of the hearing officer, regulate the course of the hearing,
fix the time for filing of briefs and other documents, provide a hearing
stenographer and for the making of a record as well as the making of a
full transcript of all proceedings at the hearing and shall at the
request of any party, school district or interested person have prepared
and furnish a copy of the transcript or any part thereof upon payment of
the costs therefor.
 (i) School districts designated in the established plan by an order of
the committee of the regents shall be made parties by the petitioning
district. Districts which may be affected by the proposed change may
join or be joined in such proceeding by the commissioner or any party.
 4. Whenever a school district scheduled for reorganization fails to
institute such proceeding hereunder within two years subsequent to the
filing of an established plan of reorganization by the commissioner
pursuant to paragraph two herein, the state plan of reorganization in
existence at that time shall be final and binding upon all districts
affected thereby. After such two year period, such district may petition
the commissioner for a change in such final and binding plan upon an
additional showing that material changes have occurred since such two
year period. No proceeding shall again be brought until two years have
elapsed since a final determination hereunder.
 5. Nothing herein contained shall delay, or interfere with, the
exercise of the powers of the commissioner of education vested in him by
articles thirty-seven or forty or sections fifteen hundred twenty-four,
fifteen hundred twenty-five or fifteen hundred twenty-six of the
education law.
 6. Whenever any school district scheduled for reorganization pursuant
to the state plan of reorganization as herein established has not
consolidated or reorganized in accordance therewith within two years
after the entry of an order pursuant to subdivision two herein
establishing such final plan of reorganization for the affected district
or districts, or has failed within such time after receipt of such
notice to institute a proceeding for a change in accordance with this
section, or is unable to show that such district has adopted a
resolution or resolutions in accordance with sections eighteen hundred
one through eighteen hundred three, fifteen hundred ten through fifteen
hundred thirteen, fifteen hundred twenty-two and fifteen hundred
twenty-three, fifteen hundred twenty-four or fifteen hundred twenty-six
of this chapter in favor of such reorganization or that in the case of
an order of dissolution and annexation, such district has not asked for
a referendum pursuant to subdivision two of section eighteen hundred
two, and is being prevented from reorganizing by the action of another
district which is part of the same plan of reorganization, commencing
with the school year following the school year in which the two-year
period expired, such school district shall not be eligible to receive
any building aid exceeding the building aid which such district would be
entitled to receive in accordance with the applicable provisions of the
education law in existence on July first, nineteen hundred sixty-five
until such reorganization shall take place, except for such additional
amounts as may be computed as due on debt service already incurred;
provided, however, that nothing contained in this subdivision shall
prevent the apportionment of building aid for construction,
reconstruction, alterations of or additions to school building
facilities for the use of grades kindergarten through eight, provided
the commissioner shall find that (1) existing facilities are obsolete or
inadequate and (2) that the construction for which aid is sought would
be capable of substantial educational use by the reorganized district in
the event that the reorganization under the existing plan for
reorganization is effected.
 § 315. School district names. Each school district, other than a city
school district, shall, in accordance with the commissioner's
regulations, adopt a simplified name as the legal name of the district.
Such name shall be submitted to the commissioner for prior approval and
when such name shall be adopted it shall be filed with the commissioner.
The name of a central school district established or reorganized by an
order of the commissioner pursuant to section eighteen hundred one of
this chapter may be changed by the board of education of such district,
with the prior approval of the commissioner, upon a written request by
the board of education filed with the commissioner not later than
fourteen days prior to the date of the establishment or reorganization
of the district and in accordance with the regulations of the
commissioner. The education department shall issue, on request,
certificates certifying the name of the district and the names of the
towns and counties in which the territory of the district is located, or
in the case of school districts other than city school districts, which
are wholly or partly located within a city, the names of the city, towns
and counties in which the territory of the district is located.
 § 316. Teacher resource and computer training centers. 1. As used in
this section, unless another meaning clearly appears from the context:
 a. "Teacher resource and computer training center" means any site
operated by a school district, board of cooperative educational services
or a consortium of school districts and/or boards of cooperative
educational services which is specifically established pursuant to this
section to provide professional support services to teachers within the
state in order to:
 (1) assist teachers, diagnose learning needs, experiment with the use
of multiple instructional approaches, assess student outcomes, assess
staff development needs and plans, and train other school personnel in
effective pedagogical approaches;
 (2) provide demonstration and training sites where teachers are
trained, specifically in the use of computers as teaching aids; the
criteria for school acquisition and use of computer equipment and
software; and the evaluation of computer-related materials;
 (3) develop and produce curricula and curricular materials designed to
meet the educational needs of students being served through application
of educational research or new or improved methods, practices, and
techniques;
 (4) provide training to improve the skills of teachers in order to
enable such teachers to meet the special educational needs of the pupils
they serve, and to familiarize such teachers with developments in
curriculum formulation and educational research, including the manner in
which the research can be used to improve teaching skills;
 (5) provide a location where teachers may share resources, ideas,
methods and approaches directly related to classroom instruction and
become familiar with current teaching materials and products for use in
their classrooms; and
 (6) retrain teachers and other educational personnel to become better
qualified to teach in subject areas necessary to prepare students for
the developing high technology era, in the disciplines of mathematics,
science and computer technology.
 b. "Site" for the purposes of this section shall mean the location or
locations where the curriculum development and training activities of
the teacher resource and computer training center take place.
 2. In order to provide the school districts and teachers of the state
with an opportunity to develop systematic, ongoing in-service training
programs, assure the dissemination and application of educational
research developments to classroom instruction and develop new curricula
and curricular materials specifically designed to meet the educational
needs of the students served, the commissioner shall, within available
state appropriations and subject to the procedures established in this
section, provide funds to school districts and boards of cooperative
educational services to plan, establish and operate teacher resource and
computer training centers. Any school district or board of cooperative
educational services requesting such funds shall make application
therefor at such time, in such manner, and containing or accompanied by
such information as the commissioner may through this section or by
regulation require. Applications shall be made within the following
categories:
 (i) a school district with a teacher population of one thousand or
more;
 (ii) a school district with a teacher population of five hundred or
more but less than one thousand;
 (iii) a school district with a teacher population of less than five
hundred;
 (iv) a board of cooperative educational services; or
 (v) a consortium of two or more school districts and/or boards of
cooperative educational services.
 3. Each such application shall be reviewed by the state professional
standards and practices board for teaching. The board shall in each
instance recommend to the commissioner action, as appropriate, including
specific reasons when it is negative. Any school district, board of
cooperative educational services or consortium whose original
application is rejected may resubmit a revised application for further
review. Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, an
application to continue a teacher resource center which was in operation
prior to the nineteen hundred eighty-four--nineteen hundred eighty-five
school year shall be deemed automatically approved.
 4. The commissioner shall establish criteria and standards by which
applications shall be evaluated which shall include provisions for
furnishing technical assistance and information provided by the
department through the facilities of the proposed teacher resource
center, provided, however, that such criteria and standards shall be
consistent with federal regulations which were applicable to teacher
resource centers in operation during the nineteen hundred eighty-two
calendar year.
 5. Any school district, board of cooperative educational services or
consortium having an application approved under this section may
collaborate, consult and contract with an approved institution of higher
education in New York state to carry out activities under or provide
technical assistance in connection with such application. Each
application shall be reviewed by the professional practices subcommittee
of the state professional standards and practices board for teaching.
 6. Each teacher resource and computer training center shall be
operated by a board, the majority of which shall be composed of
elementary and secondary school teachers representative of teachers
served by the teacher resource and computer training center. Teacher
members shall be designated by the collective bargaining agent of the
teachers served by the teacher resource and computer training center.
Such board shall also include individuals designated by the school board
or board of cooperative educational services served by such center and
at least one representative designated by the institutions of higher
education located in the area served by such center. Such board shall
also include at least one parent of an elementary or secondary school
pupil and at least one representative of a business or industry that
uses, produces or is involved with computer equipment and software.
 7. The powers and duties of each teacher resource and computer
training center board shall include policy formulation, the employment
of staff or consultants, budget control and expenditure of funds to
accomplish the purposes of this section, recommendations for
subcontracting to secure technical and other kinds of assistance, and
any other appropriate managerial or supervisory activities not otherwise
prohibited by state or local law or regulations of the commissioner.
 7-a. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a teacher resource
and computer training center board may collaborate, consult and contract
with a school district or board of cooperative educational services
which is included in the application for the establishment of such
teacher resource and computer training center for the assignment of
teachers employed by such school district or board of cooperative
educational services; provided, however, in such case such teacher shall
continue to accrue all employment rights and benefits, including
seniority, with the employing school district or board of cooperative
educational services and the teacher resource and computer training
center board shall reimburse such school district or board of
cooperative educational services for the services of such teacher.
 8. Funds provided each school year to school districts and boards of
cooperative educational services by the commissioner to plan, establish
and operate teacher resource and computer training centers shall not
exceed two million dollars per center, except that for the city school
district for the city of New York such center shall not exceed sixteen
million eight hundred thousand dollars and provided further that each
approved center shall receive not less than twenty thousand dollars. In
any year in which there is a statewide increase in funding for teacher
resource and computer training centers, such increase shall be
distributed proportionately among existing centers that have
satisfactorily fulfilled the requirements of such centers' current
grant. A portion of the increase shall be made available to new
applicants to establish new teacher centers, and to current teacher
centers to develop and implement regional and statewide teacher center
activities.
 9. Evaluation and annual reports. a. Teacher resource and computer
training centers shall provide data annually as prescribed by the
commissioner.
 b. The commissioner shall prepare and submit to the governor, the
temporary president of the senate and the speaker of the assembly, not
later than May first, nineteen hundred ninety-nine and by the first day
of January in each year thereafter, a report detailing the financial and
programmatic information for teacher resource and computer training
centers. Such report shall, at a minimum, set forth with respect to the
preceding school year: cost information for individual services provided
by such centers; numbers of teachers and other staff served, summarized
in the aggregate, by elementary and secondary school levels, and by home
school district; lists of programs and courses offered, including
identification of those with credit toward college graduate degrees and
those which relate to specific academic areas and higher learning
standards; and aggregate expenditure data for the following categories:
administration, staff development services, rent and other facilities
costs, and other services; and such other information as deemed
appropriate by the commissioner to assist the commissioner in
identifying cost-effective services and programs which may be
successfully replicated in other centers, school districts and boards of
cooperative educational services (BOCES). The format for the report
shall be developed by the commissioner in consultation with school
district officials, and teacher resource center officials, provided that
all information in such report shall be displayed on both a statewide
and individual center basis. Such report shall include changes from the
year prior to the report year for each such item for all teacher
resource and computer training centers and shall be made available to
other interested parties upon request.
 c. Funds provided under the teacher resource and computer training
centers program may be used to contract with educational organizations
for the purpose of conducting a statewide program evaluation. The
professional practices subcommittee of the professional standards and
practices board shall review and approve grant applications submitted
for this purpose.
 § 317. General education development exam. Notwithstanding any
provision of law, no fee shall be established for admission to the
general education development exam.
 § 318. Distribution of surplus computers. 1. General definitions. As
used in this section:
 (a) "Computer" means a computer central processing unit (CPU) and,
where attached to a CPU, such computer cases, computer memory, cards and
other peripheral devices as may reasonably be viewed functionally as one
unit.
 (b) "Computer software" means executable computer programs and related
data files on computer-related media, including but not limited to
floppy disks, hard disks, optical and magneto-optical computer data
storage devices.
 (c) "Computer equipment" means computers, computer memory, cards, and
associated peripheral devices, including but not limited to floppy disk
drives, hard disk drives, printers, modems, computer-related cables and
networking devices, scanners, computer monitors and computer software.
 2. The commissioner and the commissioner of general services shall,
within one hundred eighty days of the effective date of this section, in
consultation with members of the computer industry, representatives of
school boards associations, and teachers' organizations, develop
guidelines by which the monetary value of surplus computer equipment can
be compared with its potential educational value, in order to assist the
commissioner of general services to implement the provisions of section
one hundred sixty-eight of the state finance law.
 3. The commissioner shall, within one hundred eighty days of the
effective date of this section, and with the advice and counsel of the
office of general services:
 (a) develop guidelines governing distribution of state owned surplus
computer equipment to learning institutions involved in the repair and
restoration of such computer equipment; such guidelines shall identify
technical educational programs in the colleges and schools within the
state with the capacity to repair and restore computer equipment and
which may use the repair of such equipment in the technological training
of their students;
 (b) develop guidelines under which repaired and restored computer
equipment shall be equitably distributed, subject to the following
guidelines:
 (i) distribution of state-owned surplus computer equipment shall be
provided to public schools, the division for youth, public libraries,
and other public and private institutions for secular educational use,
and to not-for-profit institutions for use by individuals with
disabilities, upon proof of need, and subordinate to the requirements of
the public schools, the division for youth and libraries of New York
state;
 (ii) distribution of surplus computer equipment shall be based on
competitive proposals from schools, the division for youth, libraries,
and other public and private educational programs for secular
educational use, including not-for-profit institutions serving persons
with disabilities, which shall demonstrate need and specific plans for
the use of such equipment; and
 (iii) the department shall assist applicants in preparing such
proposals.
 4. (a) The commissioner is hereby authorized to seek and to accept the
transfer of title of surplus computer equipment of educational value
from agencies of the state and from the office of general services for
further distribution consistent with the purposes of this section and
pursuant to the guidelines developed under subdivisions two and three of
this section. Such distribution shall be performed by the office of
general services upon the request of the commissioner. Any
transportation costs for shipping such surplus equipment shall be borne
by the office of general services.
 (b) The department shall periodically distribute copies of an
inventory of surplus computer equipment that is available for
distribution contemplated by this section to educational institutions
under its supervision and to such other institutions as the commissioner
shall have designated, and make it known that those institutions may
submit proposals to obtain such computer equipment. Upon a proposal
having been approved pursuant to this section, the office of general
services shall deliver such computer equipment to the recipient pursuant
to paragraph (c) of this subdivision.
 (c) The office of general services may charge reasonable fees to the
final recipients of such computer equipment for shipping and handling,
including costs associated with shipping such computer equipment to
institutions authorized pursuant to this section to repair or restore
such computer equipment, provided that such fees shall not exceed
one-half the value of the computer equipment as determined pursuant to
subdivision two of this section, provided that such fees are published,
updated, and distributed with the inventories to the department, and
provided that requests for proposals for such computer equipment contain
a summary of accompanying fees. Nothing herein shall be construed to
prohibit such institutions involved in the repair and restoration of
such computer equipment from arranging for the shipping and handling of
such computer equipment to and/or from such institution on its own.
 5. The commissioner may accept any and all donations of money,
equipment, supplies, materials or services, from any person, firm,
association, foundation, or corporation, and may receive and utilize the
same in fulfilling the purposes and provisions of this section. Any
donation so accepted shall be reported in the report required by
subdivision six of this section. Such report shall include the nature
and amount of the donation and the identity of each donor, except where
such donor has requested anonymity in writing.
 6. The commissioner shall:
 (a) Keep inventory of computer equipment distributed under this
section to educational facilities based on information provided to the
commissioner by the office of general services; and
 (b) In collaboration with the commissioner of general services, report
every two years to the governor, the temporary president of the senate,
the speaker of the assembly, the inspector general and the state
comptroller. The initial report shall be submitted on the first of July,
not more than two years after the date on which this section shall have
become law. The report shall include but not be limited to current
inventories of surplus computer equipment in the possession of the
department and of the office of general services, inventories of surplus
computer equipment that have been distributed to educational
institutions, summaries of requests and deliveries to the various
institutions, the criteria used in determining which institutions
received what equipment, and recommendations for more effective means of
carrying out their duties under this section.
 7. To promote the purposes of this section, the commissioner shall
examine alternative methods for service, repair, and distribution of
computer equipment and may apply for and utilize such state and
federally funded programs as may appear effective and consistent with
the purposes of this section. Any grant or services accepted under this
part shall be reported in the biennial report required by subdivision
six of this section. Such report shall include the nature, amount and
source of each grant or services.
 8. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the
commissioner or the commissioner of general services to establish
mechanisms by which donated or state-owned surplus property that is not
computer equipment, but has educational usefulness for enhancing
technological and scientific literacy that substantially exceeds its
monetary value, may be provided to public and private institutions for
educational use.
 9. In developing and carrying out guidelines under this section, the
commissioner of general services and the commissioner shall ensure that
software will not be transferred pursuant hereto if such transfer would
cause a breach of a computer software license agreement or an
infringement of a copyright.
 * § 319. Establishment of dual enrollment program policy. 1. For
purposes of this section:
 (a) "Dual enrollment program" means any program that is a partnership
between at least one school and at least one institution of higher
education that provides high school students with the opportunity to
enroll in college courses and earn transferable college credit from the
institution or institutions while completing high school graduation and
diploma requirements.
 (b) "School" means a charter school, a school district, or a board of
cooperative educational services.
 2. The commissioner shall adopt a statewide policy outlining the
definition of dual enrollment programs in New York state and guidelines
for participation and data reporting.
 3. The policy established pursuant to subdivision two of this section
shall require that schools and higher education institutions annually
submit to the department data regarding participation in and outcomes of
dual enrollment programs in a form and manner determined by the
commissioner pursuant to subdivision five of this section. The
department shall annually publish such data on its public website no
later than January first in the school year following the school year
for which the data is applicable.
 4. The policy established pursuant to subdivision two of this section
shall require that, by September first, two thousand twenty-six, all
schools participating in a dual enrollment program shall submit to the
department a partnership agreement with the institution or institutions
of higher education with which they are partnered. Such partnership
agreements shall establish the scope and terms of the dual enrollment
program, as well as a protocol for collecting, sharing, and reporting
any data required by the commissioner pursuant to this section.
Partnership agreements shall be consistent with the policy adopted by
the commissioner pursuant to subdivision two of this section, and shall
contain such other provisions as may be required by the commissioner.
The partnership agreements shall be updated and resubmitted no less than
once every five years. The commissioner shall develop and make publicly
available the required partnership agreement form for schools and higher
education institutions no later than January first, two thousand
twenty-six.
 5. On or before January first, two thousand twenty-six, the
commissioner, the chancellor of the state university of New York, the
chancellor of the city university of New York, and the governor shall
jointly establish data points to be submitted pursuant to this section.
 * NB There are 2 § 319's
 * § 319. Center for dyslexia and dysgraphia. 1. As used in this
section, unless another meaning clearly appears from the context:
 a. "Center" shall mean the center for dyslexia and dysgraphia
established under this section.
 b. "Director" shall mean the executive director of the center.
 c. "Guidebook" shall mean the comprehensive guidebook on dyslexia and
dysgraphia created by the center under paragraph h of subdivision three
of this section.
 d. "Local education agencies" shall mean school districts, boards of
cooperative educational services, and other educational services
providers designated as such by the director.
 2. There is hereby established within the department the center for
dyslexia and dysgraphia. The center shall be led by the executive
director of the center who shall be appointed by the commissioner.
 3. The center's duties shall include, but not be limited to:
 a. Establishing a definition of dyslexia and dysgraphia in
consultation with nationally recognized dyslexia and dysgraphia advocacy
groups, physicians and scientists who specialize in dyslexia and
dysgraphia, and educators who specialize in remediating dyslexia and
dysgraphia.
 b. Collecting data to inventory, synthesize, and publicize best
practices for serving students with dyslexia, dysgraphia, and other
related reading or writing difficulties.
 c. Developing and disseminating of informational tools and briefs on
dyslexia and dysgraphia.
 d. Setting explicit standards and requirements for peer-reviewed
evidence-based teacher preparation programs and certifications that
address dyslexia and dysgraphia.
 e. Setting explicit standards for annual peer-reviewed evidence-based
universal screening for all students in grades kindergarten through
fifth and new entrants to schools within the state for reading and
writing difficulties and for screening students identified as at risk
for dyslexia and/or dysgraphia.
 f. Setting explicit standards for peer-reviewed evidence-based
dyslexia and dysgraphia interventions and other educational supports for
use by local education agencies.
 g. Issuing a public report on the state's progress on implementing
policies and practices regarding dyslexia and dysgraphia screenings,
interventions, and supports within two years from the effective date of
this section and every two years thereafter.
 h. Creating a comprehensive guidebook on dyslexia and dysgraphia for
professional development providers, leaders of local education agencies,
school administrators, educators, and specialists.
 i. Perform any other duties the commissioner or the director deems
necessary to identify students as at risk for dyslexia and/or dysgraphia
or to reduce barriers to education for those with dyslexia and/or
dysgraphia.
 4. The guidebook shall be created within two years of the effective
date of this section and shall be updated at least every five years. The
center shall release a draft version of the guidebook for public comment
sixty days prior to its publication. The guidebook shall include, but
not be limited to, information related to:
 a. Definitions regarding dyslexia and dysgraphia.
 b. Legal responsibilities of the local education agencies and school
to address the needs of students with diagnosed or suspected dyslexia
and/or dysgraphia.
 c. Universal screening policies, procedures, and evidence-based
practices.
 d. Dyslexia and dysgraphia screening policies, procedures, and
evidence-based practices.
 e. Screening modifications and adaptations for English language
learners and multilingual learners and students with disabilities that
impact oral language development and/or graphomotor skill development.
 f. Appropriate use of data to guide practices and protocols for local
education agencies.
 g. Regulations, guidance, and support for communicating and meeting
with parents or guardians to share and discuss screening results,
options for next steps, and making data-based decisions about
interventions aligned with identified reading and/or writing
difficulties.
 h. Classroom instruction and interventions grounded in the science of
reading and structured literacy.
 i. Development of effective individualized education plans goals,
progress monitoring, and accommodations for students with diagnosed or
suspected dyslexia and/or dysgraphia and related reading and/or writing
difficulties.
 j. Professional development opportunities.
 k. Decision criteria and steps from universal screening through
supports and progress monitoring.
 * NB There are 2 § 319's
 ARTICLE 7-A
 STANDARDIZED TESTING
Section 340. Definitions.
 341. Background reports.
 341-a. Standardized testing; reports.
 342. Disclosure of test contents.
 342-a. Special administrations.
 343. Notice.
 344. Disclosure of test scores.
 344-a. Pretest questions.
 344-b. Due process.
 344-c. Additional test subject rights.
 345. Regulations.
 346. Test subject review of computerized test.
 346-a. Advisory committee.
 347. Violations.
 348. Severability.
 § 340. Definitions. As used in this article: 1. "Standardized test" or
"test" means any test that is given in New York at the expense of the
test subject and designed for use and used in the process of selection
for post-secondary or professional school admissions. Such tests shall
include, but are not limited to, the Preliminary Scholastic Aptitude
Test, Scholastic Aptitude Test, ACT Assessment, Graduate Record
Examination, Medical College Admission Test, Law School Admission Test,
Dental Admission Testing Program, Graduate Management Admission Test,
Miller Analogies Test and the Test for Standard Written English. This
article shall not apply to any state, federal, or local civil service
test, any test used solely for placement, credit-by-examination or other
nonadmission purpose or any test developed and administered by an
individual school or institution solely for its own purposes or any
test, or portion of a test, designed to evaluate manual skills or other
physical abilities.
 2. "Commissioner" means the commissioner of education of the state of
New York.
 3. "Test subject" means an individual to whom a test is administered.
 4. "Test agency" means any organization, association, corporation,
partnership, or individual or person that develops, sponsors or
administers a test.
 5. "Part" means each portion of a test for which a score is
calculated.
 6. "Test form" means the test booklet or instrument used for each part
of each test.
 7. "Pretest question" means any question or group of questions on a
test not used to calculate the reported scores of a test subject, nor
used to equate scores for that test.
 8. "Test year" means the twelve-month period commencing September
first during which the test agency administers a particular test.
 9. "Computerized test" means any test form administered to test
subjects by means of a computer.
 § 341. Background reports. 1. Whenever any test agency prepares or
causes to have prepared research which is used in any study, evaluation
or statistical report pertaining to a test operational after January
first, nineteen hundred eighty, such study, evaluation or report shall
be filed with the commissioner. This section shall apply to any
unpublished study, evaluation or statistical report cited in memoranda
of support or opposition to legislation or proposed rules and
regulations relating to standardized testing written or published by
the test agency or its employees in behalf of the test agency on or
after July first, nineteen hundred ninety-three.
 2. If any reports or other documents submitted pursuant to this
section contain information identifiable with any test subject or test
user institution, such information shall be deleted prior to filing with
the commissioner.
 3. All reports or other documents submitted pursuant to this section
shall be public records.
 § 341-a. Standardized testing; reports. 1. Definitions. As used in
this section and section three hundred forty-six-a of this article, the
following words and terms shall have the following meanings:
 a. "Test" means a standardized test as defined in section three
hundred forty of this article; provided however, that the test of
English as a foreign language shall not constitute a test for purposes
of this section;
 b. "Test subject" means a test subject as defined in section three
hundred forty of this article.
 2. Not later than July first, nineteen hundred eighty-eight, and for
one year thereafter, test agencies shall ask each test subject to report
on the test answer sheet, test registration form, or other appropriate
means all of the following information:
 a. The test subject's race or ethnicity, including the following
groups: Black, White, American Indian, Asian, Hispanic or other;
 b. The test subject's gender, expressed as male or female; and
 c. The test subject's linguistic background, expressed as whether
English was the dominant language of the test subject's household.
 3. The test agency shall advise all test subjects that they are not
required to provide the information requested under paragraphs a and c
of subdivision two of this section, that they will not be penalized if
they do not provide the information, and that the information provided
will be used exclusively for research, recruitment, talent
identification and planning purposes.
 4. a. Not later than September first, nineteen hundred eighty-nine,
the test agency shall prepare and file or cause to be filed with the
committee described in section three hundred forty-six-a of this article
a report relating to each test administered and disclosed pursuant to
section three hundred forty-two of this article by the test agency in
New York between July first, nineteen hundred eighty-eight and July
first, nineteen hundred eighty-nine. Such report shall be subject to the
provisions of subdivisions two and three of section three hundred
forty-one of this article.
 b. Each such test report shall show by race or ethnicity, linguistic
background and gender, the mean-scaled scores of test subjects, the
standard deviation of scaled scores, and the distribution of scaled
scores.
 5. a. Not later than September first, nineteen hundred eighty-nine,
the test agency shall prepare and file or cause to be filed with the
committee an item report relating to each question used in calculating
the subject's raw score on each test form administered and disclosed
pursuant to section three hundred forty-two of this article in New York
between July first, nineteen hundred eighty-eight and July first,
nineteen hundred eighty-nine. Such report shall be subject to the
provisions of subdivisions two and three of section three hundred
forty-one of this article.
 b. Each such item report shall show for each question used in
calculating the test subject's raw score, the item's content area
specification, and where disclosed pursuant to section three hundred
forty-two of this article, information identifying the text of the item,
and the correct answer-rates and R-biserial correlations for all test
subjects, combined and separately by race, ethnicity, gender or
linguistic background as reported under subdivision two of this section.
Such item report shall also calculate the correct answer rates and
R-biserial correlations comparing performance by gender and language
dominance, within race and ethnic subgroups, including language
dominance by the total gender group. Content area specification shall be
reported for each exam to indicate area of knowledge, skill or ability
that an item purports to measure according to the examination's
manufacturer or sponsoring agency. Correct answer-rates shall be
calculated by dividing the number of correct answers for a question used
in calculating the subject's raw score on all test forms administered
and disclosed pursuant to section three hundred forty-two of this
article between July first, nineteen hundred eighty-eight and July
first, nineteen hundred eighty-nine by the number of test subjects to
whom those test forms were administered. R-biserial correlations shall
be calculated by correlating performance on a question used in
calculating the subject's raw score on each test form administered
between July first, nineteen hundred eighty-eight and July first,
nineteen hundred eighty-nine with performance on the tests as shown by
total scores.
 c. The test agency shall not be required to include in such test and
item reports under this subdivision and subdivision four of this section
information for any group comprising fewer than one hundred test
subjects.
 d. The test report will also include data showing measures of
differential item functioning on individual questions that take into
account differences in overall test performance. Data will be provided
for test items which contribute to the candidate scores and for which
differential item data are available. Differential item functioning data
shall be reported for comparative purposes between the following pairs
of groups: (Black-White), (Hispanic-White), (American Indian-White),
(Asian-White), (Other-White) and (Male-Female). Documentation as to the
methods by which these data have been calculated will accompany the
data. Differential item functioning data shall not be required for pairs
of groups comprising fewer than four hundred test subjects in each
group.
 e. The committee may request additional data, where already available
and published, from the test agencies to clarify the data previously
reported pursuant to this subdivision and subdivision four of this
section.
 § 342. Disclosure of test contents. 1. Within thirty days after the
results of any standardized test are released, the test agency shall
file or cause to be filed with the commissioner:
 a. a copy of all test questions used in calculating the test subject's
raw score;
 b. the corresponding acceptable answers to those questions; and
 c. all rules for converting raw scores into those scores reported to
the test subject together with an explanation of such rules.
 2. Within ninety days after filing a standardized test pursuant to
subdivision one of this section and for a period of not less than ninety
days after the offer is made, the test agency shall provide to the test
subject the opportunity to secure:
 a. a copy of the test questions used to calculate the test subject's
raw score;
 b. a copy of the test subject's answer sheet, or answer record where
there is no answer sheet, together with a copy of the correct answer
sheet to the same test with questions used to calculate the test
subject's raw score so marked; and
 c. a statement of the raw score used to calculate the scores reported
to the test subject.
 The agency may charge a nominal fee for providing such information,
not to exceed the direct cost thereof. Notwithstanding any other
provision in this section, a test agency shall permit a test subject to
elect in writing this opportunity both at the time the test subject
registers to take a test and at the time the test agency reports test
scores to the test subject; provided, however, that the provisions of
this paragraph shall not apply where either the materials described in
paragraph (a) or (b) of this subdivision are provided during the test
administration. The form permitting such election shall describe the
opportunity offered pursuant to this subdivision in clear and plain
English and shall be part of and included in the test registration form
and in a form provided to the test subject at the time test scores are
reported to the test subject.
 3. a. Notwithstanding subdivisions one and two of this section, a test
agency may withhold from disclosure any test forms administered in New
York in any given test program to not more than five percent of the
anticipated test subjects annually or to not more than five thousand
test subjects annually, whichever is less.
 b. Prior to the beginning of a test agency's testing year, the test
agency shall designate the dates upon which test forms to be filed with
the commissioner will be used. The test agency shall inform potential
test subjects of these dates.
 4. Within three years after the administration in New York of a
standardized test form not required to be disclosed under subdivision
three of this section the test agency shall file the test form and the
corresponding acceptable answers with the commissioner.
 5. Subdivisions one, two, three, and four of this section shall not
apply to the GRE Advanced Tests. With respect to such tests, the test
agency shall file with the commissioner the following:
 a. a copy of all test questions used in calculating the test subject's
raw score from one test form administered during the period set forth
below;
 b. the corresponding acceptable answers; and
 c. all rules for converting raw scores into those scores reported to
the test subject together with an explanation of such rules, in
accordance with the following schedule:
 (1) once every three years for such test administered to forty
thousand or more test subjects in New York annually, and
 (2) once every five years for such tests administered to five thousand
or less than forty thousand test subjects in New York annually, and
 (3) once every eight years for such tests administered to fewer than
five thousand test subjects in New York annually.
 5-a. Subdivisions one, two, three, four, five and six of this section
shall not apply to the Medical College Admission Test. With respect to
that test, the test agency shall file with the commissioner once every
four years the following:
 a. a copy of all test questions used in calculating the test subject's
raw score from one test form administered during the previous four-year
period;
 b. the corresponding acceptable answers; and
 c. all rules for converting raw scores into those scores reported to
the test subject together with an explanation of such rules.
 5-b. Subdivisions one, two, three, four, five, five-a and six of this
section shall not apply to SAT Subject Tests. With respect to such
tests, the test agency shall maintain on file with the commissioner a
complete sample test, reflecting tests currently in use, of each type of
SAT Subject Test to be administered in New York and provide to the test
subject the opportunity to secure a copy of a representative complete
sample test of a Subject Test. Whenever a new Subject Test is added the
test agency shall file and publish updated information consisting of
descriptions and sample items prior to the administration of any such
test in New York. Whenever a substantial change is made in any subject,
the test agency shall file and publish updated information consisting of
complete sample tests prior to the administration of any such test in
New York.
 6. Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, if a test agency
has administered a standardized test to less than two thousand test
subjects in New York annually, the test agency shall file with the
commissioner at least once every three years:
 a. a copy of all test questions used in calculating the test subject's
raw score from one test form administered during that three year period;
 b. the corresponding acceptable answers with the commissioner; and
 c. all rules for converting raw scores into those scores reported to
the test subject together with an explanation of such rules.
 7. Documents submitted to the commissioner pursuant to this section
shall be public records and, in collecting this material, the State
Education Department shall be considered an archive under Title 17 § 108
U.S.C.
 8. a. Within sixty days of the receipt of correspondence from a test
subject, their representative, or a user institution challenging or
questioning the keying, scoring, wording, or any aspect of a test
question or questions used to calculate test subjects' raw scores for
standardized tests filed with the commissioner pursuant to subdivision
one of this section, the test agency shall place such correspondence in
a separately maintained file. Such filed correspondence must contain no
information identifiable with any individual or user institution unless
authorized by that individual or institution.
 b. Within thirty days of the test agency's sending out a response to
the test subject, their representative or the user institution, the test
agency shall place on file a copy of any of the test agency's written
responses to such correspondence clarifying, explaining or defending the
test question or questions. Such filed responses must contain no
information identifiable with any individual or user institution unless
authorized by that individual or institution.
 c. Test subjects and any other individual shall be able to gain access
to such file by submitting a written request to the test agency. Test
agencies shall make copies of any of the requested contents of the file.
Test agencies may charge nominal fees to provide copies of any of the
contents of the file upon request. Such fees may not exceed the direct
costs of administering and maintaining such files and photocopying
requested materials.
 9. Each test agency shall report the following information to the
commissioner annually:
 a. the dates of each test administered by the test agency during the
testing year;
 b. the total number of test subjects who took the test at each
administration;
 c. the total amount of fees received from test subjects by the test
agency for the test for that testing year; and
 d. those expenses which are directly attributable to the test and
those expenses which are indirectly attributable to the test. The test
agency shall also list expenses indirectly attributable to all
activities of the test agency, including expenses not identifiable as
attributable to a test.
 10. a. Except as provided in paragraphs b, c, d and e of this
subdivision, subdivisions one and two of this section shall not apply to
any test agency which discloses test forms administered to at least
two-thirds of the test subjects in a test year, based on the number of
administrations in the most recent test year.
 b. Subdivisions one, two, three, four and six of this section shall
not apply to the SAT Test during the nineteen hundred
ninety-six--ninety-seven test year or to the two thousand eighteen--two
thousand nineteen test year so long as the College Entrance Examination
Board discloses in each such testing year:
 (i) four test forms used to administer the SAT Test in New York, or
 (ii) if fewer than four regular SAT Test administrations are offered
in New York during a test year, the same number of SAT Test forms as
regular SAT Test administrations in New York in that test year.
 b-1. Subdivisions one, two, three, four and six of this section shall
not apply to the SAT Test during the two thousand nineteen--two thousand
twenty test year or any subsequent test year, so long as the college
entrance examination board discloses in each such testing year:
 (i) if seven or more regular SAT Test administrations are offered in
New York during a test year, four SAT Test forms used to administer the
SAT Test in New York;
 (ii) if four, five or six regular SAT Test administrations are offered
in New York during a test year, three SAT Test forms used to administer
the SAT Test in New York; or
 (iii) if three or fewer regular SAT Test administrations are offered
in New York during a test year, the same number of SAT Test forms used
to administer the SAT Test in New York.
 b-2. Subdivisions one, two, three, four and six of this section shall
not apply to the ACT college entrance examination during the two
thousand nineteen--two thousand twenty test year or any subsequent test
year, so long as the ACT college entrance examination board discloses in
each such testing year:
 (i) if seven or more regular ACT college entrance examinations test
administrations are offered in New York during a test year, four ACT
college entrance examinations test forms used to administer the ACT
college entrance examination test in New York;
 (ii) if four, five or six regular ACT college entrance examinations
test administrations are offered in New York during a test year, three
ACT college entrance examinations test forms used to administer the ACT
college entrance examination test in New York; or
 (iii) if three or fewer regular ACT college entrance examinations test
administrations are offered in New York during a test year, the same
number of ACT college entrance examination test forms as regular ACT
college entrance examination test administrations in New York in that
test year.
 c. Subdivisions one, two, three, four, and six of this section shall
not apply to the Graduate Record Examination ("GRE") General Test during
the nineteen hundred ninety-six--ninety-seven test year so long as the
Graduate Record Examinations Board discloses in that test year the
greater of:
 (i) one GRE General Test form administered in New York, or
 (ii) one-half the number of GRE General Test forms administered in New
York in that test year.
 d. Subdivisions one, two, three, four, and six of this section shall
not apply to the GRE General Test during the nineteen hundred
ninety-seven--ninety-eight test year or any subsequent test year, so
long as the Graduate Record Examinations Board discloses in each such
test year one-half of the number of GRE General Test forms administered
in regular administrations in New York in that test year if it offers at
least two regular administrations of that test in New York in that test
year.
 e. Subdivisions one, two, three, four, and six of this section shall
not apply to the Test of English as a Foreign Language ("TOEFL") during
the nineteen hundred ninety-six--ninety-seven test year or any
subsequent test year so long as the TOEFL Policy Council discloses in
each such test year:
 (i) five test forms used to administer the TOEFL in New York, or
 (ii) if fewer than five regular TOEFL administrations are offered in
New York during a test year, the same number of TOEFL forms as such
regular administrations in New York during that test year.
 f. Any test agency offering one or more nondisclosed administrations
pursuant to this subdivision shall provide to test subjects, in a clear
and conspicuous manner in its registration materials, notice of which
test administrations will or will not be disclosed.
 g. For the purposes of this subdivision, a "regular" administration
means a regular Saturday major paper-and-pencil administration of the
SAT I or GRE General Test or a regular Friday major paper-and-pencil
administration of the TOEFL. A "regular" administration does not include
any other administration (whether offered on a Friday or Saturday or
otherwise), whether a makeup administration, an administration for
Saturday Sabbath observers, or other special-purpose administration, or
any individual administration.
 11. Notwithstanding subdivision one of this section, a test agency
which administered a computerized standardized test in test year
nineteen hundred ninety-four shall file with the commissioner:
 a. no later than September first, nineteen hundred ninety-six the test
item pool used for an operational test administered as of December
first, nineteen hundred ninety-four, and the corresponding acceptable
answers.
 b. no later than September first, nineteen hundred ninety-seven that
portion of the test item pool used for an operational test administered
during the nineteen hundred ninety-six test year equivalent to one
paper-and-pencil test form, and the corresponding acceptable answers.
 c. no later than September first, nineteen hundred ninety-eight that
portion of the test item pool used for an operational test administered
during the nineteen hundred ninety-seven test year equivalent to two
paper-and-pencil test forms, and the corresponding acceptable answers.
 d. no later than September first, nineteen hundred ninety-nine that
portion of the test item pool used for an operational test administered
during the nineteen hundred ninety-eight test year equivalent to six
paper-and-pencil test forms, and the corresponding acceptable answers.
 § 342-a. Special administrations. 1. When regular test
administrations are given on days of religious observance which prevent
attendance by test subjects at such regular administrations special
administrations shall be offered with the same frequency as regular
administrations as soon after or before as is possible, at comparable
times, places and cost.
 2. Provided, however, a test agency shall not be required to offer a
greater number of special administrations than were offered during the
base year commencing August first, nineteen hundred seventy-eight and
ending July thirty-first, nineteen hundred seventy-nine unless the
number of regular administrations is increased in any subsequent testing
year, in which case the provisions of subdivision one shall apply.
 3. No test subject shall by reason of religious belief be denied by a
test agency, the opportunity to take a test which shall be disclosed
pursuant to subdivisions one and two of section three hundred forty-two
of this article during any twelve month period.
 § 343. Notice. 1. Each test agency shall provide, along with the
registration form or score report for a test, the following information:
 a. the purposes for which the test is constructed and is intended to
be used;
 b. statements designed to provide information for interpreting test
results, including but not limited to, explanations of the test score
scale, the standard error of measurement of the test, and a list of
available correlations between test scores and grades, successful
completion of a course of study and parental income; however, where a
range of the correlations of such studies is given, a median correlation
must also be provided;
 c. how the test scores will be reported, whether the raw test scores
will be converted in any way before being reported to the test subject
and whether and how the test agency will use the test score in raw or
transformed form by itself or together with any other information about
the test subject to predict in any way the subject's future academic
performance for any post secondary educational institution;
 d. a complete description of any promises or covenants that the test
agency makes to the test subject with regard to accuracy of scoring,
timely forwarding of information, policies for notifying test subjects
regarding inaccuracies in scoring or score reporting, any procedures to
increase fairness and equity with respect to race, ethnicity and
linguistic background and gender for test subjects with regard to test
questions and test forms, procedures for reviewing challenges by test
subjects, their representatives or user institutions to the keying,
scoring, wording or any aspect of a test question or questions used to
calculate test subjects' raw scores, and privacy of information relating
to the test subject;
 e. whether or not the test scores are the property of the test
subject, the time period during which the results will be retained by
the test agency, and policies regarding storage, disposal and future use
of test score data; and
 f. how the test subject may obtain the information required to be
dislcosed under section three hundred forty-two of this article.
 g. how the test subject may obtain information required to be
available under section three hundred forty-four-b of this article;
 h. a clear, easily understood written description of each section of
the test, including an indication of whether the test contains sections
of equating questions together with a statement of the purpose of such,
and an indication of whether the test contains sections of pretest
questions together with a statement of the purpose of such;
 i. a description of all services which will be provided at the
location of the test administration to accommodate handicapped or
disabled test subjects;
 j. a concise summary of test administration procedures which provides
essential information to the test subject about the conduct of the test
including the duties and responsibilities of the test proctor or
supervisor and the actions a test subject may take in the event of any
problems which may arise in the course of taking the test;
 k. a statement of the test agency's recommendations as to how test
scores shall be used by an institution to which scores are reported,
including any recommendation regarding the importance that the
institution should give to such scores relative to other factors, such
as prior academic record, in making any decision affecting a test
subject;
 l. a description of how test subjects can receive additional
information from test sponsors about the appropriate use of test scores;
 m. information which clearly describes the test subjects' rights
included in section three hundred forty-four-c of this article; and
 n. information documenting procedures used by the test agency to
insure that the test is fair to all test takers regardless of racial,
ethnic, gender or regional background.
 2. Any institution which is a test score recipient shall be provided
with the information specified in this section. The test agency shall
provide such information prior to or coincident with the first reporting
of a test score or scores to a recipient institution. Such institution
shall be encouraged to provide interpretive processing by qualified
personnel where such personnel are available.
 4. Each public postsecondary institution shall include in its catalog
or bulletin a statement whether applicants for undergraduate admission
are required to submit test scores. Such statement shall clearly state
how test scores are used in the decision process, how multiple score
reports are treated, whether component scores are summed or averaged,
and how test scores are used in placement decisions.
 § 344. Disclosure of test scores. The score of any test subject shall
not be released or disclosed by the test agency to any person,
organization, corporation, association, college, university, or
governmental agency or subdivision unless specifically authorized by the
test subject. A test agency may, however, release all scores received
by a test subject on a test to anyone designated by the test subject to
receive the current score.
 This section shall not be construed to prohibit release of scores and
other information in the possession of a test agency for purposes of
research leading to studies and reports concerning the tests themselves.
Such studies and reports must contain no information identifiable with
any individual test subject or user institution unless authorized by
that individual or institution.
 § 344-a. Pretest questions. The test agency shall cooperate with a
study conducted under the auspices of the National Research Council of
the effects of pretesting on test subjects' performance. The results of
such study shall be made available to the chair of the higher education
committee in the senate and the chair of the higher education committee
in the assembly.
 § 344-b. Due process. Each test agency shall ensure due process
protection of test subjects whose scores are being questioned for
suspected inauthenticity or irregularity in test administration.
 1. When a test agency is presented with information which renders the
test subject's test score suspect, whether that information is in the
form of allegations of collusion or cheating, or irregular test
administration, or irregular statistical data, or any other form, the
test agency is responsible for reviewing the information and determining
if withholding the test subject's score is warranted.
 2. If the test agency determines that withholding the test subject's
score is warranted, the test agency shall give the test subject written
notice of the test agency's decision. The notice shall be sent by
registered mail not later than five working days after the test agency's
decision.
 3. The notice to the test subject shall include all of the following:
 (a) a complete summary of the information submitted to the test agency
and relied upon by the test agency to withhold the score;
 (b) a complete summary of the pertinent facts surrounding the
investigation;
 (c) a statement of the test subject's right to receive, upon request,
details supporting the complete summaries referred to in paragraphs (a)
and (b) of this subdivision;
 (d) the policies and procedures that were followed by the test agency
in reviewing and rendering a decision to investigate the test score;
 (e) the potential consequences which may result from the
investigation, such as withholding or invalidating the test score;
 (f) a summary of the information that may be submitted to the test
agency by the test subject to support the authenticity of the test
score; and
 (g) a statement informing the test subject that the opportunity to
respond to the notice will be afforded for not more than fifteen working
days following the date the notice was delivered. No final decision on
the question of suspected irregularity or inauthenticity shall be
rendered by the test agency until the test subject under investigation
has responded, or the time for doing so has expired, whichever occurs
first.
 4. After the time period specified in paragraph (g) of subdivision
three of this section has expired, the test agency shall review all of
the evidence and shall make a good faith effort to render a decision
regarding the authenticity of the score, within fifteen working days and
notify the test subject immediately. No test agency shall cancel or
invalidate a test subject's test scores on the basis of an alleged
irregularity or inauthenticity unless, after all evidence has been
considered by the test agency, substantial evidence resulting from an
investigation conducted pursuant to this section supports the
cancellation or invalidation.
 5. When the test agency determines that substantial evidence exists to
support cancellation or invalidation of a test score, the test agency
shall provide the test subject with a choice of the following options:
 (a) cancellation of the test scores in question, with full refund of
all test fees;
 (b) an opportunity to take the test again privately and without
charge; or
 (c) an opportunity to seek arbitration or judicial review of the
matter.
 6. The test subject shall have thirty days following receipt of the
notice by registered mail to respond to the notice of inauthenticity or
irregularity.
 7. If the test subject responds to the notice of inauthenticity or
irregularity of test scores sent by the test agency within the time
period specified by subdivision six of this section, the test agency
shall review the contents of the response and comply with one of the
following:
 (a) If the test subject requests cancellation of the test scores, a
full refund of all test fees will be provided within a reasonable
period.
 (b) If the test subject requests an opportunity to take the test again
privately and without charge, the test agency shall make appropriate
accommodations that are mutually agreed upon by the test agency and test
subject so the test subject has sufficient time to prepare for the
retest. The retest shall be given in a reasonable and timely manner. If
the score on the retest is higher, the higher score shall be reported.
 (c) Nothing in this section precludes the parties from seeking
resolution of the testing problems by either judicial review or
arbitration. The test agency and the test subject shall make a good
faith effort to complete an arbitration process in no more than thirty
days after the election of such option.
 8. The test agency shall not release confidential information to any
authorized test score recipients regarding a test subject under pending
investigation, unless authorized to do so by the test subject.
 9. The test agency shall immediately release the test score to the
test subject and the test score recipients, if any, where substantial
evidence does not exist to render the inauthenticity or irregularity of
the test score.
 10. The procedures prescribed in this section do not apply to
instances where the cancellation of all test scores results from the
complete disruption of the administration of the test, such as by
natural disasters, national emergencies, inadequate or improper test
conditions, answer sheet printing errors, or testing agency errors.
 11. Time procedures described in this section shall not apply in those
instances where test scores have already been reported to test score
recipients.
 § 344-c. Additional test subject rights. A test subject who must
retake a test because of an error by the test agency, may not be charged
for taking the retest.
 § 345. Regulations. The commissioner shall promulgate regulations to
implement the provisions of this article.
 § 346. Test subject review of computerized test. Beginning in the test
year two thousand, a test agency which administered a computerized test
in test year nineteen hundred ninety-four shall offer test subjects who
take a computerized test a process whereby test subjects are afforded
the opportunity to review questions and answers from their computerized
tests. On or before July first, nineteen hundred ninety-eight, such test
agency shall submit to the commissioner a report detailing the
implementation of such process. Such report shall set forth in clear
language the nature of such opportunity, which shall also be sufficient
to meet the demands of such process. The commissioner shall review and
comment upon the report no later than September first, nineteen hundred
ninety-eight.
 § 346-a. Advisory committee. 1. There shall be created a temporary
committee to advise the legislature and make findings and
recommendations with respect to the effect of standardized tests used in
the process of post secondary admissions on test subjects of varying
racial, ethnic, linguistic background and gender and consider other
possible analytical methods to assure the fairness and equity of such
tests.
 2. The committee shall consist of ten members to be appointed as
follows: three each shall be appointed by the temporary president of the
senate and by the speaker of the assembly, and two each by the minority
leader of the senate and the minority leader of the assembly. At least
one of the members appointed by each of the four legislative leaders
shall be an individual with expertise in measurement and standardized
testing. Such committee shall be broadly representative of persons or
groups residing in the state of New York interested in and affected by
standardized admissions tests which may include, but is not limited to,
test subjects, test agencies, representatives of consumers of
standardized test, post-secondary administrators and faculty and
representatives of civil rights organizations.
 3. The committee shall select a chairperson from its membership and
may select professional staff, other than the data analysis researchers
or organizations described herein, who shall have expertise in
measurement and standardized testing to design and conduct the study.
The committee shall prepare a design for the analysis of the data
required for collection pursuant to this section. The study design
shall be available upon request for comment for a period for thirty days
after which time the committee shall select or solicit one or more
researchers or organizations to do the data analysis. The analyses shall
examine the differences in test performance between the subgroups
indicated in section three hundred forty-one-a of this article and
consider the impact upon those differences of using alternative methods
of item selection. Such professional staff, researchers and
organizations shall not have any direct financial ties, within five
years prior to the effective date of this section, to standardized
testing, nor to any source that has by personal testimony promoted or
opposed regulation of standardized testing, or from any source which has
been engaged in litigation, within five years prior to the effective
date of this section, against any entity engaged in the standardized
testing industry. The committee shall meet at least two times annually
and shall expire on the first day of September, nineteen hundred
ninety-one. The committee members shall receive no compensation for
their services, but shall be reimbursed for reasonable expenses actually
and necessarily incurred by them in the performance of their duties
under this article.
 4. The committee may accept any state grants or appropriations, or as
agent of the state, any grant, including federal grants, or any gift for
any of the purposes of this article; provided however, that the
committee shall not accept any grant or gift, directly or indirectly,
(a) from the standardized testing industry or from any source currently
receiving funds from the standardized testing industry, or (b) from any
source that has promoted or opposed regulation of standardized testing
or from any source that has been engaged in litigation within five years
prior to the effective date of this section against any entity engaged
in the standardized testing industry or from any source currently
receiving funds from any such sources. Any monies so received may be
expended by the committee to effectuate any purpose of this article,
subject to standard limitations as to approval of expenditures and
audit.
 5. The committee shall report its finding to the state legislature no
later than the thirty-first of March, nineteen hundred ninety.
 6. The committee shall pursue the aforementioned research if adequate
funds have been committed by the first day of July, nineteen hundred
eighty-nine to further the purposes of this article. Prior to February
first, nineteen hundred eighty-nine, the committee shall notify the
chairs of the assembly ways and means and senate finance committees
regarding funds received for the purposes of this article and shall
submit a request for such appropriations as may be necessary to
effectuate the purposes of this section. If no such funds have been
committed, the committee shall dissolve.
 § 347. Violations. Any test agency which violates any section of this
article shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than one
thousand dollars for each violation.
 § 348. Severability. If any provision of this article shall be
declared unconstitutional or invalid, the other provisions shall remain
in effect notwithstanding.
 ARTICLE 8
 STATE UNIVERSITY AND STATE FINANCIAL
 ASSISTANCE FOR HIGHER EDUCATION
Section 350. Definitions.
 351. State university mission.
 352. State university of New York established.
 352-a. Maritime college; admissions program.
 353. State university trustees.
 354. Powers and duties of state university trustees-planning
 functions.
 355. Powers and duties of trustees--administrative and fiscal
 functions.
 355-a. Powers and duties of trustees--personnel functions.
 355-b. Investments in designated obligations; indemnifications.
 355-c. College opportunity to prepare for employment.
 355-d. Educational opportunity centers.
 355-e. New York state firearm violence research institute.
 356. Councils of state-operated institutions; powers and
 duties.
 357. Statutory or contract colleges.
 358. State aid for certain higher educational institutions.
 359. Reports of the state university trustees.
 360. Powers to regulate traffic on university grounds.
 361. START-UP NY program leases.
 363. Curing Alzheimer's health consortium.
 364. Separability.
 365. Construction.
 § 350. Definitions. As used in this article, unless the context shall
otherwise require, the following terms shall mean:
 1. "State university." The state university created by this article.
 2. "Community colleges." Colleges established and operated pursuant to
the provisions of article one hundred twenty-six, and providing two-year
post secondary programs in general and technical educational subjects
and receiving financial assistance from the state.
 3. "Statutory or contract colleges." Colleges furnishing higher
education, operated by independent institutions on behalf of the state
pursuant to statute or contractual agreements; provided, that an
institution not otherwise a statutory or contract college shall not
become a statutory or contract college because of its receipt of state
funds or financial assistance pursuant to section three hundred
fifty-eight hereof, or by entering into any contract pursuant to that
section.
 4. "State-operated institutions." Institutions comprising the state
university as provided for in subdivision three of section three hundred
fifty-two hereof, but not including statutory or contract colleges.
 5. "State university health care facility" shall mean a hospital, as
defined in section twenty-eight hundred one of the public health law,
operated by the state university, or a clinic, as defined in subdivision
six of this section, of a state university health sciences center at
Brooklyn, Buffalo, Stony Brook and Syracuse, or the College of
Optometry.
 6. "Clinic" shall mean a facility located either within or outside of
a state university health care facility providing services related to
the medical education mission of the university, but shall not include
state university student health services.
 * 7. "University centers" shall mean the university centers at Albany,
Binghamton, Buffalo and Stony Brook.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2027
 * 8. "NY-SUNY 2020 challenge grant program" ("NY-SUNY 2020") shall
mean a long-term economic and academic plan, which shall include a
financial aid program, submitted by each state university of New York
university center, subject to the approval by the governor and the
chancellor of the state university of New York.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2027
 9. "SUNY Challenge Grant Program" shall mean a long-term economic and
academic plan submitted by a college, university or community college as
defined by this section, excluding university centers as defined by this
section, subject to the approval by the Governor and the Chancellor of
the State University of New York.
 10. "Dormitory facilities revenue fund" means the fund established
pursuant to section sixteen hundred eighty-q of the public authorities
law.
 11. "Dormitory facilities revenues" means all moneys, including rents,
fees and charges, derived from the use or occupancy of dormitory
facilities.
 12. "Dormitory facility" means a dormitory, as such term is defined in
paragraph (a) of subdivision two of section sixteen hundred seventy-six
of the public authorities law.
 13. "Dormitory facility revenue bond" means any note or bond of the
dormitory authority (i) issued on or after the first day of April, two
thousand thirteen for the purposes of financing dormitory facilities or
refinancing notes or bonds previously issued in connection with
dormitory facilities, including notes or bonds issued to pay costs
incurred in connection with the issuance of such notes or bonds, to fund
any reserve for the payment of debt service on such bonds or notes, to
fund any reserve established for the improvement, repair, maintenance or
operations of dormitory facilities, or to pay or provide for the payment
of any note or bond previously issued for any such purpose, and (ii) is
payable from moneys on deposit in the dormitory facilities revenue fund
and is not payable from any revenue of the state.
 § 351. State university mission. The mission of the state university
system shall be to provide to the people of New York educational
services of the highest quality, with the broadest possible access,
fully representative of all segments of the population in a complete
range of academic, professional and vocational postsecondary programs
including such additional activities in pursuit of these objectives as
are necessary or customary. These services and activities shall be
offered through a geographically distributed comprehensive system of
diverse campuses which shall have differentiated and designated missions
designed to provide a comprehensive program of higher education, to meet
the needs of both traditional and non-traditional students and to
address local, regional and state needs and goals. In fulfilling this
mission, the state university shall exercise care to develop and
maintain a balance of its human and physical resources that:
 a. recognizes the fundamental role of its responsibilities in
undergraduate education and provides a full range of graduate and
professional education that reflects the opportunity for individual
choice and the needs of society;
 b. establishes tuition which most effectively promotes the
university's access goals;
 c. encourages and facilitates basic and applied research for the
purpose of the creation and dissemination of knowledge vital for
continued human, scientific, technological and economic advancement;
 d. strengthens its educational and research programs in the health
sciences through the provision of high quality general comprehensive and
specialty health care, broadly accessible at reasonable cost, in its
hospitals, clinics and related programs and through networks and joint
and cooperative relationships with other health care providers and
institutions, including those on a regional basis;
 e. shares the expertise of the state university with the business,
agricultural, governmental, labor and nonprofit sectors of the state
through a program of public service for the purpose of enhancing the
well-being of the people of the state of New York and in protecting our
environmental and marine resources;
 e-1. encourage, support and participate through facility planning and
projects, personnel policies and programs with local governments, school
districts, businesses and civic sectors of host communities regarding
the health of local economies and quality of life;
 f. promotes appropriate program articulation between its
state-operated institutions and its community colleges as well as
encourages regional networks and cooperative relationships with other
educational and cultural institutions for the purpose of better
fulfilling its mission of education, research and service.
 § 352. State university of New York established. 1. There is hereby
created in the state education department and within the university of
the state of New York as established under the board of regents a
corporation to be known as the state university of New York which shall
be responsible for the planning, supervision and administration of
facilities and programs in accordance with the plan proposed by the
state university trustees as approved by the regents pursuant to section
two hundred thirty-seven of this chapter. The state university shall
provide for higher education supported in whole or in part with state
moneys in accordance with the provisions of section three hundred
fifty-eight hereof, and shall perform such other duties as may be
entrusted to it by the provisions of this article and any other law.
Subject to the terms of any agreement to which it is a party, such
corporation shall have the care, custody, control and management of the
lands, grounds, buildings, facilities and equipment used for the
purposes of the state-operated institutions of the state university, and
it shall have power to protect, preserve and improve the same.
 2. Whenever such corporation acquires, absorbs, merges or consolidates
with or becomes the successor to any higher educational institution, all
the right, title and interest in real property held by such predecessor
institution shall vest in and be held and enjoyed by the people of the
state of New York and state university of New York shall thereupon be
deemed to be vested with and become the successor to all right, title
and interest in any personal property, or any beneficial interest
therein, or any other rights and powers possessed by such institution,
whether derived by gift, grant, devise or bequest, in trust or
otherwise.
 3. The state university shall consist of the four university centers
at Albany, Binghamton, Buffalo and Stony Brook, the designated colleges
of arts and sciences at Brockport, Buffalo, Cortland, Fredonia, Geneseo,
New Paltz, Old Westbury, Oneonta, Oswego, Plattsburgh, Potsdam and
Purchase, empire state college, the agricultural and technical colleges
at Alfred, Canton, Cobleskill, Delhi, Farmingdale and Morrisville,
downstate medical center, upstate medical center, the college of
optometry, the college of environmental science and forestry, maritime
college, the college of technology at Utica/Rome, the statutory or
contract colleges at Cornell university and Alfred university, and such
additional universities, colleges and other institutions, facilities and
research centers as have been or hereafter may be acquired, established,
operated or contracted to be operated for the state by the state
university trustees.
 § 352-a. Maritime college; admissions program. 1. There shall be
created an admissions program for the state university of New York
maritime college as established pursuant to section three hundred
fifty-two of this article in which certain elected officials shall
nominate students for placement in such college's regimental/cadet
degree system.
 2. (a) Maritime college shall have a total of two hundred eighty-four
vacancy positions set aside for applicants who are nominated by the
governor, a state senator or a member of the assembly. Such vacancy
nominations shall increase or decrease based upon the number of senate
districts authorized pursuant to article three of the New York state
constitution. An applicant who receives such a nomination, is accepted
for admission into the college and participates in the regimental
program shall receive a scholarship equal to the amount of the state
tuition charge after the deduction of any available grant aid for the
four consecutive years following his or her admission into the program
provided, however, that the student remains in the regimental/cadet
degree program and remains at all times in good academic standing as
determined by the maritime college administration. In no event shall a
student lose his or her scholarship based upon legislative
reapportionment or changes in legislative composition or membership.
Nothing herein shall be construed to limit or reduce the number of
vacancies available to the general population.
 (b) To be eligible to receive such nomination and scholarship, the
applicant must be a resident of the state. For purposes of this section,
a state resident shall be defined as a person who has resided in the
state of New York for a period of at least one year prior to the time of
nomination, is a graduate or within one year of graduation from an
approved high school or has attained a New York state high school
equivalency diploma or its equivalent as determined by the commissioner.
 3. The vacancy nominations shall be distributed as follows: five for
the governor, five for the majority leader of the senate, five for the
speaker of the assembly, two for each state senator other than the
majority leader of the senate and one for each member of the assembly
other than the speaker of the assembly. The governor and each member of
the legislature shall provide one principal and three alternative
nominations for consideration for admission. Final admission decisions
shall remain with the college and within administrative procedures and
criteria.
 4. The state university of New York shall provide annually by the
first day of July and upon request of the chairperson of the senate
higher education committee or the chairperson of the assembly higher
education committee a report detailing the total vacancies filled, the
total vacancies expected for the upcoming academic year, what vacancies
each elected official is expected to have pursuant to the provisions of
subdivision three of this section and a summary of the previous year's
total student enrollment and participation in the program.
 5. The scholarships authorized by this section shall be made available
so long as funds are made available for such purposes.
 6. Any individual receiving a scholarship pursuant to this section
shall apply for all other available state, federal, or other educational
grant aid at the time of enrollment. Any grant aid or financial
assistance received shall be utilized to offset the cost of tuition and
the "Summer Sea Term" to the maximum extent possible, except that
nothing shall require that aid or assistance received which may be used
towards costs other than that of tuition shall be applied toward the
cost of tuition.
 7. The state university of New York is hereby authorized to promulgate
any rules and regulations necessary for the implementation of the
provisions of this section.
 § 353. State university trustees. 1. The state university shall be
governed, and all of its corporate powers exercised, by a board of
trustees. Such board shall consist of eighteen members, fifteen of whom
shall be appointed by the governor with the advice and consent of the
senate, one of whom shall be the president of the student assembly of
the state university, ex-officio and voting, one of whom shall be the
president of the university faculty senate, ex-officio and non-voting,
and one of whom shall be the president of the faculty council of
community colleges, ex-officio and non-voting. Such ex-officio members
shall be subject to every provision of any general, special, or local
law, ordinance, charter, code, rule, or regulation applying to the
voting members of such board with respect to the discharge of their
duties, including, but not limited to, those provisions setting forth
codes of ethics, disclosure requirements, and prohibiting business and
professional activities. One member of the board shall be designated by
the governor as chairperson and one as vice-chairperson. Of the members
first appointed, two shall be appointed for a term which shall expire on
June thirtieth, nineteen hundred fifty-two; one for a term which shall
expire on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred fifty-three; two for a term
which shall expire on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred fifty-four; one
for a term which shall expire on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
fifty-five; two for a term which shall expire on June thirtieth,
nineteen hundred fifty-six; one for a term which shall expire on June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred fifty-seven; two for a term which shall
expire on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred fifty-eight; one for a term
which shall expire on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred fifty-nine; two
for a term which shall expire on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred sixty;
and one for a term which shall expire on June thirtieth, nineteen
hundred sixty-one. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in
the same manner as original appointments. The term of office of each
trustee appointed on or after April first, nineteen hundred eighty-six
shall be seven years, except those of the student member and the faculty
members. Trustees shall receive no compensation for their services but
shall be reimbursed for their expenses actually and necessarily incurred
by them in the performance of their duties under this article.
 2. a. The board may provide for regular meetings, and the chairman, or
the vice-chairman, or any eight members by petition, may at any time
call a special meeting of the board of trustees and fix the time and
place therefor; and at least seven days notice of every meeting shall be
mailed to the usual address of each trustee, unless such notice be
waived by a majority of the board. Resolutions for the consideration of
the board of trustees must be mailed to the usual address of each
trustee no less than seven days prior to a meeting, unless the chair
shall make available in writing on the day of the meeting the facts
which necessitate an immediate vote. Eight trustees attending shall be a
quorum for the transaction of business and, unless a greater number is
required by the by-laws, the act of a majority of the members present at
any meeting shall be the act of the board. The board shall hold at least
two public hearings each year. One public hearing shall be held during
the spring semester and one public hearing shall be held in the fall
semester. The purpose of such hearings shall be to receive testimony and
statements from concerned individuals about university issues. The board
shall fix the time, place, duration and format of each hearing. At least
three members of the board shall attend each hearing. At least thirty
days notice of the hearing shall be given by the chairman of the board
to all members of the board, to all presidents of state operated
campuses, to the chair of faculty-senate bodies of state operated
campuses, to all student government presidents of state operated
campuses, to the certified or recognized employee organizations
representing employees of the state university and to the media. Such
notice shall contain the time and place of the public hearing.
 b. The agenda for any such meeting of the board of trustees shall be
electronically available on the state university of New York website
three days prior to the meetings unless an executive committee meeting
has been called in which an agenda must be available twenty-four hours
in advance, and shall be considered a public record. A summary of
resolutions and board actions for any such meeting of the board of
trustees shall be electronically available on the state university of
New York website no later than seven days after the meeting and shall be
considered a public record. The approved minutes, attendance, voting
record and either transcripts or video record for any such meeting must
be posted no later than seven days following their approval by the board
or executive committee. Information posted on the state university of
New York website regarding board of trustee meetings shall remain on the
site as archived data for a minimum of ten years.
 c. Any such meeting of the board of trustees shall be conducted in
accordance with article seven of the public officers law.
 3. The board shall appoint its own officers and staff, prescribe the
duties of such employees, and fix their compensation within the
appropriations prescribed therefor. Other than those positions included
in section one hundred sixty-nine of the executive law, the board shall
fix the compensation and benefits of employees in positions in the
professional service in the state university which are designated,
stipulated or excluded from negotiating units as managerial or
confidential as defined pursuant to article fourteen of the civil
service law.
 4. a. The board may elect an executive committee of not less than five
members, who, in intervals between meetings of the board may transact
such business of the state university as the board may from time to time
authorize, except to grant degrees or to make removals from office. The
student member of the board shall be a member of such committee. A
majority of the whole of the executive committee, but in any event not
less than four members, attending shall be a quorum for the transaction
of business and the act of a majority of the members of the executive
committee present at any meeting thereof shall be the act of such
committee.
 b. The agenda for any meeting of any committee and subcommittee of the
board of trustees shall be available electronically on the state
university of New York website three days prior to the meeting unless an
executive committee meeting has been called, in which case an agenda
must be available twenty-four hours in advance, and shall be considered
a public record. A summary of resolutions and actions by the committee
or subcommittee for any such meeting shall be electronically available
on the state university of New York website no later than seven days
after the meeting and shall be considered a public record. The approved
minutes, attendance, voting record, and either transcripts or video
record, for any such meeting must be posted no later than seven days
following the approval by the board, committee or subcommittee.
Information posted on the state university of New York website regarding
such meetings shall remain on the site as archived data for a minimum of
ten years.
 c. Any such meeting of a committee or subcommittee of the board of
trustees shall be conducted in accordance with article seven of the
public officers law.
 § 354. Powers and duties of state university trustees-planning
functions. 1. The state university trustees shall, once every four
years, formulate a long-range state university plan or general revision
thereof and make recommendations to the board of regents and the
governor for the organization, development, coordination and expansion
of the state university and for the establishment of community colleges
in areas suitable for and in need of such institutions, which plan and
recommendations shall include the following:
 a. plans for new curricula;
 b. plans for new facilities;
 c. plans for change in policies with respect to student admissions;
 d. projected student enrollments; and
 e. comments upon its relationship to other colleges and universities,
public, independent and proprietary, within the state.
 f. For informational purposes only, projection standards and overall
expenditure projections of capital and operating costs. Prior to
transmitting their long-range state university plan or general revision
thereof to the board of regents and the governor the state university
trustees may, after giving due notice, conduct one or more hearings on
such plan.
 1-a. The state university trustees shall organize or cause to be
organized at a university or college of the state university an annual
conference on the role of the universities, colleges and other
facilities on the local economies, social conditions and quality of life
of host cities, towns and villages. Such conference shall rotate amongst
the individual universities and colleges and shall include but not be
limited to:
 a. a review of significant partnering between universities, colleges
and other institutions of the state university with their host
communities;
 b. presentations utilizing the expertise of the state university on
types of projects, programs and administrative actions that could
support the state university's mission stated in subdivision e-1 of
section three hundred fifty-one of this article; and
 c. roundtable discussions between state university trustees, officers
and faculty with county, city, town and local officials, business and
civic leaders relating to the purposes of the annual conference.
 Each sponsoring university or college shall prepare and distribute a
report on the annual conference.
 2. During the calendar year nineteen hundred sixty-four and each
fourth year thereafter the state university trustees shall transmit
their proposed plan or general revision thereof to the board of regents
and the governor on or before the first day of June in each such year.
Such plan shall be reviewed by the board of regents and shall be subject
to approval by such board. As approved by the board of regents and
incorporated into the regents plan or general revision thereof for the
development of higher education in the state and, upon approval
thereafter by the governor, such plan shall guide and determine the
development of the state university and its community colleges until
such plan is modified or revised in the manner provided herein.
 3. By the first day of June in nineteen hundred seventy-four and every
fourth year thereafter, the state university trustees shall report in
writing to the board of regents, to the governor and to the legislature
on the progress made in carrying out their responsibilities under such
plan and their general recommendations with respect to public higher
education, including recommendations as to modifications of such plan
which the trustees deem essential to meet the then current demands upon
public higher education. The state university trustees may also at any
other time propose modifications which they then deem essential or
desirable with respect to such plan. They may, after giving due notice,
conduct one or more hearings on such modifications and shall transmit
their recommendations therefor to the board of regents and the governor.
Such modifications shall be subject to approval by the regents and
thereafter by the governor in the same manner as such plan or general
revisions thereof.
 § 355. Powers and duties of trustees--administrative and fiscal
functions. 1. Subject to the provisions of the plan or general revision
thereof proposed by the state university trustees as approved by the
regents pursuant to section two hundred thirty-seven of this chapter,
the state university trustees shall be responsible for:
 a. The over-all central administration, supervision and coordination
of state-operated institutions and the general supervision and
coordination of the statutory or contract colleges in the state
university.
 b. The supervision and coordination of state-aided programs in
institutions providing higher education pursuant to the provisions of
section three hundred fifty-eight hereof.
 c. The approval of the establishment of community colleges and four
year colleges authorized by article one hundred twenty-six of this
chapter, in conformance with the master plan; the provision of standards
and regulations covering the organization and operation of their
programs, courses and curricula, financing arrangements, state financial
assistance, tuition charges and fees, and such other matters as may be
involved in the operation of such colleges.
 d. The establishment of health and medical centers, four year liberal
arts colleges, professional and graduate schools, research centers and
other facilities, as provided in this article.
 e. The approval of the appointment of the head of each statutory or
contract college and community college by the respective boards of
trustees or other governing bodies of such institutions.
 f. The promotion of and participation in inter-institutional
arrangements among independent and public institutions of higher
education and health care facilities and providers and other
health-related organizations on a geographical or topical basis to
encourage responsible and cost effective use of facilities and academic
and health care resources for the enhancement and enrichment of
educational experiences and opportunities and promoting high quality
health care services in support of the state university's educational
mission.
 2. The state university trustees are further authorized and empowered,
subject to the provisions of the plan or general revisions thereof
proposed by the state university trustees as approved by the regents
pursuant to section two hundred thirty-seven of this chapter:
 * a. To take, hold and administer on behalf of the state university or
any institution therein, real and personal property or any interest
therein and the income thereof either absolutely or in trust for any
educational or other purpose within the jurisdiction and corporate
purposes of the state university. The trustees may acquire property for
such purposes by purchase, appropriation or lease and by the acceptance
of gifts, grants, bequests and devises, and, within appropriations made
therefor, may equip and furnish buildings and otherwise improve property
owned, used or occupied by the state university or any institution
therein. The trustees may acquire property by the acceptance of
conditional gifts, grants, devises or bequests, the provisions of
section eleven of the state finance law notwithstanding. Where real
property is to be acquired by purchase or appropriation, such
acquisition shall be in accordance with the provisions of section three
hundred seven of this chapter except that the powers and duties in said
section mentioned to be performed by the commissioner shall be performed
by the state university trustees. The provisions of section three of the
public lands law notwithstanding, the trustees may provide for the lease
of state-owned real property under the jurisdiction of the state
university that is part of a tax-free NY area approved pursuant to
article twenty-one of the economic development law, in such manner and
upon such terms as the trustees shall determine, provided such lease is
consistent with the approved plan for such tax-free NY area.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * a. To take, hold and administer on behalf of the state university or
any institution therein, real and personal property or any interest
therein and the income thereof either absolutely or in trust for any
educational or other purpose within the jurisdiction and corporate
purposes of the state university. The trustees may acquire property for
such purposes by purchase, appropriation or lease and by the acceptance
of gifts, grants, bequests and devises, and, within appropriations made
therefor, may equip and furnish buildings and otherwise improve property
owned, used or occupied by the state university or any institution
therein. Where real property is to be acquired by purchase or
appropriation, such acquisition shall be in accordance with the
provisions of section three hundred seven of this chapter except that
the powers and duties in said section mentioned to be performed by the
commissioner of education shall be performed by the state university
trustees.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 b. To make and establish and from time to time alter and amend such
rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law, for the government of
the state university and the institutions therein.
 c. To provide for the care, custody and management of the lands,
grounds, structures, buildings, equipment and facilities of the state
university and the institutions therein.
 d. To visit and inspect the institutions in the state university, and
to distribute to or expend or administer for them such property and
funds as the state may appropriate therefor, or as the state university
trustees may hold in trust, or as may otherwise come into their
possession.
 e. To merge any higher educational corporation into the state
university with the approval of the governing body of such corporation
and statutory approval of the legislature. Any higher educational
corporation is authorized and empowered to merge into the state
university. Upon the approval of an agreement of merger by the board of
regents and subsequent statutory approval by the legislature, and the
filing thereof with the regents, the merger shall be deemed complete and
all the right, title and interest in real property held by such merged
higher educational corporation shall vest in and be held and enjoyed by
the people of the state of New York and all the other estate, property,
rights, privileges and franchises of such merged higher educational
corporation shall vest in and be held and enjoyed by the state
university, as fully and entirely and without change or diminution as
the same were before held and enjoyed by such merged corporation, and be
managed and controlled by the state university, but subject to all
liabilities and obligations of such merged corporation and the rights of
all creditors thereof; except that the state university shall not
thereby acquire power to engage in any activity or to exercise any
right, privilege or franchise of a kind which it could not otherwise
lawfully engage in or exercise. The state university shall cause a copy
of the agreement of merger, certified by the board of regents to be a
true and correct copy of the original filed in their office, to be filed
in the office of the secretary of state and in the office of the clerk
of the county in which the certificate of incorporation of the merged
corporation was filed, in each case in which the certificate of
incorporation of the merged corporation was filed in the office of the
secretary of state; and shall cause a like copy of the merger agreement
with the certificate of the board of regents to be recorded in the
office of the recording officer of each county in which is located any
real property in or to which the merged corporation had any right, title
or interest at the time of the merger; and it shall be the duty of each
such recording officer to record such copy and certificate in his office
in the books used for the recording of deeds and to index the same
against the merged corporation as grantor and the people of the state of
New York as grantees. Neither the secretary of state nor the county
clerk or the recording officer of any county shall be entitled to demand
or collect any fee for filing or recording any such copy of an agreement
of merger.
 f. To grant all degrees, diplomas and certificates which heretofore
have been granted or have been authorized to be granted upon the
completion of courses of study in any state-operated institution which
now is or hereafter may be in the state university, prior to the
acquisition of such institution by the state university, and also such
other degrees as the regents may hereafter specifically authorize them
to grant. In testimony thereof the state university trustees may give
suitable diplomas or certificates under the state university seal
including honorary degrees. Every diploma or certificate so granted
shall entitle the conferee to all privileges and immunities which by
usage or statute are allowed for similar diplomas or certificates of
corresponding grade granted by any institution of learning.
 f-1. Notwithstanding any law, rule or regulation to the contrary, the
state university of New York board of trustees shall pass a resolution
by June first, two thousand fifteen, to develop a plan to make available
to students enrolled in an academic program of the state university of
New York beginning in the two thousand sixteen--two thousand seventeen
academic year, approved experiential or applied learning activities.
Such experiential or applied learning activities may include completion
of activities related to students' program of study, including, but not
limited to, service-learning activities completed as part of a course,
paid or unpaid internships, faculty-supervised undergraduate projects
and activities leading to publication of research in journals or similar
publications, production or performance of creative works, and iterative
"co-op" partnerships that explicitly link the curricula to a temporary,
paid position in industry or the public sector. Such plan, to be
completed by June first, two thousand sixteen, shall be developed in
consultation with university faculty senate, the faculty council of
community colleges, the SUNY student assembly, and other stakeholders.
Such plan shall define approved experiential or applied learning
activities, methods of faculty oversight and assessment,
responsibilities of business, corporate, non-profit or other entities
hosting students, and include a requirement for collecting and reporting
data associated with such experiential or applied learning activities.
Such plan shall have each college examine the feasibility of including
such experiential or applied learning activities as a degree
requirement. Such college shall examine its ability to administer and
provide such opportunities to students; the local community's capacity
to support such experiential or applied learning activities; the impact
such requirement would have on the local workforce, if any; potential
for such a requirement to enhance learning outcomes for students; and
whether adding such a requirement would cause potential delays in
graduation for students.
 f-2. Notwithstanding any law, rule or regulation to the contrary, the
state university of New York board of trustees shall establish a policy
authorizing state-operated institutions and community colleges within
the state university to grant posthumous degrees to enrolled
matriculated students whose death occurs prior to graduation. Such
policy shall provide that, upon terms set in the policy, any remaining
credit requirements shall be waived for any student who dies and who
otherwise would have been eligible for graduation had they been able to
complete their academic career.
 f-3. Notwithstanding any law, rule or regulation to the contrary, the
state university of New York board of trustees shall, by June first, two
thousand twenty-five, develop a plan to make available to students
enrolled in an academic program of the state university of New York
beginning in the two thousand twenty-five--two thousand twenty-six
academic year, approved experiential or applied learning activities, as
defined in paragraph f-1 of this subdivision. Such plan shall be
developed in consultation with university faculty senate, the faculty
council of community colleges, the university student assembly, and
other stakeholders. Such plan shall define approved experiential or
applied learning activities, methods of faculty oversight and
assessment, responsibilities of business, corporate, non-profit or other
entities hosting students, and include a requirement for collecting and
reporting data associated with such experiential or applied learning
activities. Such plan shall have each college examine the feasibility of
including such experiential or applied learning activities as a degree
requirement. Such college shall examine its ability to administer and
provide such opportunities to students; the local community's capacity
to support such experiential or applied learning activities; the impact
such requirement would have on the local workforce, if any; potential
for such a requirement to enhance learning outcomes for students; and
whether adding such a requirement would cause potential delays in
graduation for students.
 g. To appoint the head of each state-operated institution in the state
university upon the recommendation made to them by the council of such
institution in accordance with the rules and standards established by
the state university trustees; or if such recommendation is not made or
does not comply with such rules and standards, then to make such
appointment as is by them deemed necessary; to prescribe the functions,
powers, and duties of the head of each such institution; and to appoint
or provide for the appointment of the members of the instructional and
administrative staffs, and such other employees as may be necessary, at
each state-operated institution upon the recommendation of the head
thereof and prescribe or provide for the prescription of their duties.
 h. To regulate the admission of students, prescribe the qualifications
for their continued attendance, regulate tuition charges where no
provision is otherwise made therefor by law, and regulate other fees and
charges, curricula and all other matters pertaining to the operation and
administration of each state-operated institution in the state
university.
 (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of any other general, special or
local law, rule or regulation, such regulations may permit persons sixty
years of age or over to audit courses given therein without tuition,
examination, grading or credit therefor upon a space available basis, as
determined by the president of each such institution, provided that such
audit attendance does not deny course attendance at a state-operated
institution by an individual who is otherwise qualified under the
regulations promulgated pursuant to this section.
 (2) Such regulations shall also provide that upon request by a student
who is an eligible veteran the payment of tuition and other fees and
charges, less the amounts payable for such purposes from scholarships or
other financial assistance awarded said veteran pursuant to article
thirteen of this chapter, article one hundred thirty of this chapter or
any other state or federal aid program, shall be deferred in such
amounts and until such times as the several payments of veterans'
benefits under the Veterans' Readjustment Benefit Act of 1966, as
amended, are received by the veteran, provided that the veteran has
filed a claim for such benefits and presents to the state university
proof of eligibility, extent of entitlement to benefits and the need for
deferral until the receipt of such benefits.
 (3) (i) Such regulations shall further provide that the payment of
tuition and fees by any student in any state-operated institution of the
state university who is a member or the spouse or the dependent of a
member of the armed forces of the United States on full-time active duty
and stationed in this state, whether or not a resident of the state,
shall be paid at a rate or charge no greater than that imposed for
students thereat who are residents of this state.
 (ii) Such regulations shall further provide that the payment of
tuition and fees by any student who is not a resident of New York state
shall be paid at a rate or charge no greater than that imposed for
students who are residents of the state if such student is enrolled in
an institution or educational unit of the state university and is
attending such institution or educational unit in accordance with the
federal GI bills and in compliance with all applicable eligibility
requirements thereof.
 (iii) Such regulations shall further provide that the payment of
tuition and fees by any student who is not a resident of New York state
shall be paid at a rate or charge no greater than that imposed for
students who are residents of this state if such student is enrolled in
an institution or educational unit of the state university and is the
spouse or the dependent of a member of the armed forces of the United
States on full-time active duty and not stationed in this state
immediately following being stationed therein.
 (3-a) Notwithstanding the provisions of any other general, special or
local law, rule or regulation, the state university trustees shall be
authorized to set a reduced rate of tuition and/or fees, or to waive
tuition and/or fees entirely, for students participating in any dual or
concurrent enrollment program with no reduction in other state, local,
or other support for such students earning college credit that such
higher education partner would otherwise be eligible to receive;
provided that, for purposes of this provision, a dual or concurrent
enrollment program shall mean one or more college courses taken by a
high school student through a state-operated institution while such
student is still enrolled in high school or boards of cooperative
educational services and for which the student may receive both high
school and college credit.
 * (4) The trustees shall not impose a differential tuition charge
based upon need or income. Except as hereinafter provided, all students
enrolled in programs leading to like degrees at state-operated
institutions of the state university shall be charged a uniform rate of
tuition except for differential tuition rates based on state residency.
Provided, however, that the trustees may authorize the presidents of the
colleges of technology and the colleges of agriculture and technology to
set differing rates of tuition for each of the colleges for students
enrolled in degree-granting programs leading to an associate degree and
non-degree granting programs so long as such tuition rate does not
exceed the tuition rate charged to students who are enrolled in like
degree programs or degree-granting undergraduate programs leading to a
baccalaureate degree at other state-operated institutions of the state
university of New York. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
subparagraph, the trustees may authorize the setting of a separate
category of tuition rate, that shall be greater than the tuition rate
for resident students and less than the tuition rate for non-resident
students, only for students enrolled in distance learning courses who
are not residents of the state. Except as otherwise authorized in this
subparagraph, the trustees shall not adopt changes affecting tuition
charges prior to the enactment of the annual budget, provided however
that:
 (i) Commencing with the two thousand eleven--two thousand twelve
academic year and ending in the two thousand fifteen--two thousand
sixteen academic year the state university of New York board of trustees
shall be empowered to increase the resident undergraduate rate of
tuition by not more than three hundred dollars over the resident
undergraduate rate of tuition adopted by the board of trustees in the
prior academic year, provided however that commencing with the two
thousand eleven--two thousand twelve academic year and ending in the two
thousand sixteen--two thousand seventeen academic year if the annual
resident undergraduate rate of tuition would exceed five thousand
dollars, then a tuition credit for each eligible student, as determined
and calculated by the New York state higher education services
corporation pursuant to section six hundred eighty-nine-a of this title,
shall be applied toward the tuition charged for each semester, quarter
or term of study. Tuition for each semester, quarter or term of study
shall not be due for any student eligible to receive such tuition credit
until the tuition credit is calculated and applied against the tuition
charged for the corresponding semester, quarter or term.
 (ii) Commencing with the two thousand seventeen--two thousand eighteen
academic year and ending in the two thousand twenty--two thousand
twenty-one academic year the state university of New York board of
trustees shall be empowered to increase the resident undergraduate rate
of tuition by not more than two hundred dollars over the resident
undergraduate rate of tuition adopted by the board of trustees in the
prior academic year, provided, however that if the annual resident
undergraduate rate of tuition would exceed five thousand dollars, then a
tuition credit for each eligible student, as determined and calculated
by the New York state higher education services corporation pursuant to
section six hundred eighty-nine-a of this title, shall be applied toward
the tuition charged for each semester, quarter or term of study. Tuition
for each semester, quarter or term of study shall not be due for any
student eligible to receive such tuition credit until the tuition credit
is calculated and applied against the tuition charged for the
corresponding semester, quarter or term. Provided, further that the
revenue resulting from an increase in the rate of tuition shall be
allocated to each campus pursuant to a plan approved by the board of
trustees to support investments in new classroom faculty, instruction,
initiatives to improve student success and on-time completion and a
tuition credit for each eligible student.
 (iii) On or before November thirtieth, two thousand seventeen, the
trustees shall approve and submit to the chairs of the assembly ways and
means committee and the senate finance committee and to the director of
the budget a master tuition plan setting forth the tuition rates that
the trustees propose for resident undergraduate students for the four
year period commencing with the two thousand seventeen--two thousand
eighteen academic year and ending in the two thousand twenty--two
thousand twenty-one academic year, and shall submit any proposed
amendments to such plan by November thirtieth of each subsequent year
thereafter through November thirtieth, two thousand twenty, and provided
further, that with the approval of the board of trustees, each
university center may increase non-resident undergraduate tuition rates
each year by not more than ten percent over the tuition rates of the
prior academic year for a six year period commencing with the two
thousand eleven--two thousand twelve academic year and ending in the two
thousand sixteen--two thousand seventeen academic year.
 (iv) Beginning in state fiscal year two thousand twelve-two thousand
thirteen and ending in state fiscal year two thousand fifteen--two
thousand sixteen, the state shall appropriate and make available general
fund operating support, including fringe benefits, for the state
university in an amount not less than the amount appropriated and made
available in the prior state fiscal year; provided, however, that if the
governor declares a fiscal emergency, and communicates such emergency to
the temporary president of the senate and speaker of the assembly, state
support for operating expenses at the state university and city
university may be reduced in a manner proportionate to one another, and
the aforementioned provisions shall not apply.
 (v) Beginning in state fiscal year two thousand seventeen--two
thousand eighteen and ending in state fiscal year two thousand
twenty--two thousand twenty-one, the state shall appropriate and make
available general fund operating support, including fringe benefits, for
the state university in an amount not less than the amount appropriated
and made available in the prior state fiscal year; provided, however,
that if the governor declares a fiscal emergency, and communicates such
emergency to the temporary president of the senate and speaker of the
assembly, state support for operating expenses at the state university
and city university may be reduced in a manner proportionate to one
another, and the aforementioned provisions shall not apply; provided
further, the state shall appropriate and make available general fund
support to fully fund the tuition credit pursuant to subdivision two of
section six hundred sixty-nine-h of this title.
 (vi) For the state university fiscal years commencing two thousand
eleven--two thousand twelve and ending two thousand fifteen--two
thousand sixteen, each university center may set aside a portion of its
tuition revenues derived from tuition increases to provide increased
financial aid for New York state resident undergraduate students whose
net taxable income is eighty thousand dollars or more subject to the
approval of a NY-SUNY 2020 proposal by the governor and the chancellor
of the state university of New York. Nothing in this paragraph shall be
construed as to authorize that students whose net taxable income is
eighty thousand dollars or more are eligible for tuition assistance
program awards pursuant to section six hundred sixty-seven of this
chapter.
 * NB Effective until July 1, 2027
 * (4) The trustees shall not impose a differential tuition charge
based upon need or income. All students enrolled in programs leading to
like degrees at state-operated institutions of the state university
shall be charged a uniform rate of tuition except for differential
tuition rates based on state residency. Provided, however, that the
trustees may authorize the presidents of the colleges of technology and
the colleges of agriculture and technology to set differing rates of
tuition for each of the colleges for students enrolled in
degree-granting programs leading to an associate degree and non-degree
granting programs so long as such tuition rate does not exceed the
tuition rate charged to students who are enrolled in like degree
programs or degree-granting undergraduate programs leading to a
baccalaureate degree at other state-operated institutions of the state
university of New York. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
subparagraph, the trustees may authorize the setting of a separate
category of tuition rate, that shall be greater than the tuition rate
for resident students and less than the tuition rate for non-resident
students, only for students enrolled in distance learning courses who
are not residents of the state. The trustees shall not adopt changes
affecting tuition charges prior to the enactment of the annual budget.
 * NB Effective July 1, 2027
 (4-a) Notwithstanding any law, rule, regulation, or practice to the
contrary and following the review and approval of the chancellor of the
state university or his or her designee, the board of trustees may raise
non-resident undergraduate rates of tuition by not more than ten percent
over the tuition rates of the prior academic year for the following
doctoral degree granting institutions of the state university of New
York: the state university of New York college of environmental science
and forestry as defined in article one hundred twenty-one of this
chapter, downstate medical center, upstate medical center, and the
college of technology at Utica-Rome/state university polytechnic
institute for a four year period commencing with the two thousand
twenty--two thousand twenty-one academic year and ending in the two
thousand twenty-three--two thousand twenty-four academic year provided
that such rate change is approved annually prior to board of trustees
action by the chancellor of the state university or his or her designee.
 (4-a-1) Notwithstanding any law, rule, regulation or practice to the
contrary and following the review and approval of the chancellor of the
state university or his or her designee, the board of trustees may
annually impose differential tuition rates on non-resident undergraduate
and graduate rates of tuition for state-operated institutions for a
three year period commencing with the two thousand twenty-three--two
thousand twenty-four academic year and ending in the two thousand
twenty-five--two thousand twenty-six academic year, provided that such
rates are competitive with the rates of tuition charged by peer
institutions and that the board of trustees annually provide the reason
and methodology behind any rate increase to the governor, the temporary
president of the senate, and the speaker of the assembly prior to the
approval of such increases.
 (4-b) In state fiscal year two thousand twenty-two--two thousand
twenty-three and thereafter, the state shall appropriate and make
available general fund operating support in the amount of the tuition
credit calculated pursuant to section six hundred eighty-nine-a of this
chapter annually.
 (5) The trustees shall further provide standards for the granting of
advanced standing to veterans applying for college admissions at the
state university, who have successfully completed United States Armed
Forces Institute or other comparable course work.
 (6) Where an undergraduate state-operated institution of the state
university is located adjacent to another institution of higher
education and students of such undergraduate state operated institution
are, under arrangements made by the state university, taking a
substantial portion of their courses at such other institution, the
state university trustees may permit the students of such undergraduate
state-operated institution, subject to such conditions or limitations as
they deem advisable, to participate in the extra-curricular activities
and utilize services of such other institution if those privileges are
extended by such other institution.
 (7) In formulating the curriculum of each state-operated institution
in the state university for professional education in medicine there
shall be required and included in such curriculum and in the plans and
recommendations of the state university trustees formulated and
transmitted in pursuance of the provisions of section three hundred
fifty-four of this chapter, courses and facilities, which in the
judgment of the trustees shall be best suited to encourage and to
implement the study and preparation, by students desiring the same, for
the family practice of medicine. Such courses and facilities shall
include: the establishment and maintenance of a department of family
practice under the direction of a qualified family practitioner, courses
of study under the supervision of qualified family practitioners, a
family care program of study and clinical experience, a program of
preceptorships, and a program of internships or family practice
residencies in the hospital or hospitals affiliated with such respective
school.
 (8) Such regulations shall further provide that the payment of tuition
and fees by any student who is not a resident of New York state, other
than a non-immigrant noncitizen within the meaning of paragraph (15) of
subsection (a) of section 1101 of title 8 of the United States Code,
shall be paid at a rate or charge no greater than that imposed for
students who are residents of the state if such student:
 (i) attended an approved New York high school for two or more years,
graduated from an approved New York high school and applied for
attendance at an institution or educational unit of the state university
within five years of receiving a New York state high school diploma; or
 (ii) attended an approved New York state program for general
equivalency diploma exam preparation, received a general equivalency
diploma issued within New York state and applied for attendance at an
institution or educational unit of the state university within five
years of receiving a general equivalency diploma issued within New York
state; or
 (iii) was enrolled in an institution or educational unit of the state
university in the fall semester or quarter of the two thousand one--two
thousand two academic year and was authorized by such institution or
educational unit to pay tuition at the rate or charge imposed for
students who are residents of the state.
 A student without lawful immigration status shall also be required to
file an affidavit with such institution or educational unit stating that
the student has filed an application to legalize his or her immigration
status, or will file such an application as soon as he or she is
eligible to do so.
 (9) The trustees shall review any proposed community college tuition
increase and the justification for such increase. The justification
provided by the community college for such increase shall include a
detailed analysis of ongoing operating costs, capital, debt service
expenditures, and all revenues.
 (10) Such regulations shall further provide that any student who is
not a legal resident of New York state but is a United States citizen, a
permanent lawful resident, an individual who is granted U or T
non-immigrant status pursuant to the Victims of Trafficking and Violence
Protection Act of 2000, a person granted temporary protected status
pursuant to the Federal Immigration Act of 1990, an individual of a
class of refugees paroled by the attorney general of the United States
under his or her parole authority pertaining to the admission of
noncitizens to the United States, or an applicant without lawful
immigration status may have the payment of tuition and other fees and
charges reduced by state-aided programs, scholarships or other financial
assistance awarded under the provisions of articles thirteen,
thirteen-A, fourteen and fourteen-A of this chapter, provided that the
student meets the requirements set forth in subparagraph (ii) of
paragraph a or subparagraph (ii) of paragraph b of subdivision five of
section six hundred sixty-one of this chapter, as applicable.
 * (11) (i) For purposes of this subparagraph, "Team USA athlete" means
any student athlete who meets the eligibility standards defined and
approved by the United States Olympic and Paralympic Committee and by
the national governing body for the sport in which the athlete competes.
 (ii) Notwithstanding the provisions of any other general, special or
local law, rule or regulation and pursuant to an appropriation and
funding being made for such purpose, such regulations shall further
provide that the payment of tuition and fees by any student who is not a
resident of New York state shall be paid at a rate or charge no greater
than that imposed for students who are residents of this state if such
student is enrolled in an institution or educational unit of the state
university, is a Team USA athlete, and is training in New York State in
an elite level program approved by the United States Olympic and
Paralympic Committee.
 * NB Effective July 1, 2026
 * NB There are 2 sbpar (11)'s
 * (11) Notwithstanding any law, rule or regulation to the contrary,
such regulations shall provide for eligibility of admission for students
who have completed an online high school program which (i) has in excess
of ten thousands students per year nationally complete such program,
(ii) is located within the United States, and (iii) is accredited in
accordance with paragraph four of appendix three hundred two of the Job
Corps Policy and Requirements Handbook (Guidelines for the Ongoing
Quality Monitoring of Job Corps High School Diploma (HSD) Programs), as
amended from time to time;
 * NB There are 2 sbpar (11)'s
 i. To lease to alumni associations of institutions of the state
university a portion of the grounds occupied by any institution of the
state university, for the erection thereon of dormitories to be used by
students in attendance at such institutions. The terms of any lease and
the character of the building to be erected shall be determined by the
state university trustees. Such lease, prior to its execution, shall be
submitted to the attorney general for his approval as to its form,
contents and legal effect. Nothing contained in this paragraph shall
affect the provisions of any lease heretofore executed by a board of
visitors of any state-operated institution pursuant to law. The state
university trustees may similarly enter into an agreement with an alumni
association of an institution of the state university to furnish heat
from a central heating plant to any dormitory erected by such alumni
association. Any such dormitory shall not be subject to taxation for any
purpose.
 j. To enter into a boundary line agreement for, on behalf of, and in
the name of the people of the state of New York whenever a mistake has
been made or an honest dispute exists as to the location of the division
line between land owned by the state, which is under the jurisdiction,
care, custody or control of the state university trustees, and adjoining
land not owned by the state. Such an agreement shall fix and determine
the division line between such lands, subject to the approval of the
attorney general as to form, content and manner of execution.
 k. To enlist and accept the cooperation of municipal authorities in
obtaining the use of public buildings, lands, property and other
facilities, or portions thereof, under the jurisdiction of such
municipal authorities, for the purposes of the state university. Such
appropriate municipal authorities are hereby authorized to permit the
use of public buildings, lands, property and other facilities or
portions thereof under their jurisdiction for the purposes of the state
university, with or without rental or other charges.
 l. To appoint university police officers who shall have the powers of
police officers and to remove such police officers at pleasure;
provided, however, that any person appointed a police officer must have
satisfactorily completed or complete within one year of the date of his
appointment a course of law enforcement training approved by the
municipal police training council in consultation with the university.
It shall be the duty of such police officers to preserve law and order
on the campuses and other property of the university, including any
portion of a public highway which crosses or abuts such property.
Subject to the approval of the chancellor, the president of each
state-operated campus of the state university shall enter into a written
agreement with adjoining law enforcement agencies establishing protocols
for the exercise of authority by such university police officer
off-campus, including mutual aid and assistance. Such written protocols
shall not be deemed to supersede the authority of other police officers.
The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to any of the state
institutions and property referred to in section five thousand seven
hundred nine of this chapter.
 m. To name and rename any state-operated institution of the state
university after consultation with its council.
 n. To enter into a contract with the board of education of a city or
school district in which a state-operated institution is located for the
education by such college, for such period of time as may be agreed
upon, of all or part of the children of legal school age residing in
such city or school district. A board of education in such a city or
school district is hereby authorized and empowered to enter into such
contracts with the state university trustees, subject to the approval of
the commissioner of education, and to perform all necessary acts to
carry out the purposes of this paragraph.
 o. To conduct or authorize the conduct of research and experiments at
state-operated institutions of the state university in the field or,
pursuant to agreements therefor, in industrial and commercial plants, in
connection with the educational programs of the state university,
including projects involving the care, preservation, utilization and
management of natural resources and the disposition of crops and other
products incidental thereto.
 p. To perform such other acts as may be necessary or appropriate to
carry out effectively the objects and purposes of the state university
as specified in this article.
 q. To prepare and adopt, within the amounts appropriated therefor,
plans for land acquisition, state university development and expansion,
space needs and uses and for the construction, acquisition,
reconstruction, rehabilitation and improvement of academic buildings,
dormitories and other facilities required or to be required for the
state-operated institutions and the statutory or contract colleges, and
for such planning functions to retain or employ private architects,
engineers and artists, or firms thereof, or other and different
consultants for proposed projects and for the preparation of space
requirements, cost estimates, preliminary plans, budgetary
justifications, and construction standards. During the selection of
projects for such plans, the trustees shall, where applicable, give due
consideration to projects that support improvements in environmental
protection, energy and resource management, solar energy and
conservation with particular consideration given to a project's
potential to generate cost savings over time.
 r. To cooperate with and assist the state university construction fund
in the construction, acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation and
improvement of academic buildings, dormitories and other facilities
pursuant to article eight-A of this chapter, and to approve the
architectural concept of all such construction projects.
 s. To lease or make available to the state university construction
fund, the dormitory authority or other public benefit corporation, the
New York state teachers' retirement system, the New York state
employees' retirement system, or a business that intends to locate in a
tax-free NY area approved pursuant to article twenty-one of the economic
development law, a portion of the grounds or real property occupied by a
state-operated institution or statutory or contract college for the
construction, acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement
of academic buildings, dormitories or other facilities thereon pursuant
to article eight-A of this chapter and for the purpose of facilitating
such construction, acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or
improvement, to enter into leases and agreements for the use of any such
academic building, dormitory or other facility in accordance with the
provisions of section three hundred seventy-eight of this chapter;
provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall affect the
provisions of any lease or agreement heretofore executed by the state
university with the dormitory authority. The state university trustees
may also enter into agreements with the state university construction
fund, the dormitory authority or other public benefit corporation, the
New York state teachers' retirement system, the New York state
employees' retirement system or any business that intends to locate in a
tax-free NY area approved pursuant to article twenty-one of the economic
development law, to furnish heat from a central heating plant to any
academic building, dormitory or other facility erected by them or with
moneys supplied by them. Any such academic building, dormitory or other
facility shall not be subject to taxation for any purpose.
 t. The trustees shall have the power to lease or make available to a
not-for-profit corporation or political subdivision of the state, or the
state, or the office for the aging, for the purposes set forth in
section sixteen hundred seventy-seven of the public authorities law;
pertaining to the use of dormitory authority facilities by the aged,
facilities or portions thereof located on the grounds or real property
occupied by a state-operated institution or statutory or contract
college, which facilities are owned by or mortgaged to the dormitory
authority. Such leases and agreements shall be upon such terms and
conditions as may be agreed upon between the parties thereto, provided
that any such lease or agreement shall be subject to the approval of the
dormitory authority. Nothing herein contained shall affect the
provisions of any lease or agreement heretofore executed by the state
university with the dormitory authority, or any other agency.
 u. To establish a water conservation program for academic buildings,
dormitories and other facilities of the state university. Such program
shall include a survey of water use and conservation in such buildings.
 v. To cooperate with and assist the state university construction fund
in the construction of academic incubator facilities. "Academic
incubator facilities" as used in this chapter shall mean facilities
providing low-cost space, technical assistance, support services and
educational opportunities, including but not limited to central services
shared by tenants of the facility, to new high technology companies in
the formative stages of development through a partnership with the state
university and shall be state university educational facilities under
subdivision twenty-eight of section sixteen hundred seventy-six of the
public authorities law. Academic incubator facilities shall promote job
creation, entrepreneurship, technology transfer and provide support
services to incubator tenants, including, but not limited to, business
planning, management assistance, financial-packaging, linkages to
financing sources, and coordination with other sources of assistance.
 w. When authorized by law, to cooperate with and assist the state
university construction fund in the acquisition and development of sites
for university-related economic development facilities as defined in
section three hundred seventy-two-a of this title.
 x. To enter into one or more agreements with the dormitory authority
to provide financial assistance on behalf of the state, as provided in
subdivision eight of section six thousand three hundred four of this
chapter, to the local sponsors of community colleges for the design,
acquisition, construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement
of one or more facilities for locally sponsored community colleges
including the furnishing and equipping of such facilities pursuant to
section six thousand three hundred four of this chapter. Each such
agreement shall provide for annual payments to the dormitory authority
from the state aid or other financial assistance provided to the local
sponsors of such community colleges and paid into the community college
tuition and instructional fund pursuant to paragraph (iii) of
subdivision two of section ninety-seven-p of the state finance law, and
may contain such other terms and conditions as may be agreed upon by the
parties thereto, including, but not limited to, provisions relating to
the establishment of reserve funds and indemnities. Each such agreement
shall be subject to the approval of the director of the budget.
 y. To better secure dormitory authority bonds issued in connection
with dormitory facilities, including dormitory facility revenue bonds,
the state university of New York is hereby authorized, in its own name,
to assign or otherwise transfer to the dormitory authority any or all of
the state university's rights, title and interest in and to the
dormitory facility revenues, and to enter into agreements with the
dormitory authority pursuant to subdivision two of section sixteen
hundred eighty-q of the public authorities law in furtherance of such
assignment or transfer. Any assignment or transfer made pursuant to this
paragraph shall constitute a true sale and absolute transfer of the
dormitory facilities revenues. The characterization of such assignment
or transfer shall not be negated or adversely affected by the retention
by the state university of New York of any ownership interest in the
dormitory facilities revenues or of any residual right to payment of any
dormitory facility revenues remaining in the dormitory facilities
revenue fund after the moneys therein have been applied in accordance
with paragraph (b) of subdivision three of section sixteen hundred
eighty-q of the public authorities law. All rights, title and interest
in and to any moneys paid to or upon the order of the state university
of New York pursuant to any agreement by and between the dormitory
authority and the state university of New York entered into pursuant to
subdivision two of section sixteen hundred eighty-q of the public
authorities law or pursuant to any agreement entered into pursuant to
paragraph j of subdivision two of section sixteen hundred eighty of the
public authorities law shall vest in the state university of New York
and be the absolute property of the state university of New York, and
the dormitory authority shall no longer have any interest in such
moneys.
 z. In connection with business/university partnerships in support of
the corporate purposes of the state university, to participate in joint
and cooperative arrangements with businesses that have located in a
tax-free NY area approved pursuant to article twenty-one of the economic
development law provided such arrangements are consistent with the
approved plan for such tax-free NY area.
 2-a. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, rule, or regulation
to the contrary, the state university trustees charter school committee,
as a charter entity, are further authorized and empowered, to promulgate
regulations with respect to governance, structure and operations of
charter schools for which they are the charter entity pursuant to
section twenty-eight hundred fifty-one of this chapter.
 3. The state university trustees shall adopt and implement a patent
policy for research conducted in university facilities which is
consistent with the university's mission of education, scholarly
research and public service. Such policy shall be designed to encourage
research activities which produce new knowledge which is of benefit to
the public and which may result in the development of new products and
processes which are likely to improve the quality of life and the
standard of living of the people of the state, contribute to increased
productivity and advance the public health, safety and welfare. Such
policy shall also provide appropriate incentives for participation by
private sector business concerns in efforts to develop and utilize
patents orginated in conjunction with such research and to commercialize
new products and processes based on the results of such research. The
trustees, when it is deemed necessary to fulfill the objectives of this
subdivision, shall adopt and implement appropriate modifications to such
policy. The trustees shall include in the annual report required by
section three hundred fifty-nine of this chapter an evaluation of the
effectiveness of the policy adopted pursuant to this subdivision
together with a synopsis of any changes in that policy adopted during
the previous year.
 4. Notwithstanding the provisions of section forty-four, fifty, or
fifty-one of the state finance law or any other provision of law to the
contrary, the state university trustees are authorized and empowered:
 a. To review and coordinate the budget and appropriation requests of
all state-operated institutions and statutory or contract colleges and
combine these requests with the fiscal requirements for institutions of
higher education specified in section three hundred fifty-eight hereof
into a university program budget for submission to the governor together
with appropriate comments by the trustees of the independent
institutions operating statutory or contract colleges on behalf of the
state regarding the portion of the program budget which relates to such
colleges. Such submission shall be made pursuant to the provisions of
section twenty-two of the state finance law.
 b. To expend all lump sum or consolidated appropriations and other
appropriations made for the state university, including all moneys
derived from other sources in the course of the administration thereof.
Within aggregate funds available for expenditure pursuant to section
forty-nine of the state finance law, the state comptroller shall draw
warrants for the payment of all vouchers approved by the chancellor of
the state university, as the chief administrative officer of the state
university, or by such authority or authorities in the state university
as shall be designated by the chancellor by a rule or written direction
filed with the state comptroller, when and in the manner authorized by
the state university trustees. Such lump sum or consolidated
appropriations made for personal service, or for maintenance and
operation or for non-personal service, or maintenance undistributed
including personal service, other than appropriations from proprietary
or fiduciary funds, shall be available for payments for personal
service, or maintenance and operation or for non-personal service, or
for maintenance undistributed including personal service upon the filing
of a schedule of positions and salaries provided, however, that the
salary of the chancellor shall be in accordance with section one hundred
sixty-nine of the executive law and that the portions of the salaries
funded from state appropriations for the presidents and senior staff
shall not exceed that of the chancellor and the amounts to be available
for other personal service classes of expenditure, and for the expenses
of maintenance and operation, or for non-personal service with the
director of the budget, chairman of the senate finance committee,
chairman of the assembly ways and means committee, and the state
comptroller. Any such schedule may be amended and such amendment shall
be filed with the officers named above. The state comptroller is
authorized to pay any amounts required for the salaries and related
employment benefits of state university employees from any
appropriations or other funds available therefor. In regard to the state
university, the budget director shall exercise the authority granted
under section forty-nine of the state finance law by establishing an
aggregate amount available for expenditure for the state university from
the aggregate appropriations made, by funding source, for the state
university in the state operations appropriations act, rather than by
making the specific approvals and by filing the certificates of such
approvals authorized by section forty-nine of the state finance law. The
schedule of positions and salaries required to be filed by the budget
director pursuant to section forty-nine of the state finance law shall
be replaced by the schedule of positions and salaries filed by the state
university pursuant to this paragraph. If the director of the budget,
pursuant to section forty-nine of the state finance law, shall establish
as available for expenditure an aggregate amount less than that
contained in the appropriations made for the state university in the
state operations appropriations act, the board of trustees shall within
thirty days of the action of the director of the budget file with the
comptroller, with an informational copy to the budget director and to
the chairs of the assembly ways and means and senate finance committees,
a certificate allocating such lesser amount in no greater detail than
provided for in the state operations appropriations act. In the event
that the board has failed to file such certification within such thirty
day period, the budget director may issue a certificate of availability
for the state university reflecting such amount in no greater detail
than provided for in the state operations appropriations act.
 c. To increase or decrease appropriations by transfer or interchange
as follows:
 (1) Amounts appropriated for the programs or purposes or for any item
or items within such programs or purposes of any individual
state-operated institution and the statutory or contract colleges of the
state university, including state university central administration
within the schedules of such units or for any individual hospital within
the schedule of hospitals of the state university from a particular fund
or funds in a fiscal year may be interchanged between such programs or
purposes of such unit or hospital of state university, or between items
within the same program or purpose, or with other items appropriated
from such fund not in the same program or purpose, but which are
contained in the state comptroller's classification of items as last
promulgated pursuant to a certificate of allocation. Such certificate
shall be submitted by such units to the board of trustees of the state
university. Such certificate shall be submitted by the board of trustees
to the state comptroller with copies to be sent to the chairs of the
senate finance committee and the assembly ways and means committee and
the director of the budget for informational purposes only. The total
amount appropriated for any program or purpose may be decreased by not
more than the aggregate of five percent of such appropriation for a
program or purpose with the approval of the units or hospitals or such
amounts may be decreased by more than the aggregate of five percent of
such appropriation with the approval of the state university trustees.
 (2) Amounts appropriated to state-operated institutions and statutory
or contract colleges within the schedule of such units or to hospitals
within the schedule of hospitals of the state university from a
particular fund or funds in a fiscal year for the programs or purposes
of such units or hospitals of the state university may be transferred
between and among such units or hospitals pursuant to a certificate of
allocation, submitted directly by the state university to the state
comptroller, with copies of such certificates to be sent to the chairs
of the senate finance committee and the assembly ways and means
committee and the director of the budget for informational purposes
only. The total amount appropriated for any unit may not be decreased by
more than the aggregate of three percent of an appropriation for a unit
or the aggregate of ten percent of an appropriation for a hospital.
 (3) Amounts appropriated for programs or purposes, or for any item
within such programs or purposes, within the university-wide program
schedule of state university from a particular fund or funds in a fiscal
year shall not be decreased by means of transfer or interchange by more
than the aggregate of four percent of an appropriation for a program or
purpose within such schedule.
 (4) Amounts appropriated for hospitals within the hospital schedule of
the state university from a particular fund or funds in a fiscal year
for programs or purposes of such hospitals shall not be increased or
decreased by means of transfer or interchange from the amounts
appropriated to the state-operated institutions and the statutory or
contract colleges, university-wide programs, or central administration
of the state university. The aggregate appropriation for the hospital
schedule shall not be increased or decreased by such transfers of
appropriations.
 (5) Amounts appropriated for the central administration of the state
university within the central administration schedule from a particular
fund or funds in a fiscal year for programs or purposes including, but
not limited to, administration of state-operated institutions and
statutory or contract colleges, university-wide programs, and hospitals
of the state university shall not be increased by means of transfer or
interchange by more than five percent of the aggregate appropriation
within such schedule.
 (6) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subdivision,
whenever the director of the budget, pursuant to section forty-nine of
the state finance law, shall establish an aggregate amount less than
that contained in the state operations appropriations act, the trustees
may transfer or interchange any or all of such lesser amount among any
of the programs or purposes or items without regard to the restrictions
provided in this subdivision.
 (7) On the fifteenth day of October, January, April and July of each
year, the state university shall provide the chair of the senate finance
committee and the assembly ways and means committee, the state
comptroller and the director of the budget with quarterly reports of all
transfers or interchanges made by the state university pursuant to this
section, with such reports to include the program impact of each
transfer or interchange. The allocation of lump sum appropriations from
a fund or funds made to the state university for later distribution to
state operated institutions, statutory or contract colleges, hospitals
and/or central administration of the state university or the allocation
of lump sum appropriations made to all state departments and agencies
for later allocation for specific programs or purposes or units of the
state university shall not be deemed to be part of any total increase or
decrease authorized by this section.
 5. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision two of section one
hundred twelve and sections one hundred fifteen, one hundred sixty-one,
and one hundred sixty-three of the state finance law and section three
of the New York state printing and public documents law or any other law
to the contrary, the state university trustees are authorized and
empowered to:
 a. (i) purchase materials, proprietary electronic information
resources including but not limited to academic, professional, and
industry journals, reference handbooks and manuals, research tracking
tools, indexes and abstracts; and equipment and supplies, including
computer equipment and motor vehicles, where the amount for a single
purchase does not exceed seventy-five thousand dollars, (ii) execute
contracts for services and construction contracts to an amount not
exceeding seventy-five thousand dollars, and (iii) contract for printing
to an amount not exceeding seventy-five thousand dollars, without prior
approval by any other state officer or agency, but subject to rules and
regulations of the state comptroller not otherwise inconsistent with the
provisions of this section and in accordance with the guidelines
promulgated by the state university board of trustees after consultation
with the state comptroller. In addition, the trustees, after
consultation with the commissioner of general services, are authorized
to annually negotiate with the state comptroller increases in the
aforementioned dollar limits and the exemption of any articles,
categories of articles, services, or commodities from these limits;
 b. establish cash advance accounts for the purpose of purchasing
materials, supplies, or services, for cash advances for travel expenses
and per diem allowances, or for advance payment of wages and salary. The
account may be used to purchase such materials, supplies, or services
where the amount of a single purchase does not exceed one thousand
dollars, in accordance with such guidelines as shall be prescribed by
the state university trustees after consultation with the state
comptroller;
 c. establish guidelines in consultation with the commissioner of
general services authorizing participation by the state university in
programs administered by the office of general services for the purchase
of available New York state food products. The commissioner of general
services shall provide assistance to the state university necessary to
enable the university to participate in these programs; and
 d. award contract extensions for campus transportation without
competitive bidding where such contracts were secured either through
competitive bidding or through evaluation of proposals however such
extensions may be rejected if the amount to be paid to the contractor in
any year of such proposed extension fails to reflect any decrease in the
regional consumer price index for the New York, New York-Northeastern,
New Jersey area, based upon the consumer price index for all urban
consumers (CPI-U) during the preceding twelve-month period. At the time
of any contract extension, consideration shall be given to any
competitive proposal offered by a public transportation agency. Such
contract may be increased for each year of the contract extension by an
amount not to exceed the regional consumer price index increase for the
New York, New York-Northeastern, New Jersey area, based upon the
consumer price index for all urban consumers (CPI-U), during the
preceding twelve-month period, provided it has been satisfactorily
established by the contractor that there has been at least an equivalent
increase in the amount of his cost of operation, during the period of
the contract.
 Guidelines promulgated by the state university board of trustees
shall, to the extent practicable, require that competitive proposals be
solicited for purchases, and shall include requirements that purchases
and contracts authorized under this section be at the lowest available
price, including consideration of prices available through other state
agencies, consistent with quality requirements, and as will best promote
the public interest. Such purchases may be made directly from any
contractor pursuant to any contract for commodities let by the office of
general services or any other state agency.
 6. To enter into any contract or agreement deemed necessary or
advisable after consultation with appropriate state agencies for
carrying out the objects and purposes of the state university without
prior review or approval by any state officer or agency other than the
state comptroller and the attorney general including contracts with
non-profit corporations organized by officers, employees, alumni or
students of the state university for the furtherance of its objects and
purposes. Contracts or agreements entered into with the federal
government to enable participation in federal student loan programs,
including any and all instruments required thereunder, shall not be
subject to the requirements of section forty-one of the state finance
law; provided, however, that the state shall not be liable for any
portion of any defaults which it has agreed to assume pursuant to any
such agreement in an amount in excess of money appropriated or otherwise
lawfully available therefor at the time the liability for payment
arises.
 * 6-a. The state university trustees shall adopt guidelines for
foundations of state-operated campuses that require each foundation to
adopt a conflict of interest policy applicable to such foundation and
its affiliated corporations. Among other items, the state university
trustees' guidelines shall require such foundation policies to provide:
(a) that service as a board member or officer thereof shall not be used
as a means for private benefit or inurement for the board member or
officer, a relative thereof, or any entity in which the board member or
officer, or relative thereof, has a business interest; (b) no board
member or officer who is a vendor of goods or services to the foundation
or its affiliated corporation, or who has a business interest in such
vendor, or whose relative has a business interest in such vendor, shall
vote on, or participate in the foundation's administration of, any
transaction with such vendor; and (c) a board member or officer shall
advise the chair of the foundation or its affiliated corporation of his
or a relative's business interest in any such existing or proposed
vendor with the foundation or its affiliate. The state university
trustees' guidelines shall define the nature of a business interest and
the closeness of a personal relation that bring a relationship within
the purposes of this subdivision.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2027
 7. To refund or credit moneys paid to the state university for tuition
or any other fee or charge imposed or received by the state university
trustees (1) where such moneys were not required by law or trustees'
rule, to the extent of the amount paid; (2) where such moneys were in
excess of the amount required by law or trustees' rule, to the extent of
such excess; (3) where registration or attendance at a state university
institution is canceled or terminated prior to the expiration of an
academic term otherwise than by dismissal, to the extent prescribed by
rule or otherwise by the state university trustees; provided, however,
that no moneys shall be refunded or credited unless application therefor
is made within three years after receipt of such moneys by the state
university.
 8. Except as otherwise provided herein, all moneys received by the
state university of New York and by state-operated institutions thereof
from appropriations, tuition, fees, user charges, sales of products and
services and from all other sources, including sources and activities of
the state university which are intended by law to be self-supporting may
be credited to an appropriate fund or funds to be designated by the
state comptroller. The amounts so paid into such fund or funds which
were received by or for the state university shall be used for expenses
of the state university in carrying out any of its objects and purposes
and such amounts received by or for state-operated institutions of the
state university shall be used for expenses of the state university
under regulations prescribed by the state university trustees.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subdivision, all
dormitory facilities revenues transferred to the dormitory authority by
assignment or otherwise pursuant to paragraph y of subdivision two of
this section shall upon receipt by the state university acting as agent
for the dormitory authority be transferred and immediately paid without
appropriation thereof to the commissioner of taxation and finance
pursuant to subdivision four of section four of the state finance law
for deposit to the dormitory facilities revenue fund.
 8-a. All monies received by state university health care facilities
from fees, charges, and reimbursement and from all other sources shall
be credited to a state university health care account in a fund to be
designated by the state comptroller. Notwithstanding the provision of
any law, rule or regulation to the contrary, a portion of such monies
credited may be transferred to a state university account as requested
by the state university chancellor or his or her designee. Monies to
establish reserves for long-term expenses of state university health
care facilities and to fulfill obligations required for any contract for
health care services authorized pursuant to subdivision sixteen of this
section may be designated by the state university as a reserve and
transferred to a separate contractual reserve account. The amounts in
such accounts shall be available for use in accordance with paragraph b
of subdivision four and subdivision eight of this section. Monies shall
only be expended from the state university health care account and the
contractual reserve account pursuant to appropriation. Notwithstanding
any provision of this chapter, the state finance law or any other law to
the contrary, such appropriations shall remain in full force and effect
for two years from the effective date of the appropriation act making
the appropriation. Monies so transferred may be returned to the state
university health care account; provided, however, that funds in such
contractual reserve account must be sufficient to meet the obligations
of all such contracts.
 8-b. Notwithstanding the provision of any law, rule or regulation to
the contrary, the state university shall be entitled to annually receive
an apportionment and payment of state assistance equal to all moneys
derived as a result of the tuition increase, calculated as the
difference in the amount generated using the tuition rates authorized by
the state university trustees for the two thousand seven--two thousand
eight academic year and the amount generated using the tuition rates
authorized by state university trustees for the two thousand nine--two
thousand ten academic year, pursuant to the following schedule: for the
two thousand nine--two thousand ten academic year, the state university
shall receive an amount equal to twenty percent of such tuition
increase; for the two thousand ten--two thousand eleven academic year,
the state university shall receive an amount equal to thirty percent of
such tuition increase; for the two thousand eleven--two thousand twelve
academic year, the state university shall receive an amount equal to
forty percent of such tuition increase; and for the two thousand
twelve--two thousand thirteen academic year, the state university shall
receive an amount equal to fifty percent of such tuition increase. Such
apportionment shall be for the enhanced investment in the state
university of the state of New York and shall be used to supplement, not
supplant, state gross general fund support, unless the director of the
budget determines that state fiscal conditions preclude such an outcome
and, in which case, the director shall submit a report regarding the
recommended funding levels and whether the tuition increase
apportionment provisions of this subdivision have been complied with for
the state university of the state of New York to the chairs of the
senate finance committee and the assembly ways and means committee and
the chairs of the senate higher education committee and the assembly
higher education committee no later than fifteen days following the
release of the executive budget.
 9. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the state
university trustees may assign to the state university construction fund
for the corporate purposes of the fund all or any portion of any moneys
received or to be received by the state university and by the
state-operated institutions which are not required by a donor or grantor
to be used for other state university purposes.
 10. The state university trustees may authorize the chief
administrative officer of each medical center of the state university
operating in-patient or out-patient hospital facilities or clinic
facilities to compromise any claim which the state may have for care,
maintenance or treatment received or furnished to patients in such
facilities, in proper cases, where substantial justice will best be
served thereby. Any such compromise shall be subject to the prior
written approval of the attorney general.
 11. Notwithstanding any provision of law, rule or regulation to the
contrary, the state university trustees may authorize the chief
administrative officer of each medical center of the state university
operating in-patient or out-patient hospital facilities or clinic
facilities to establish a system for the billing of patients for the
care, maintenance or treatment received or furnished to patients in such
facilities, which in proper cases or in the exercise of prudent fiscal
discretion may allow for the payment of such charges by means of a
credit card or similar device. Such system may allow for the payment of
such reasonable administrative fees as may be regularly imposed by a
banking institution or other credit service organization for the use of
such credit devices. In establishing such system the chief
administrative officer shall seek the assistance of the state
comptroller who shall assist in developing such system so as to ensure
that state funds allocated to such medical centers shall be utilized in
an economically feasible method.
 12. The state comptroller, or a legally authorized representative of
the state comptroller, may accept from the state university in lieu of
an examination of the books and accounts of state university, including
its receipts and disbursements and any other matters relating to its
financial standing, an external examination of its books and accounts
made at the request of state university.
 13. Master capital plan. On or before November fifteenth of each year,
the trustees of the state university of New York shall approve and
submit to the chairmen of the assembly ways and means committee and the
senate finance committee and to the director of the budget a master
capital plan setting forth the projects proposed to be constructed,
reconstructed, rehabilitated or otherwise substantially altered pursuant
to appropriations enacted or to be enacted during the succeeding five
years. Such plan shall specify the name, location, estimated total cost
at the time the project is to be bid, the anticipated date or dates on
which the design of such project is to commence, the proposed method of
financing and the estimated economic life of each project. Such plan
shall further specify whether proposed projects constitute new
construction, substantial rehabilitation, moderate rehabilitation or
minor rehabilitation and shall indicate how projects support
improvements in environmental protection, energy and resource
management, solar energy and conservation. Such criteria for each method
of financing shall include, but not be limited to: (i) an analysis of
private enterprise, federal and any other appropriate financing
standards, (ii) the consideration of the period of economic life of
projects as related to the method of financing, and (iii) project cost
ranges for the methods of financing. Such plan specification and
categories of construction shall be defined by the trustees, in
consultation with the state university construction fund.
 Such capital master plan report shall also include, for each project
over one-million dollars, a description of the project; expected
construction start date; any changes to the previously reported start or
expected completion dates; any changes to the expected cost of the
project; the total cash encumbered for the project for the year and the
total to date for the project; and the total cash expended for the
project for the year and the total to date for the project.
 All projects that are reported under this subdivision shall be
identified by campus, the name of the specific facility for which the
allocation is provided and a description of what the project is that is
being provided.
 14. Notwithstanding the provisions of any general, special or local
law or charter, the state university trustees shall prepare or cause to
be prepared a development and operation plan for a state university
athletic facility, as defined in section sixteen hundred eighty-e of the
public authorities law. Such development and operation plan shall be
submitted to the director of the budget for approval not later than the
fifteenth day of September of the fiscal year of the state. The director
of the budget shall file a copy of such plan and approval thereof with
the chairpersons of the senate finance committee and the assembly ways
and means committee. No proposed amendment to the plan shall be
effective until submitted by the state university trustees and approved
by, the director of the budget and filed by the director with the
chairpersons of the senate finance committee and the assembly ways and
means committee.
 Such development and operation plan shall include, but not be limited
to, provisions concerning the following:
 (a) revenue and expense estimates for the succeeding three year period
commencing in the year of the completion of construction and beneficial
occupancy of the state university athletic facility;
 (b) the sources of revenues that are projected to be available to meet
all costs of the operation, repair, maintenance and continuing use of
the state university athletic facility, and any net income remaining to
cover subsequent annual debt service expenses, and evidence satisfactory
to the state university of New York and the director of the budget that,
consistent with university and community use as set forth in this
section, revenues will be maximized and available when needed for the
state university athletic facility; and
 (c) plans for the development, operation, repair, maintenance and
continuing use of the state university athletic facility under the care,
custody, and management of the state university to include, but not be
limited to, athletic competition of the state university of New York at
Buffalo, amateur sports, appropriate community events, and activities
that generate support for facility operations.
 15. State university fiscal year. Notwithstanding any provision of
this chapter, the state finance law, or any other law to the contrary,
on and after the first day of July, nineteen hundred ninety-three, the
fiscal year of the state university of New York, for the purposes of the
budget, appropriations, receipts and disbursements of state moneys and
all other revenues of the state university, financial reporting, and all
other affairs of the state university which are regulated in accordance
with or are based on a fiscal year, shall begin with the first day of
July and end with the next following thirtieth day of June.
Appropriations made for the state university for whatever purpose on the
basis of the state university fiscal year which at the close of such
fiscal year shall cease to have force and effect except as to
liabilities already incurred thereunder shall as to such liabilities
continue in force and effect until the next succeeding thirtieth day of
September, on which date such appropriation shall lapse and no money
shall thereafter be paid out of the state treasury or any of its funds
or any of the funds under its management pursuant to such appropriation.
 16. Subject to laws and regulations applicable to the state university
as a health care provider the state university trustees may:
 a. Notwithstanding section one hundred sixty-three of the state
finance law, authorize contracts for a state university health care
facility for participation in managed care networks and other joint and
cooperative arrangements with public, non-profit or business entities
including entering into a maximum of twenty network arrangements per
year, as partners, joint ventures, sole member or members of non-profit
or for-profit corporations, sole member or members of non-profit or
for-profit limited liability companies, as lessor or lessee, as
participants in joint operating agreements, and shareholders of business
corporations, and the provision of management and administrative
services by or for state university; provided, however, that any such
contracts with for-profit entities shall be authorized only upon
approval by the commissioner of health and the director of the division
of the budget of a request by the chancellor demonstrating financial
need of a state university health care facility. Any contract for the
provision of management services shall be subject to any provision of
the public health law and health regulations applicable to the state
university as a health care provider, including any review by the
commissioner of health pursuant to 10 NYCRR section 405.3(f). In
addition, the commissioner of health shall provide for public comment
within thirty days of a submission of any management contract required
to be reviewed pursuant to regulation. The trustees may also authorize
contracts, including capitation contracts, for a state university health
care facility for the provision of general comprehensive and specialty
health care services, directly or through contract with other service
providers or entities, including state university employees or entities
comprised thereof. Contracts authorized hereunder shall be:
 (1) consistent with trustee guidelines respecting all terms and
conditions necessary and appropriate for managed care and other network,
joint or cooperative arrangements, including guidelines for comparative
review where appropriate;
 (2) subject to laws and regulations applicable to the state university
as a health care provider, including with respect to rates and
certificates of need; and
 (3) subject to article fourteen of the civil service law and the
applicable provisions of agreements between the state and employee
organizations pursuant to article fourteen of the civil service law.
 b. (i) Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision two of section
one hundred twelve of the state finance law relating to the dollar
threshold requiring the comptroller's approval of contracts and
subdivision six of section one hundred sixty-three of the state finance
law, authorize contracts for the purchase of goods and services for
state university health care facilities:
 (A) for any contract which does not exceed one hundred fifty thousand
dollars; or
 (B) for joint or group purchasing arrangements which do not exceed one
hundred fifty thousand dollars without prior approval by any other state
officer or agency in accordance with procedures and requirements found
in paragraph a of subdivision five of this section.
 (ii) contracts authorized hereunder shall be subject to article
fourteen of the civil service law and the applicable provisions of
agreements between the state and employee organizations pursuant to
article fourteen of the civil service law. The trustees are authorized
to negotiate annually with the state comptroller increases in the
aforementioned dollar limits.
 c. Authorize contracts for the acquisition, by purchase, lease,
sublease, transfer of jurisdiction or otherwise, of facilities suitable
for the delivery of health care services and for the construction,
repair, maintenance, equipping, rehabilitation or improvement thereof.
Such contracts shall be subject to approval by the attorney general as
to form and by the director of the budget and the state comptroller.
Contracts under this paragraph shall be funded from any moneys lawfully
available for the expenses of the health care facilities.
 17. Investigation of crimes and crime reporting. a. The board of
trustees of the state university of New York shall adopt rules requiring
that each institution of the state university, on or before January
first, two thousand, adopt and implement a plan providing for the
investigation of any violent felony offense occurring at or on the
grounds of each such institution, and providing for the investigation of
a report of any missing student. Such plans shall provide for the
coordination of the investigation of such crimes and reports with local
law enforcement agencies. Such plans shall include, but not be limited
to, written agreements with appropriate local law enforcement agencies
providing for the prompt investigation of such crimes and reports and a
requirement that the institution shall notify the appropriate law
enforcement agency as soon as practicable but in no case more than
twenty-four hours after a report of a violent felony or that a student
who resides in housing owned or operated by such institution is missing;
provided that each institution shall: (1) inform each victim of a sexual
offense of their options to notify proper law enforcement authorities,
including on-campus and local police; (2) inform the victim of a sexual
offense of the right to report or not to report such offense to local
law enforcement agencies; and (3) offer the option to be assisted by
campus authorities in notifying such authorities, if the victim of
sexual assault so chooses, all in compliance with applicable federal
law, including, but not limited to, the federal Campus Sexual Assault
Victims' Bill of Rights under Title 20 U.S. Code Section 1092(f).
 b. As used in this subdivision, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
 (i) "Local law enforcement agencies" means any agency or agencies
employing peace officers or police officers for the enforcement of the
laws of the state, and which has or have jurisdiction under provisions
of the criminal procedure law over offenses occurring at or on the
grounds of any institution subject to the provisions of this
subdivision.
 (ii) "Missing student" means any student of an institution subject to
the provisions of this subdivision, who resides in a facility owned or
operated by such institution and who is reported to such institution as
missing from his or her residence.
 (iii) "Violent felony offense" means a violent felony offense as
defined in subdivision one of section 70.02 of the penal law.
 18. Scholarships for academic achievement. a. (1) Beginning with the
two thousand--two thousand one academic year and thereafter,
scholarships for academic achievement shall be awarded to full-time
students completing their sophomore and junior years of study at all
state university state operated campuses. Two thousand five hundred
scholarships shall be awarded to students in the junior year of study
and two thousand five hundred scholarships shall be awarded to students
in the senior year of study.
 (2) Scholarships made to students in the junior year shall be to the
two thousand five hundred students with the highest cumulative grade
point average at the end of such students sophomore year of study. Any
student receiving such award shall be a New York state resident and
shall have a minimum grade point average of 3.5. Such scholarship shall
be awarded at the beginning of the spring semester of such student's
junior year.
 (3) Scholarships made to students in the senior year will be to the
two thousand five hundred students with the highest cumulative grade
point average at the end of such students' junior year of study. Any
student receiving such award shall be a New York state resident and
shall have a minimum grade point average of 3.5. Such scholarship shall
be awarded at the beginning of the spring semester of such students'
senior year.
 b. Each individual state university of New York state operated campus
shall receive no more than its pro rata share of awards than the
percentage of such university's juniors and seniors represent of the
entire system enrollment in the junior and senior classes.
 c. Upon determination of the recipients of the annual awards, the
chancellor shall notify the members of the state legislature of all
recipients who permanently reside within the district that such members
represent.
 19. The state university of New York shall provide the chairs of the
assembly ways and means committee and the senate finance committee with
the formula and/or methodology used in determining state aid allocations
to state university of New York state operated campuses and
university-wide programs and the specific budget allocation to each
campus and university-wide program based on the overall funding level
for state-operated campuses and university-wide programs included within
the executive budget submission for the state university of New York
within forty-five days after the submission of the executive budget and
within thirty days after the enactment of the state budget.
 20. The state university trustees shall adopt rules requiring that
each institution of the state university of New York adopt written
policies requiring that all public single-occupancy bathroom facilities
be designated as gender neutral for use by no more than one occupant at
a time or for family or assisted use. Such gender neutral bathroom
facilities shall be clearly designated by the posting of such on or near
the entry door of each facility. For purposes of this section,
"single-occupancy bathroom" shall have the same meaning as paragraph (d)
of subdivision one of section one hundred forty-five of the public
buildings law.
 21. The state university trustees shall adopt a policy requiring that
each institution of the state university of New York collaborate with
students, faculty and staff to encourage campuses to eliminate the use
of certain plastic items generally recognized by the public as being
designed for single use. Such plastic items may include, but shall not
be limited to, tableware, straws, stirrers, cups and food service
containers. In establishing such a policy, the trustees shall consider
the following:
 a. the availability of affordable alternatives;
 b. the accessibility of alternatives to all students, faculty, and
staff;
 c. an evaluation of the effectiveness of reusable alternatives; and
 d. benchmarks for assessing progress.
 § 355-a. Powers and duties of trustees--personnel functions. 1. (a)
The state university trustees are authorized and empowered to classify
and reclassify all positions in the state university determined pursuant
to section thirty-five of the civil service law to be in the
professional service as defined in subdivision three of this section,
except those of the New York state colleges, schools and experiment
stations administered by Cornell university and Alfred university.
 (b) To the fullest extent possible consistent with its authority under
the civil service law, and after consultation with the state university
trustees, the state civil service commission shall consider the unique
educational mission and operating requirements of the state university
when making any determination relating to the jurisdictional
classification of positions in the state university in the classified
service. The director of the classification and compensation division of
the department of civil service shall similarly consider the unique
educational mission and operating requirements of the state university
when making determinations concerning the classification and
reclassification and the allocation and reallocation of the positions in
the state university in the classified service.
 2. Subject to the approval of the state university trustees, Cornell
university and Alfred university are authorized and empowered to
allocate and reallocate positions in the non-professional services of
the New York state statutory or contract colleges, schools and
experiment stations administered by such universities, as classified and
reclassified by the respective universities, in accordance with a
schedule of positions and salaries filed by the state university
trustees pursuant to subdivision four of section three hundred
fifty-five of this chapter.
 3. a. The professional service shall include positions requiring the
performance of educational functions in teacher education, agriculture,
home economics, forestry, ceramics, liberal and applied arts and
sciences, engineering, technical skills, crafts, business education,
labor and industrial relations, medicine, dentistry, veterinary
medicine, pharmacy, nursing, law, public affairs, maritime officer
training, academic administration, library service, student activities,
student personnel service and other professions required to carry on the
work of the state university and of the colleges, schools, institutes,
research centers, facilities and institutions comprising it. Each
employee in the professional service shall receive an annual salary to
be paid over a period of not less than nine months as determined by the
state university trustees, or by Cornell university and Alfred
university with the approval of the state university trustees for the
New York state colleges, schools and experiment stations administered by
such universities.
 b. The non-professional services shall mean all positions at the New
York state statutory or contract colleges, schools and experiment
stations administered by Cornell university and Alfred university which
are not included in the professional service.
 4. New appointments in positions allocated to the nonprofessional
services shall be made in accordance with a schedule of positions and
salaries filed by the state university trustees pursuant to subdivision
four of section three hundred fifty-five of this chapter. Any person who
is appointed, promoted, reinstated or transferred from an unallocated
position in the nonprofessional services to a position allocated to a
salary grade, the minimum salary of which is equal to or lower than the
annual rate of compensation then received by such employee, shall, upon
such appointment, promotion, reinstatement or transfer, be paid the
minimum salary of the grade of such allocated position plus the number
of normal performance advancement payments which corresponds to the
number of years of service in such employee's former unallocated
position or positions during which that employee received a salary equal
to or in excess of the minimum salary of the position to which such
employee is appointed, promoted, reinstated or transferred, not to
exceed the salary that employee was receiving in such employee's former
position immediately prior to the date of such appointment, promotion,
reinstatement or transfer and not to exceed the maximum salary of the
new position.
 5. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the employment of
persons who receive part of their compensation from other than state
sources.
 6. An employee in the professional service who is assigned to
extension session, summer session or part-time service shall be entitled
to extra compensation for such service provided such service is in
addition to that regularly assigned to his position.
 7. Any contribution of food, lodging, or maintenance by the state or
any commutation in lieu of maintenance, except traveling expenses and
field allowances, shall be considered as part of the salary established
in this section. The fair value of such food, lodging, maintenance or
commutation shall be determined by the state university trustees and may
in their discretion be deducted from the salary established by this
section.
 8. The state university trustees are further authorized and empowered,
and Cornell university and Alfred university so far as concerns the New
York state statutory or contract colleges, schools and experiment
stations administered by such universities, subject to the approval of
the state university trustees, are also further authorized and
empowered:
 a. To except individual positions or groups, titles or classes of
positions from the schedules filed by the state university trustees
pursuant to subdivision four of section three hundred fifty-five of this
chapter.
 b. To determine the procedure by which an employee may be promoted on
evidence of continued meritorious service, and to make promotions. If an
employee in the non-professional services in a position allocated to a
salary grade is appointed or promoted to a position in a higher grade,
such employee shall receive a percentage increase in existing basic
salary of one and one-half percent plus one and one-half percent times
the number of grades by which that employee is so advanced, or shall be
paid the minimum salary of the grade of the position to which such
employee is appointed or promoted, whichever results in a higher annual
salary.
 c. To transfer positions from one state-operated institution in the
state university to another. Notwithstanding the provisions of the state
finance law, the trustees are hereby authorized to transfer positions
within a unit of the university without the approval of the director of
the budget.
 d. To grant leaves of absence to employees for travel, study or other
appropriate purposes, not to exceed one year in seven, at the rate of
not to exceed one-half the regular salary paid, or with salary at full
rate for such leave for one-half year. The balance of salaries
appropriated for such persons, or so much thereof as may be necessary,
may be applied by the state university trustees, Cornell university or
Alfred university, as the case may be, during the period of such absence
for the payment of the salaries of substitutes to take the place of the
persons to whom leaves of absence have been granted as provided herein.
 e. To establish regulations providing for the adjustment and
determination of salaries of professional service employees whose
professional obligation is changed as between or within calendar years
or academic years, or whose conditions of appointment are affected by
any other situation unique to state university positions in the
unclassified service.
 f. To establish regulations providing for the payment, upon
resignation or retirement, or upon death while in service, for salary or
remuneration due by reason of the completion of required services, or in
settlement for unused vacation, if any, to any incumbent of a position
in the professional service. The state comptroller is hereby authorized
to make such payments in accordance with such regulations from monies
available to state university.
 9. The annual salary of a position which is classified or
reclassified, or which is allocated or reallocated to a salary grade
pursuant to this section shall not be reduced for the incumbent by
reason of such allocation, reallocation, classification or
reclassification so long as such position is held by such incumbent.
 No employee whose salary would be increased by such allocation,
reallocation, classification or reclassification shall have any claim
for the difference between such increased salary and his former salary
for the period prior to the date such change in title or salary grade
becomes effective.
 The state university trustees are further authorized and empowered,
and Cornell university and Alfred university so far as concerns the New
York state statutory or contract colleges, schools and experiment
stations administered by such universities, subject to the approval of
the state university trustees, are also further authorized and empowered
to adjust salaries upon the reallocation of positions as follows:
 When any position allocated to a salary grade is reallocated to a
higher salary grade, the annual salary of an incumbent shall be
determined in accordance with the provisions of paragraph b of
subdivision eight of this section.
 10. Salary, status, and accumulated leave credits of employees whose
employment changes as between the classified and the unclassified
service:
 a. The incumbent of any position in the classified service which is
determined to be in the unclassified service shall, on the effective
date of such change, be paid at an annual salary rate not less than the
former rate. Such person shall retain the rights and privileges of the
classified service jurisdictional classification with respect to
discipline, dismissal and suspension for as long as such person remains
in the redesignated position.
 b. Any employee in the classified service who accepts appointment to
an unclassified service position shall thereby relinquish the rights and
privileges of such employee's classified service jurisdictional
classification during the continuance of such employee's service in an
unclassified position and shall acquire the rights and status of such
employee's unclassified position.
 c. Any employee in the classified service who accepts appointment to a
position in the unclassified service pursuant to subdivision (h) of
section thirty-five of the civil service law having, as of the effective
date of such change, an accrued balance of annual leave or sick leave
under the attendance rules for the classified service, shall retain such
balances to such employee's credit upon appointment to the professional
service, but shall accrue no further annual or sick leave under the
attendance rules for the classified service. Thereafter any such
employees shall be eligible for annual leave and sick leave as provided
for by the state university trustees. Upon resignation or retirement
from state service such employee shall be paid in cash for any balance
of annual leave in accordance with the regulations applicable to persons
in the professional service; provided however, that in the case of death
while in service, such payment, if any, shall be made to the beneficiary
to whom a survivor's death benefit pursuant to section one hundred
fifty-four of the civil service law, if any, would be payable.
 Any such employee having accrued overtime or personal leave balance
shall forfeit such credit, except that such employee shall be paid in
cash for an accrued balance of overtime on the basis of the annual
salary in that employee's classified service position at the time of
such employee's appointment to the unclassified service. Hereafter, any
such employee shall be subject to the provisions made by the state
university trustees with respect to vacation and other leave except as
herein provided.
 d. Any employee in the unclassified service pursuant to subdivision
(h) of section thirty-five of the civil service law who accepts
appointment to a classified service position having, as of the effective
date of such change, eligibility for vacation or sick leave under the
provisions made by the state university trustees shall be credited with
such balance under the attendance rules for the classified service;
provided however, that not more than thirty days of annual leave and two
hundred days of sick leave shall be so credited. Thereafter such
employee shall accrue annual leave and sick leave credits in accordance
with the attendance rules for the classified service, except that (i)
that employee's previous state service shall be considered in
determining the rate at which the employee shall accumulate annual leave
under such rules and (ii) such service shall be considered in allowing
any sick leave at one-half salary for which the employee may be
otherwise eligible under such rules. For the purpose of establishing an
anniversary date for computing personal leave credit, such employee
shall be deemed to have been appointed on the effective date of that
employee's appointment to the classified service from the unclassified
service. Thereafter such employee shall be subject to the attendance
rules for the classified service except as herein provided.
 11. Whenever a salary for a position in the professional service
results in an annual salary rate in an amount other than a whole dollar
amount, said rate shall be increased to the next higher whole dollar.
 12. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the powers
heretofore conferred on Cornell university or Alfred university except
as expressly provided for herein.
 * 13. The expenditure of moneys appropriated to support a group
disability insurance program for employees in the professional service
shall not exceed sixty percent of salary plus contributions for annuity
contracts not to exceed the rates of employer contributions pursuant to
article eight-B of this chapter plus adjustment for cost of living
increases reduced by any amount for which the employee is eligible
pursuant to compensation or benefit paid for, by or on behalf of the
state or state university and any normal contribution to a retirement
program made by the state or the state university on the employee's
behalf while eligible for benefits under such program in accordance with
regulations of the state university trustees relating to eligibility and
other terms, conditions and limitations of coverage and benefits and
administration of program.
 * NB There are 2 sb 13's
 * 13. Notwithstanding subdivisions one through thirteen of section one
hundred thirty and section one hundred thirty-five of the civil service
law or any other provisions of law, rule or regulations to the contrary:
 a. Whenever a representative study of peer institutions in private or
other public hospitals in the same geographic area as a state university
hospital shows that wage rates and/or pay differentials of nurses
employed in such peer institutions are higher than the wage rates and/or
pay differentials paid by the state to teaching and research center
nurses of the state university, the state university trustees may
authorize and prescribe pay differentials which may be added as
adjustments to the hiring rate, the job rate and the longevity steps of
the salary grade or grades and/or shift differentials for teaching and
research center nurses in the classified civil service at the state
university hospitals, clinics or other ancillary health care facilities
in such areas or locations. In each case, pay differentials under this
subdivision shall be percentages or fixed dollar amounts. Such
differentials shall be in addition to and not in lieu of an employee's
basic annual salary. Any performance advancement payments, performance
awards, longevity payments or other rights or benefits to which an
employee may be entitled shall be calculated from a combined base of
annual salary plus differential payments. Any differential payable
pursuant to this subdivision shall be included as compensation for
retirement purposes. A pay differential shall be terminated for any
employee when the employee ceases to be employed in a position, or area,
or location for which such pay differential was authorized. Otherwise, a
pay differential shall remain in effect for each such employee and
future pay differentials shall be authorized pursuant to this
subdivision.
 b. Teaching and research center nurses who on April first, nineteen
hundred ninety-five are receiving additional compensation as a result of
a previous determination by the director of classification and
compensation of the department of civil service to authorize a
geographic area pay differential shall continue to receive such
additional compensation while employed in the position for which such
differential was authorized unless modified pursuant to this
subdivision.
 c. The state comptroller is hereby authorized to make the payments
allowed under this subdivision from monies available to the state
university from health care revenues.
 d. The compensation described herein is limited to those nurses in the
classified civil service employed at university health care facilities
at the health science center at Syracuse, university hospital at the
health science center at Brooklyn, and university hospital at the state
university of New York at Stony Brook.
 * NB There are 2 sb 13's
 * 14. (a) The use of artificial intelligence systems, as defined by
section one hundred three-e of the state technology law, shall not
affect (i) the existing rights of employees pursuant to a collective
bargaining agreement; or (ii) the existing representational
relationships among employee organizations or the bargaining
relationships between the employer and an employee organization.
 (b) The use of such artificial intelligence systems shall not result
in the: (i) discharge, displacement or loss of position, including
partial displacement such as a reduction in the hours of non-overtime
work, wages, or employment benefits, or result in the impairment of
existing collective bargaining agreements; or
 (ii) transfer of duties and functions currently performed by employees
of the state university of New York to an artificial intelligence
system.
 (c) The use of an artificial intelligence system shall not alter the
rights or benefits, and privileges, including but not limited to terms
and conditions of employment, civil service status, and collective
bargaining unit membership status of all existing employees of the state
university of New York shall be preserved and protected.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2028
 § 355-b. Investments in designated obligations; indemnifications. 1.
It is hereby found and declared that obligations of the state of New
York, the New York state housing finance agency and the dormitory
authority of the state of New York are reasonable, prudent, proper and
legal investments in which all gifts, grants, bequests and devises
administered as endowments by the state university trustees may be
invested by such trustees or any officer, employee or fiduciary thereof.
For the purposes of this section such gifts, grants, bequests and
devises shall be referred to as endowment funds.
 2. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of law, the state
university trustees may, in their discretion, purchase obligations
designated and found to be reasonable, prudent, proper and legal
investments in subdivision one of this section for such endowment funds
without regard to the percentage of the assets of such endowment funds
invested in such obligations and without regard to the percentage of
outstanding obligations of each issuer held or to be held by such funds.
The state university trustees in determining investments for such
endowment funds in such obligations may consider, in addition to the
appropriate factors recognized by law, the extent to which such
investments will maintain the credit worthiness of the state of New York
and the public benefit corporations identified in subdivision one of
this section so as to enable the state and such corporations to finance
the construction of capital facilities heretofore and hereafter duly
authorized for the state university.
 3. Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, including the
provisions of section seventeen of the public officers law, the state
shall save harmless and indemnify each and every trustee, officer,
employee or fiduciary with responsibility for the custody of endowment
funds or the assets thereof or for the approval of the sale or
investment of the assets of such endowment funds, and any investment
adviser, attorney or accountant who shall have been employed by or who
have advised such trustee, officer, employee or fiduciary, from any or
all financial loss arising out of or in connection with any claim,
demand, suit, action, proceeding or judgment for alleged negligence,
waste or breach of fiduciary duty by reason of any investment by any
endowment funds in any obligations designated in subdivision one of this
section, or resulting from the sale of any assets of any endowment fund
to obtain sufficient revenues to make such investments, provided that
such trustee, officer, employee, fiduciary, investment adviser, attorney
or accountant shall, within five days after the date on which he is
personally served with, or receives actual notice of, any summons,
complaint, process, notice, demand, claim or pleading, shall give notice
thereof to the attorney general. Upon such notice, the attorney general
shall assume control of the representation of such trustee, officer,
employee, fiduciary, investment adviser, attorney or accountant in
connection with such claim, demand, suit, action or proceeding. Each
person so represented shall cooperate fully with the attorney general or
any other person designated to assume such defense in respect of such
representation or defense.
 § 355-c. College opportunity to prepare for employment. 1. The state
university is authorized to enter into an agreement with the department
of social services for the establishment of the college opportunity to
prepare for employment (COPE) program for the development of a program
of allowable activities and services for eligible participants in the
federal job opportunity and basic skills (JOBS) program.
 2. The state university shall identify such funds as necessary,
including any private funds provided for the purpose of supporting
employment and training services, to be used on a matching basis
consistent with federal requirements.
 3. Services may include, but are not limited to, high school
equivalency, basic education, job skills training, English-as-a-second
language, job readiness training, job placement services, case
management, career counseling and assessment, employability planning,
supportive services such as child care, and a youth demonstration
activity providing an integrated program of high school equivalency,
occupational training, work experience, and job placement.
 4. The state university shall submit an annual evaluation and report
on the college opportunity to prepare for employment program to the
governor, the speaker of the assembly, the temporary president of the
senate, the chairman of the assembly ways and means committee, the
chairman of the senate finance committee, and the chair of the
legislative commission on skills development and career education no
later than October thirty-first following the program year ending June
thirtieth. The evaluation and report shall include, at a minimum, a
description of services provided, participant characteristics, data on
measures of educational and job skills gains, job development and
placement, and retention.
 § 355-d. Educational opportunity centers. 1. There shall be created
within the state university of New York a comprehensive system of higher
education programs and services that promote the growth and stability of
the state's educationally and economically challenged communities as
referred to in this section as educational opportunity centers.
 2. Such educational opportunity centers shall be managed and
supervised by the state university and shall provide programs and
services that include, but are not limited to the following, provided
that the state university shall have the discretion to determine the
programs and services offered at each educational opportunity center:
 (a) academic programs leading to and increasing persistence in higher
education;
 (b) vocational programs leading to career pathways, gainful employment
and self-sufficiency;
 (c) counseling and guidance services to enhance student retention;
 (d) targeted services for business and industry to upgrade the skill
levels of emerging and incumbent workers such that they support
increased productivity and the creation and retention of job
opportunities;
 (e) collaboration with secondary schools to assist in the academic
preparation of at-risk youth;
 (f) collaborative programs with colleges and universities to increase
opportunities for center graduates for advanced placement and receipt of
academic credits for academic work completed at such center;
 (g) collaboration with other state and local agencies, workforce
development boards and charitable organizations to meet emerging
state-wide priorities for serving the disadvantaged; and
 (h) entrepreneurial training opportunities that may lead to community
economic development.
 3. The state university shall formulate a plan and guidelines for the
organization, development, coordination and operation of educational
opportunity centers and may promulgate such rules and regulations
necessary to carry out the provisions of this section. Such plan shall
include:
 (a) definition of academic and economic eligibility;
 (b) procedures for the selection of such students for admission to a
center;
 (c) program objectives including coordination with the university's
long range mission and goals; and
 (d) program evaluation and reporting.
 § 355-e. New York state firearm violence research institute. 1.
Institute formation and goals. Subject to amounts available by
appropriation, the New York state firearm violence research institute,
hereinafter the "institute", is hereby created within the state
university of New York. The purposes of the institute shall include:
 (a) advising the governor, governmental agencies, and the legislature
on matters relating to firearm violence in New York state;
 (b) fostering, pursuing and sponsoring collaborative firearm violence
research;
 (c) increasing understanding by establishing and reporting on what is
known and what is not known about firearm violence of the state;
 (d) identifying priority needs for firearm violence research and
inventory work within New York that currently are not receiving adequate
attention, and identifying public or private entities that are best
situated to address such needs, thereby leading to better coordination
of firearm violence research efforts in the state;
 (e) promoting awareness of existing and new sources of firearm
violence information and firearm violence while educating elected
officials, governmental agencies, and the general public on firearm
violence issues through such means as it may determine;
 (f) organizing and sponsoring meetings on firearm violence topics;
 (g) encouraging the establishment of networks of collaborating experts
engaged in related aspects of firearm violence research;
 (h) raising sensitivity to firearm violence concerns among state and
local government agencies, and serving as a forum for enhanced
interagency information sharing and cooperation;
 (i) recommending priority activities for funding through the firearm
violence research fund, created pursuant to section ninety-seven-j of
the state finance law;
 (j) working on a continuing basis with policymakers in the legislature
and state agencies to identify, implement, and evaluate innovative
firearm violence prevention policies and programs;
 (k) recruiting and providing specialized training opportunities for
new researchers, including experienced investigators in related fields
who are beginning work on firearm violence, young investigators who have
completed their education, postdoctoral scholars, doctoral students, and
undergraduates; and
 (l) providing copies of their research publications to the legislature
and to agencies supplying data used in the conduct of such research as
soon as is practicable following publication.
 2. Research. The institute shall foster, pursue, and sponsor basic,
translational, and transformative research, field studies, and all other
such activities to research:
 (a) the nature of firearm violence, including individual and societal
determinants of risk for involvement in firearm violence, whether as a
victim or a perpetrator;
 (b) the individual, community, and societal consequences of firearm
violence;
 (c) the prevention and treatment of firearm violence at the
individual, community, and societal levels;
 (d) the effectiveness of existing laws and policies intended to reduce
firearm violence, and efforts to promote the responsible ownership and
use of firearms; and
 (e) other research as deemed by the institute to be aligned with its
core mission.
 3. Education and information transfer programs. To the extent
possible, the institute shall foster the collection, transfer, and
application of firearm violence information in the state by:
 (a) fostering access, compatibility, interchange, and synthesis of
data about firearm violence maintained by public entities, academic and
research institutions, and private organizations;
 (b) employing advanced technology to coordinate for ease of use of the
scattered firearm violence resources of the state; and
 (c) supporting the preparation and publication of interpretative works
that draw upon firearm violence resources.
 4. Quinquennial reports. The institute shall prepare and submit a
report within one year of the effective date of this section and every
five years thereafter to the governor and the legislature describing
programs undertaken or sponsored by the institute, the status of
knowledge regarding the state's firearm violence, and research needs
related thereto.
 5. Executive committee. The institute shall be guided by an executive
committee. Members of the committee shall be from varying backgrounds
with members selected from the scientific community, academic community,
as well as from government service. Such committee shall consist of ten
members including the commissioner of education, the commissioner of
criminal justice services, the commissioner of health, the chancellor of
the state university of New York or their designees, two at large
members appointed by the governor, two members appointed by the
temporary president of the senate, and two members appointed by the
speaker of the assembly. Appointed members shall serve for a term of
three years, provided that such members may be reappointed. The
executive committee shall:
 (a) adopt policies, procedures, and criteria governing the programs
and operations of the institute;
 (b) recommend to the governor and legislature appropriate actions to
reduce firearm violence within the state;
 (c) develop and implement the research, education and information
transfer programs of the institute;
 (d) identify and rate proposals for firearm violence research;
 (e) submit to the director of the budget, and the chairpersons of the
senate finance committee and the assembly ways and means committee on
the first day of October, two thousand twenty-one and on or before
August first each year thereafter, a budget request for the expenditure
of funds available from the firearm violence research fund, for the
purposes established by section ninety-seven-j of the state finance law;
and
 (f) meet publicly at least twice a year. The committee shall widely
disseminate notice of its meetings at least two weeks prior to each
meeting. The commissioners on the executive committee and the chancellor
of the state university of New York shall aid in such dissemination.
 6. Scientific working group. The institute shall appoint a scientific
working group consisting of individuals having knowledge and expertise
in firearm violence research which shall advise and make recommendations
to the institute regarding its research and information programs.
 7. Institute director. The institute shall have a director who shall
be appointed by the executive committee and shall after appointment be
an employee of the state university. The institute director shall serve
at the pleasure of the executive committee. The institute director shall
serve as chief administrative officer of the institute and provide the
necessary support for the executive committee.
 8. Compensation. The members of the executive committee and the
scientific working group shall serve without additional compensation,
but shall be eligible to receive reimbursement for their actual and
necessary expenses from the firearm violence research fund established
by section ninety-seven-j of the state finance law, provided however,
members of the executive committee representing state agencies may
receive reimbursement for their actual and necessary expenses from their
respective agencies. Members of the executive committee and scientific
working group shall be considered state employees for the purposes of
sections seventeen and nineteen of the public officers law.
 9. Memorandum of understanding. The state university of New York, the
department of health, the department of motor vehicles, and the division
of criminal justice services shall enter into a written memorandum of
understanding to facilitate the appropriate implementation of the
firearm violence research institute and the goals, responsibilities, and
programs established by this section.
 § 356. Councils of state-operated institutions; powers and duties. 1.
Subject to the general management, supervision and control of and in
accordance with rules established by the state university trustees, the
operations and affairs of each state-operated institution of the state
university shall be supervised locally by a council consisting of ten
members, nine of whom shall be appointed by the governor and one of whom
shall be elected by and from among the students of the institution. Such
voting members shall be subject to every provision of any general,
special or local law, ordinance, charter, code, rule or regulation
applying to the voting members of such board with respect to the
discharge of their duties including, but not limited to, those
provisions setting forth codes of ethics, disclosure requirements and
prohibiting business and professional activities. The election of the
student member shall be conducted in accordance with rules and
regulations promulgated by the respective representative campus student
association in accordance with guidelines established by the state
university trustees. One member shall be designated by the governor as
chairman. Where an undergraduate state-operated institution of the state
university is located adjacent to another institution of higher
education and students of such undergraduate state-operated institution
are, under arrangements made by the state university, taking a
substantial portion of their courses at such other institution, the
president or other head of such other institution shall be an ex-officio
member of the council for such undergraduate state-operated institution.
Initial appointments, other than the student member and ex-officio
members, shall be for terms expiring July first, nineteen hundred
fifty-four, July first, nineteen hundred fifty-five, July first,
nineteen hundred fifty-six, July first, nineteen hundred fifty-seven,
July first, nineteen hundred fifty-eight, July first, nineteen hundred
fifty-nine, July first, nineteen hundred sixty, July first, nineteen
hundred sixty-one and, where there is no ex-officio member, July first,
nineteen hundred sixty-two, respectively, and subsequent appointments,
other than the student member, shall be for a full term of nine years
from the first day of July of the calendar year in which the appointment
is made. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same
manner as original selections. The term of office for each council
member appointed on or after April first, nineteen hundred eighty-six
shall be seven years. The term of office for the student member shall be
one year commencing July first of the calendar year in which the
election is conducted, provided, however, that the term of the student
member first elected shall be nine months commencing October first,
nineteen hundred seventy-five and expiring June thirtieth, nineteen
hundred seventy-six. In the event that the student member ceases to be a
student at the institution, such member shall be required to resign.
Members of such councils appointed by the governor may be removed by the
governor. Members of such councils elected by the students of the
institution may be removed by such students in accordance with rules and
regulations promulgated by the respective representative campus student
association in accordance with guidelines promulgated by the state
university trustees. Members of such councils shall receive no
compensation for their services but shall be reimbursed for the expenses
actually and necessarily incurred by them in the performance of their
duties hereunder.
 2. The councils of state-operated institutions shall provide for
regular meetings at least four times annually, and the chair, or any
five members by petition, may at any time call a special meeting of the
council and fix the time and place therefor. At least seven days notice
of every meeting shall be mailed to the usual address of each member,
unless such notice be waived by a majority of the council. Resolutions
for the consideration of the councils must be mailed to the usual
address of each council member no less than seven days prior to a
meeting, unless the chair shall make available in writing on the day of
the meeting the facts which necessitate an immediate vote. The agenda
for such meetings shall be available three days prior to the meetings
and shall be considered public records. Five members attending shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and the act of a
majority of the members present at any meeting shall be the act of the
council.
 3. Subject to the general management, supervision, control and
approval of, and in accordance with rules established by the state
university trustees, the council of each state-operated institution
shall, with respect to the institution or institutions for which it
serves, exercise the following powers:
 a. recommend to the state university trustees candidates for
appointment by the state university trustees as head of such
institution;
 b. review all major plans of the head of such institution for its more
effective operation and make such recommendations with respect thereto
as it deems appropriate. Such plans shall be submitted for approval by
the state university trustees, together with the recommendations of the
council with respect thereto. The state university trustees shall
determine what constitute such major plans, which are hereby generally
defined to include, among others, plans for the appraisal or improvement
of the faculty and other personnel, expansion or restriction of student
admissions, appraisal or improvement of academic programs and of
standards for the earning of degrees, expansion of institutional plants
and appraisal or improvement of student activities and housing;
 c. make regulations governing the care, custody and management of
lands, grounds, buildings and equipment;
 d. review the proposed budget requests for such institution prepared
by the head thereof and recommend to the state university trustees a
budget for such institution;
 e. foster the development of advisory citizens committees to render
such assistance as the council may request, and to appoint the members
of such citizens' committees. Members of such citizens' committees shall
receive no compensation for their services but shall be reimbursed for
the expenses actually and necessarily incurred by them in the
performance of their duties;
 f. name buildings and grounds;
 g. make regulations governing the conduct and behavior of students;
 h. prescribe for and exercise supervision over student housing and
safety;
 i. make an annual report to the state university trustees on or before
September first of each year, and report to them from time to time on
any matter it believes requires their attention;
 j. perform such other powers and duties as may be authorized or
required by the state university trustees by general rules or special
directives; and
 k. make and establish, and from time to time alter and amend, such
regulations pertaining to the affairs of its institution, not
inconsistent with law or the rules of the state university trustees, as
may be necessary or appropriate to carry out effectively the foregoing
powers and duties.
 § 357. Statutory or contract colleges. Statutory or contract colleges
shall continue to be operated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
but such colleges shall be subject to the general supervision of the
state university trustees.
 § 358. State aid for certain higher educational institutions. 1.
State financial assistance may be provided for designated shares of
capital expenditures or operating expenditures or both to the following
types of institutions operating in conjunction with the state university
program:
 a. Medical schools, dental schools, research centers and similar
institutions or facilities operating specified training or research
programs or projects pursuant to contracts with the state university.
The state university is hereby authorized to enter into such contracts
with the city university of New York. The acceptance of any such
financial assistance or the making of any such contract by or on behalf
of a medical school, dental school, research center or similar
institution or facility shall not subject it or its programs to
supervision, control or regulation by the state university trustees
except to the extent that such supervision, control or regulation are
expressly stated in the contract.
 b. Community colleges.
 c. Post-secondary technical vocational training institutions which are
partly supported by a municipality or board of education and partly
supported by an educational foundation for an industry chartered by the
board of regents.
 § 359. Reports of the state university trustees. 1. The trustees of
the state university shall make, on or before January first of each
year, an annual report of its activities and such recommendations as it
may deem appropriate to the board of regents, the governor, the state
comptroller and the legislature. This annual report shall include a
summary of state university's (1) operations and accomplishments; and
(2) revenues and expenditures, in accordance with the categories or
classifications established by the trustees of the state university for
operating and capital outlay purposes. A copy of such report shall also
be transmitted to the council of each state-operated institution.
 2. On the fifteenth day of September, November, January, March, May
and July of each year, the trustees of the state university shall submit
to the chairs of the senate finance committee and the assembly ways and
means committee and the director of the budget for informational
purposes, bi-monthly reports developed in consultation with the
aforementioned chairs and director of all receipts and disbursements of
the state university. These reports shall include but not be limited to:
 a. a comparison of actual receipts and disbursements with the fiscal
year expenditure and revenue plan;
 b. an allocation of lump sums;
 c. an allocation of lump sum positions;
 d. the reallocation between campuses of personal service based upon
full-time equivalent positions;
 e. transfers to other than personal service and temporary service;
 f. campus allocation changes; and
 g. identification of any revenue shortfalls, deficiencies, surpluses,
or budgetary actions by the governor.
 3. The trustees of the state university shall submit to the governor,
the state comptroller and the legislature, within one hundred twenty
days after the close of each state university fiscal year, an annual
financial statement which has been audited by an independent certified
public accountant and prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles as prescribed by the state comptroller.
 4. On the fifteenth day of February, May, August and November of each
year, the state university shall provide the chairs of the senate
finance committee and the assembly ways and means committee and the
director of the budget with: (a) quarterly reports summarizing all
expenditures from and status of the health care account and the
contractual reserve account authorized by subdivision eight-a of section
three hundred fifty-five of this article; and (b) a list of networks in
which state university health care facilities are participating.
 6. The state university trustees shall annually report on how the
revenue generated has been invested in faculty, instruction, initiatives
to improve student success and on-time completion and student financial
assistance for the duration of the four year tuition plan. The trustees
shall submit the report by September first of each subsequent year.
 § 360. Powers to Regulate Traffic on University Grounds. 1. For the
purpose of providing for the safety and convenience of its students,
faculty, employees, and visitors within and upon the property, roads,
streets, and highways under the supervision and control of the state
university, the board of trustees is hereby authorized to:
 a. Adopt and enforce such provisions of the vehicle and traffic law,
or any rules of the state department of transportation adopted under the
authority of that law, as control or regulate vehicular or pedestrian
traffic and parking.
 b. Adopt and enforce such additional rules and regulations for the
control of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and parking as local
authorities are permitted to adopt and enforce pursuant to the vehicle
and traffic law.
 c. Adopt and enforce campus rules and regulations not inconsistent
with the vehicle and traffic law relating to parking, vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, and safety. Such rules and regulations may include
provisions for the disposition of abandoned vehicles, removal by towing
or otherwise of vehicles parked in violation of such rules at the
expense of the owner, the payment of fees for the registration or
parking of such vehicles, provided that such campus rules and
regulations may provide that any veteran attending the state university
as a student shall be exempt from any fees for parking or registering a
motor vehicle, and the assessment of administrative fines upon the owner
or operator of such vehicles for each violation of the regulations.
However, no such fine may be imposed without a hearing or an opportunity
to be heard conducted by an officer or board designated by the board of
trustees. Such fines, in the case of an officer or employee of state
university, may be deducted from the salary or wages of such officer or
employee found in violation of such regulations, or in the case of a
student of state university found in violation of such regulations, the
university may withhold his or her grades and transcripts until such
time as any fine is paid. For purposes of this subdivision, the term
"veteran" shall mean a member of the armed forces of the United States
who served in such armed forces in time of war and who (i) was honorably
discharged or released under honorable circumstances from such service,
or (ii) has a qualifying condition, as defined in section one of the
veterans' services law, and has received a discharge other than bad
conduct or dishonorable from such service, or (iii) is a discharged LGBT
veteran, as defined in section one of the veterans' services law, and
has received a discharge other than bad conduct or dishonorable from
such service.
 d. To erect, operate and maintain at the entrance or entrances to any
such grounds and at other appropriate points thereon or therein
appropriate control lights, signs and signals.
 2. A violation of any section of the vehicle and traffic law or of any
rule of the state department of transportation made applicable as
provided in paragraphs a or b of subdivision one hereof, shall be a
misdemeanor or traffic infraction as designated in such law or rules as
the case may be, and shall be punishable as therein provided. Such laws,
rules and regulations shall be enforced, and violations thereof where
designated a misdemeanor or traffic infraction shall be punishable in
any court having jurisdiction in the territory in which such violations
shall occur.
 3. Notice of all such laws, rules, and regulations adopted or made
applicable pursuant to paragraphs a and b of subdivision one shall be
given by filing a copy of all such laws, rules and regulations in the
office of the secretary of state, the office of the clerk of the city,
town, or village where they may be enforced, and in the office of the
campus security director or such other location as may be designated by
the campus chief administrative officer. Notice of campus rules and
regulations adopted pursuant to paragraph c of subdivision one shall be
given by filing in the office of the campus security director or such
other location as may be designated by the campus chief administrative
officer.
 4. The persons designated as police officers by the board of trustees,
pursuant to paragraph l of subdivision two of section three hundred
fifty-five of this chapter, shall have the power among all other police
powers to issue a uniform traffic summons and complaint as provided in
the vehicle and traffic law and simplified traffic informations as
provided for in the criminal procedure law for traffic violations
committed within the geographical area of employment of such police
officers, such informations to be administered pursuant to the
provisions of article two-A of the vehicle and traffic law, where
applicable.
 § 361. START-UP NY program leases. 1. Any lease or contract between a
state university campus, city university campus or community college as
defined in section four hundred thirty-one of the economic development
law and a business for the use of vacant land or vacant space owned or
leased by such state university campus, community college or city
university campus in a tax-free NY area approved pursuant to article
twenty-one of the economic development law shall provide:
 (a) The term of the lease or contract.
 (b) A requirement that any contract to which a campus or college is a
party, and any contract entered into by a third party acting in place
of, on behalf of and for the benefit of the campus or college therein
pursuant to any lease, permit or other agreement between such third
party and the campus or college for the use of vacant land or vacant
space owned or leased by the state university campus, community college
or city university campus for the construction, reconstruction,
demolition, excavation, rehabilitation, repair, renovation, alteration
or improvement of a project shall be subject to all of the provisions of
article eight of the labor law, including the enforcement of prevailing
wage requirements by the fiscal officer as defined in paragraph e of
subdivision five of section two hundred twenty of the labor law to the
same extent as a contract of the state, and shall be deemed a public
work for purposes of such article.
 (c) Whenever a party to any lease or contract for projects authorized
pursuant to this section on lands leased or owned by the city university
of New York, enters into a contract under which employees are employed
to perform building service work, as that term is defined in section two
hundred thirty of the labor law, such work shall be subject to article
nine of the labor law to the same extent as building service work
performed pursuant to a contract with a public agency.
 (d) A requirement that for the purposes of article fifteen-A of the
executive law, any individual, public corporation or authority, private
corporation, limited liability company or partnership or other entity
entering into a contract, subcontract, lease, grant, bond, covenant or
other agreement for a project undertaken by a business authorized
pursuant to article twenty-one of the economic development law shall be
deemed a state agency as that term is defined in such article and such
contracts shall be deemed state contracts within the meaning of that
term as set forth in such article, except that this paragraph shall not
apply to any lease or contract entered into by a community college of
the state university of New York or city university of New York.
 (e) The metes and bounds or other applicable description that can be
easily identified, shared and verified by an independent third party of
the vacant land or vacant space subject to the contract or lease.
 (f) A requirement that any lease, contract or other agreement shall
include an indemnity provision whereby the lessee or sublessee promises
to indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the lessor against all claims,
suits, actions, and liability to all persons on the leased premises,
including tenant, tenant's agents, contractors, subcontractors,
employees, customers, guests, licensees, invitees, and members of the
public, for damage to any such person's property, whether real or
personal, or for personal injuries arising out of tenant's use or
occupation of the demised premises.
 (g) A requirement that upon the expiration of the lease or agreement
covering property owned by the campus or college the demised premises
and any improvements thereon shall revert to the campus or college,
unless the lease is renewed.
 (h) A requirement that in the event the demised premises shall cease
to be used for the purposes described in the lease or contract covering
property owned by the campus or college, the lease or contract shall
terminate on the thirtieth day after notice of such termination is
mailed to the business, the demised premises and any improvements
thereon shall revert to the campus or college.
 (i) A requirement that any and all proceeds relating to the lease or
contract shall be allocated by the board of trustees to the campus or
college for which such contract or lease applies, deposited in the
general fund of such campus or college, and used for purposes including
but not limited to student financial aid for students who are eligible
to receive a tuition assistance award or supplemental tuition assistance
pursuant to section six hundred sixty-seven or six hundred sixty-seven-a
of the education law and to support additional full-time faculty
positions.
 2. For the purposes of this section and for the purposes of any lease
or contract authorized pursuant to this section: "project" shall mean
capital improvement work on real property under the jurisdiction of the
campus or college to be subject to any lease, transfer or conveyance,
other than conveyance of title. Such capital improvement work shall
include the design, construction, reconstruction, demolition,
excavation, rehabilitation, repair, renovation, alteration or
improvement of real property under the jurisdiction of the campus or
college.
 3. A party to any lease or contract authorized pursuant to this
section may require a contractor awarded a contract, subcontract, lease,
grant, bond, covenant or other agreement for a project to enter into a
project labor agreement pursuant to section two hundred twenty-two of
the labor law during and for the work involved with such project when
such requirement is part of such party's request for proposals for the
project and when the party determines that the record supporting the
decision to enter into such an agreement establishes that the interests
underlying the competitive bidding laws are best met by requiring a
project labor agreement including: obtaining the best work at the lowest
possible price; preventing favoritism, fraud and corruption; the impact
of delay; the possibility of cost savings; and any local history of
labor unrest.
 § 363. Curing Alzheimer's health consortium. 1. There is hereby
established within the state university of New York the curing
Alzheimer's health consortium. The consortium shall have as its purpose
to identify genes that predict an increased risk for developing the
disease, collaborating with research institutions within the state
university of New York system, and the department of health, in research
projects and studies to identify opportunities to develop new
therapeutic treatment and cures for Alzheimer's.
 2. The state university of New York shall issue a request for
proposals to partner with hospitals both within the state university of
New York and other not-for-profit article twenty-eight of the public
health law hospitals and non-profit higher education research
institutions to map the genomes of individuals suffering from or at risk
of Alzheimer's.
 § 364. Separability. If any clause, sentence, subdivision, paragraph,
section or part of this article be adjudged by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or
invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, subdivision, paragraph, section or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which said judgment shall have
been rendered.
 § 365. Construction. The powers enumerated in this article shall be
interpreted broadly to effectuate the purposes thereof and shall not be
construed as a limitation of powers.
 ARTICLE 8-A
 STATE UNIVERSITY CONSTRUCTION FUND
Section 370. Definitions.
 371. State university construction fund.
 372. Purposes of fund.
 372-a. University-related economic development facilities.
 373. General powers and duties of fund.
 373-a. Jurisdiction in actions by, against or involving the
 fund.
 374. Relationship with state university.
 375. Capital construction planning.
 376. Letting of construction contracts.
 376-a. Notices of claim and commencement of actions against the
 fund.
 377. Resources of fund.
 378. Lease agreements.
 379. Transfer of jurisdiction to state university.
 380. Tax exemption of moneys and property of fund.
 381. Cooperation and assistance from other state agencies.
 382. Annual report of trustees.
 383. Article not affected if in part unconstitutional or
 ineffective.
 384. Inconsistent provisions of other laws superseded.
 § 370. Definitions. As used or referred to in this article, unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context:
 1. "Comptroller" shall mean the state comptroller.
 2. "Director of the budget" shall mean the state director of the
budget.
 3. "Dormitory" shall mean a housing unit or any emergency temporary
housing, with necessary and usual attendant and related facilities and
equipment, for the use of students, faculty and staff, and their
families, at a state-operated institution or statutory or contract
college under the jurisdiction of the state university.
 4. "Facility" shall mean a classroom, lecture hall, library,
laboratory or other academic building, a dormitory, or any structure on
or improvement to real property of any kind or description, including
fixtures and equipment which are an integral part of any such building,
structure or improvement, a walkway or roadway, and improvements and
connections for water, sewer, gas, electrical, telephone, heating, air
conditioning and other utility services, at a state-operated institution
or statutory or contract college under the jurisdiction of the state
university.
 5. "Federal government" shall mean the United States of America, and
any officer, department, board, commission, bureau, division,
corporation, agency or instrumentality thereof.
 6. "Fund" shall mean the state university construction fund created by
subdivision one of section three hundred seventy-one of this chapter.
 6-a. "Large-scale construction project" shall mean any project for
which the total estimated cost of the contract or contracts is ten
million dollars or more that is:
 (a) a project performed under the approved master plan of the state
university submitted pursuant to subdivision thirteen of section three
hundred fifty-five of this chapter; or
 (b) which involves the construction, acquisition, reconstruction,
rehabilitation or improvement of academic buildings, dormitories and
other facilities, with respect to university-related economic
development projects authorized by law pursuant to section three hundred
seventy-two-a of this article.
 7. "Letting agency" shall mean (i) the dormitory authority or other
state agency which by agreement with the fund is to award the contracts
for a particular construction, acquisition, reconstruction,
rehabilitation or improvement project, or (ii) the fund if it is to
award such contracts.
 8. "Real property" shall mean lands, waters, rights in lands or
waters, structures, franchises and interests in land, including lands
under water and riparian rights, and any and all other things and rights
usually included within the same term and includes also any and all
interests in such property less than full title, such as easements
permanent or temporary, rights-of-way, uses, leases, licenses and all
other incorporeal hereditaments in every estate, interest or right,
legal or equitable.
 9. "State" shall mean the state of New York.
 10. "State agency" shall mean any officer, department, board,
commission, bureau, division, public benefit corporation, agency or
instrumentality of the state.
 11. "State-operated institutions" shall mean institutions comprising
the state university as provided for in subdivision three of section
three hundred fifty-two of this chapter but not including statutory or
contract colleges.
 12. "State retirement systems" shall mean (i) the New York state
teachers' retirement system provided for in section five hundred two of
this chapter and (ii) the New York state employees' retirement system
provided for in section ten of the retirement and social security law.
 13. "State university" shall mean the state university of New York as
defined in section three hundred fifty of this chapter.
 14. "Statutory or contract colleges" shall mean colleges furnishing
higher education, operated by private institutions on behalf of the
state pursuant to statute or contractual agreements; provided that an
institution not otherwise a statutory or contract college shall not
become a statutory or contract college because of its receipt of state
funds or financial assistance pursuant to section three hundred
fifty-eight of this chapter, or by entering into any contract pursuant
to that section.
 § 371. State university construction fund. 1. There is hereby created
within the state university the "state university construction fund".
The fund shall be a corporate governmental agency constituting a public
benefit corporation. It shall be administered by three trustees
appointed by the governor, one of whom shall at all times be a state
university trustee. The trustees other than the state university trustee
shall be appointed with the advice and consent of the senate.
 2. The trustees of the fund first appointed by the governor shall
serve for terms ending December thirty-first, in nineteen hundred
sixty-four, nineteen hundred sixty-six and nineteen hundred sixty-eight,
respectively. Persons appointed for full terms as their successors shall
serve for six years each commencing as of the January first next
following the year in which the term of his predecessor expired. In the
event of a vacancy occurring in the office of a trustee by death,
resignation or otherwise, the governor shall appoint a successor in the
same manner as an original appointment to serve for the balance of the
unexpired term. A vacancy shall be deemed to have occurred whenever the
trustee of the fund who is a state university trustee ceases to be a
state university trustee.
 3. The trustees of the fund shall serve without salary, but each
trustee shall be entitled to reimbursement for his actual and necessary
expenses incurred in the performance of his official duties.
 4. The trustees of the fund may engage in private employment, or in a
profession or business, subject to the limitations contained in sections
seventy-three and seventy-four of the public officers law. The fund
shall, for the purposes of such sections, be a "state agency", the
trustees thereof shall be "officers" of the agency for the purposes of
said sections, and the trustees, officers and other persons in the
employment of the fund shall be "employees" for the purposes of
subdivision one of section seventeen of the public officers law.
 5. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of law, general,
special or local, no officer or employee of the state, or of any civil
division thereof, shall be deemed to have forfeited or shall forfeit his
office or employment by reason of accepting appointment as a trustee of
the fund.
 6. The governor may remove any trustee for inefficiency, neglect of
duty or misconduct in office after giving him a copy of the charges
against him, and an opportunity to be heard, in person or by counsel, in
his defense, upon not less than ten days' notice. If any trustee shall
be removed, the governor shall file with the secretary of state a
complete statement of charges made against the trustee, and his findings
thereon, together with a complete record of the proceedings.
 7. The chairman of the fund shall be designated by the governor, shall
preside over all its meetings and shall have such other duties as the
trustees may direct. A vice-chairman who shall preside over all meetings
of the fund in the absence of the chairman and shall have such other
duties as the trustees may direct may be designated from time to time by
the trustees from among the other trustees.
 8. The powers of the fund shall be vested in and exercised by no fewer
than two of the trustees then in office. The fund may delegate to one or
more of its trustees, or officers, agents and employees, such powers and
duties as it may deem proper; provided, however, that all contracts
involving an estimated expense of seventy-five thousand dollars or more
and all lease agreements to be entered into pursuant to section three
hundred seventy-eight of this article shall be approved prior to
execution by no fewer than two trustees of the fund.
 9. The fund may appoint such officers, employees and agents as it may
deem advisable, including a general manager to be the chief
administrative officer of the fund, a counsel and a controller, and may
prescribe their duties and fix their compensation.
 10. Officers and employees of other state agencies may be transferred
to the fund and officers and employees of the fund may be transferred to
other state agencies without examination and without loss of any civil
service status or rights. No such transfer, however, may be made except
with the approval of the head of the other state agency involved, the
director of the budget and the chairman of the fund, and in compliance
with the rules and regulations of the state civil service commission.
 § 372. Purposes of fund. The purposes of the fund shall be to provide
academic buildings, dormitories and other facilities including academic
incubator facilities and a pharmaceutical research, development which
may also include a manufacturing facility for the state-operated
institutions and contract and statutory colleges under the jurisdiction
of the state university, to reduce the time lag between determination of
need for such facilities and actual occupancy thereof, to expedite the
construction, acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement
of such facilities and to assure that the same are ready for the
purposes intended when needed and when scheduled under the approved
master plan of the state university; with respect to university-related
economic development projects authorized by law pursuant to section
three hundred seventy-two-a of this article, to act as agent for the
state university or for a foundation or other not-for-profit entity
created by or for the state university. In addition to any other
approval or permit otherwise required by law, the fund shall not
construct any new project or facility on a campus of the state
university unless the said project or facility has been approved by the
state university trustees and has been specifically and expressly
authorized by such section.
 § 372-a. University-related economic development facilities. 1.
Notwithstanding subdivisions one through six and eight through ten of
section three hundred seventy-six of this article, the provisions of
this section shall apply to the fund when it acts pursuant to the
authorization under this section. Pursuant to the authorization in this
section and approval by the trustees of the university, the fund may
acquire, design, construct, reconstruct, rehabilitate, improve, lease,
manage and/or operate university-related economic development
facilities. University-related economic development facilities, as used
in this chapter, shall mean facilities for research, development and
commercial enterprises dealing in products and/or services related to
the mission or academic specialties of the campus associated with such
facilities, or dealing in support products or services for such
enterprises which will have a significant economic benefit. Consistent
with such authorization, the state university trustees are authorized to
enter into contracts or leases for lands and facilities authorized in
subdivision two of this section. Such leases or contracts shall be for
the development, construction, and operation of such facilities by the
fund. Construction, acquisition, rehabilitation, improvement, facilities
operation management, mortgaging with any private lender (including
other security or financing arrangements incidental or related thereto
or customary in connection therewith, leasehold mortgaging or assignment
of rents) leasing, subleasing of, providing services for or otherwise
assisting or granting of easements, licenses or other arrangements in
regard to such facilities and underlying land may be provided from time
to time without public bidding or sale by such contracts or leases (and
replacements, modifications, substitutions and renewals thereof) and
upon such terms as the trustees may approve provided, however, that:
 a. No contract or lease for real property shall provide for a fee
simple conveyance, or be for a period of greater than thirty years; each
such contract or lease shall be approved by the attorney general, as to
form, the director of the budget and the comptroller of the state of New
York;
 b. In the event the real property which is the subject of such lease
or contract shall cease to be used for the purposes authorized by this
section and at the expiration of such contract or lease in any event,
such property and the improvements thereon shall revert to the state
university of New York, and any such lease or contract shall be made
subject to such conditions, and provide for such reverter;
 c. The authorization of any facilities or projects in this section
shall expire and be of no further force and effect, unless the approval
of the trustees of the university occurs within three years of the
effective date thereof;
 d. Any contracts or leases entered into by the trustees of the state
university of New York pursuant to this section shall require the lessee
or contracting not-for-profit corporation to comply with the
requirements of article fifteen-A of the executive law. Any contract or
lease for construction, rehabilitation, or other improvement authorized
by this section entered into by the trustees shall require the lessee or
contractor and/or subcontractor to comply with the requirements of
section two hundred twenty, two hundred thirty, two hundred thirty-one,
two hundred forty and two hundred forty-one of the labor law, where
applicable, as well as sections one hundred one and one hundred three of
the general municipal law, where applicable;
 e. The benefits to the region, state, and university community by the
establishment of a high technology facility at the state university of
New York shall be realized with no negative impact upon the employment
status of state university of New York employees or collective
bargaining units that represent such employees as a result of any
contract or lease authorized by this section;
 f. Any agreement, contract or lease authorized by this section shall
include an indemnity provision whereby the lessee or sublessee promises
to indemnify, hold harmless, and defend lessor against all claims,
suits, actions, and liability, to all persons on the leased premises,
including tenants, tenants' agents, contractors, subcontractors,
employees, customers, guests, licensees, invitees, and members of the
public, for damage to any such person's property, whether real or
personal, or for personal injuries arising out of tenants' use or
occupation of the demises premises;
 g. Any such lease, contract or agreement authorized by this section
must clearly define the purpose for which the land will be used
consistent with the mission of the state university of New York and the
mission of the campus involved in such lease, contract or agreement; and
 h. The fund shall report annually to the state university of New York,
the governor, the speaker of the assembly and the temporary president of
the senate, on each of the facilities and projects authorized by this
section.
 2. Subsequent to the approval of the trustees of the state university,
the following facilities are specifically and expressly authorized by
law and to the terms and conditions set forth herein:
 a. Pharmaceutical technology/manufacturing building and an affiliated
academic incubator at state university of New York college at
Farmingdale. The state university of New York is authorized to establish
an account to receive payments from leases of the pharmaceutical
technology/manufacturing building. Any payments deposited into this
account may be transferred to the fund for payments related to design,
construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the
affiliated academic incubator authorized in this paragraph.
 § 373. General powers and duties of fund. The fund shall have the
following powers in addition to those specifically conferred elsewhere
in this article:
 1. To sue and be sued;
 2. To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure;
 3. To make and alter by-laws for its organization and internal
management;
 4. With the approval of the comptroller, to prescribe a system of
accounts;
 5. To make rules and regulations governing the exercise of its
corporate powers and the fulfillment of its corporate purposes under
this article, which rules and regulations shall be filed with the
secretary of state in the manner provided by section one hundred two of
the executive law;
 6. To accept jurisdiction over and to hold, use and improve, in
accordance with such terms and conditions as the fund and the state
university shall determine, any or all real property acquired by the
state university trustees in the name of the state for state university
purposes, together with such rights and privileges as may be incidental
and appurtenant thereto;
 7. To purchase, receive, lease or otherwise acquire in accordance with
the requirements of article eleven of the state finance law personal
property necessary and convenient for its corporate purposes, provided
that such personal property shall not be construed to include
furnishings and equipment for completed facilities;
 8. To design, construct, acquire, reconstruct, rehabilitate and
improve academic buildings, dormitories and other facilities for the
state university in accordance with sections three hundred seventy-five
and three hundred seventy-six of this chapter;
 9. In connection with such design, construction, acquisition,
reconstruction, rehabilitation and improvement, (i) to install or cause
to be installed water, sewer, gas, electrical, telephone, heating, air
conditioning and other utility services, including appropriate
connections, (ii) to construct or cause to be constructed walkways,
roadways and other improvements on adjacent real property made available
by the state university, and (iii) to landscape adjacent real property
or cause the same to be landscaped;
 10. To maintain, repair and keep up the real property held by it and
the facilities constructed, acquired, reconstructed, rehabilitated or
improved pursuant to this article until responsibility therefor is
transferred to the state university in accordance with section three
hundred seventy-nine of this chapter;
 11. Subject to the terms of any lease or agreement with third parties,
with respect to approved university-related economic development
facilities or approved university related economic development projects
to develop, manage, operate, and/or lease, solely or in cooperation with
one or more entities or individuals, or to surrender to the appropriate
state official, for other public use or for sale, lease or other
disposition in accordance with law, real property made available to the
fund for its corporate purposes by the state university whenever the
state university trustees determine that such real property is
unnecessary for present or foreseeable future needs of the state
university;
 12. To make and execute contracts, lease agreements, and all other
instruments necessary or convenient for the exercise of its corporate
powers and the fulfillment of its corporate purposes under this article
to an amount not exceeding seventy-five thousand dollars without prior
approval by any other state officer or agency; notwithstanding the
foregoing, all contracts, lease agreements, and all other instruments
exceeding seventy-five thousand dollars in amount shall be subject to
section one hundred twelve of the state finance law;
 13. To procure insurance against any loss in connection with any
facility leased to the fund under section three hundred seventy-eight of
this chapter, in such amounts, and from such insurers, as it deems
desirable;
 14. To act as agent for, or to assist generally, the attorney general
and the state commissioner of transportation in making land surveys,
topographical surveys and valuation appraisals of real property sought
to be acquired by the state university trustees;
 15. To engage the services of construction, engineering,
architectural, legal and financial consultants, surveyors and
appraisers, on a contract basis or as employees, for professional
service and technical assistance and advice; and
 16. To do any and all things necessary or convenient to carry out its
corporate purposes and exercise the powers given and granted to it in
this article.
 * 17. To construct, design/build (using a competitive selection
process with due consideration of cost), develop, manage, lease and/or
operate real property and facilities made available to the fund for its
corporate purposes by the state university related to academic incubator
facilities and a pharmaceutical research, development, which may also
include a manufacturing facility located at the state university New
York college of technology at Farmingdale.
 * NB There are 2 sub 17's
 * 17. To construct, design/build, develop, manage and/or operate real
property and facilities made available to the fund for its corporate
purposes by the state university related to academic incubator and
approved university-related economic development facilities;
 * NB There are 2 sub 17's
 * 18. To receive or acquire by gift, purchase or otherwise, real and
personal property, or services or other aid, including any reimbursement
allowance offered or made available by any person, government agency or
corporation, including, but not limited to, any foundation or other
not-for-profit entity and to receive and use money from any source,
including, but not limited to the dormitory authority of the state of
New York, or any other private or public source for the site acquisition
and construction of a pharmaceutical research, development, which may
also include a manufacturing facility at the state university of New
York college of technology at Farmingdale.
 * NB There are 2 sub 18's
 * 18. With respect to approved university-related economic development
facilities, to act as agent for, and execute the powers of, a foundation
or other not-for-profit entity created by or for the state university;
and
 * NB There are 2 sub 18's
 19. To receive or acquire by gift, purchase or otherwise, real and
personal property, or services or other aid, including any reimbursement
allowance offered or made available by any person, government agency or
corporation, including, but not limited to, any foundation or other
not-for-profit entity and to receive and use money from any source,
including, but not limited to the dormitory authority of the state of
New York, or any other private or public source for the site acquisition
and construction of approved university-related economic development
facilities as set forth in section three hundred seventy-two-a of this
article.
 § 373-a. Jurisdiction in actions by, against or involving the fund.
The state supreme court shall have exclusive jurisdiction of any action,
where the amount sought to be recovered, exclusive of interest and
costs, exceeds ten thousand dollars, brought by or against or involving
the fund. The venue of any such action shall be determined in
accordance with the provisions of the civil practice law and rules.
 § 374. Relationship with state university. In order the most
effectively to carry out its corporate purposes, the fund shall assist
and cooperate with and shall make its personnel and services fully
available to the state university in matters relating to the discharge
of the capital planning responsibilities and land acquisition program of
the state university. During the course of construction, acquisition,
reconstruction, rehabilitation and improvement of facilities for the
state university, the fund shall consult with the state university as
the work progresses in matters relating to changes in space
requirements, site plans, architectural concept, and detailed plans and
specifications and in matters relating to the materials, equipment and
supplies needed to furnish and equip completed facilities. The state
university for its part shall assist and cooperate with the fund in
matters relating to such construction, acquisition, reconstruction,
rehabilitation and improvement, including the financing thereof.
 § 375. Capital construction planning. 1. Construction standards. On or
before July first, nineteen hundred sixty-two, the state university
trustees shall cause to be prepared with the assistance of the fund, the
dormitory authority, the state department of transportation and the
division of the budget, proposed standards for all facilities or classes
of facilities to be constructed, acquired, reconstructed, rehabilitated
or improved for the state university pursuant to contracts executed on
or after a date thirty days subsequent to the effective date of such
standards. The proposed standards may, in the discretion of the state
university trustees, include, among other things, provisions relating to
the quality and type of materials to be used in such facilities,
provisions for safety, fire protection, health and sanitation,
provisions for the installation of fixtures and equipment in such
facilities and construction features deemed by the state university to
be desirable for academic use or for habitability. The proposed
standards shall be reviewed by the state university trustees and shall
be subject to their approval, disapproval or modification on or before
August first, nineteen hundred sixty-two and in the form approved, shall
be forwarded to the governor for his further approval, disapproval or
modification within thirty days thereafter. The proposed standards shall
be deemed adopted, with or without modifications as the case may be,
upon (i) written approval by the governor or (ii) the expiration of
thirty days after receipt of the proposed standards by the governor from
the state university trustees, whichever occurs first. The effective
date of such standards shall be September first, nineteen hundred
sixty-two. Such standards, in the form adopted, shall be filed by the
state university with the secretary of state in the manner provided by
section one hundred two of the executive law.
 Changes in the construction standards so adopted may from time to time
be formulated and proposed, reviewed, approved, disapproved or modified,
adopted and filed in the same manner as the original standards.
 2. Design. The fund shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, within the
amounts appropriated therefor or otherwise available, the building
plans, the exterior drawings or models displaying the architectural
concept of the facility, and the detailed plans and specifications for
all construction, acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation and
improvement work to be performed at state-operated institutions or
statutory or contract colleges under the jurisdiction of the state
university. The fund may cause the building plans, drawings, models and
detailed plans and specifications for such work to be prepared under the
direction of the letting agency in accordance with the terms of any
agreement entered into between the fund and such letting agency pursuant
to section three hundred seventy-six of this chapter.
 The detailed plans and specifications for any such work to be
performed pursuant to a contract executed on or after a date thirty days
subsequent to the effective date of the construction standards adopted
pursuant to subdivision one of this section shall comply with the
standards in effect at the time the contract is executed.
 Subject to the terms of any agreement entered into between the fund
and the letting agency pursuant to section three hundred seventy-six of
this chapter, the fund may from time to time modify, or authorize
modifications to, such detailed plans and specifications provided (i)
that the plans and specifications as so modified shall comply with the
construction standards, if any, adopted pursuant to subdivision one of
this section and in effect at the time of the modification, and (ii)
that such modifications are made after consultation with the state
university, and (iii) that in the event a contingency fund is
appropriated to the fund to pay the added costs during the then current
state fiscal year of all modifications made in the course of
construction, acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation and
improvement of facilities for the state university, no such modification
may be made or authorized in such fiscal year without the approval of
the director of the budget unless the cost thereof shall be less than
five per centum of the total estimated cost of the facility as set forth
in the budget bill referred to in subdivision one of section three
hundred seventy-six of this chapter, but in no event shall any such
modification be made or authorized in such fiscal year if the cost
thereof, plus the cost of all modifications theretofore made or
authorized during the same state fiscal year, would exceed the amount of
the contingency fund appropriated for the purpose of such modifications,
and (iv) that in the event a contingency fund is not appropriated for
the purpose of such modifications, no such modification involving an
estimated expense of ten thousand dollars or more shall be made or
authorized without the prior approval of the director of the budget.
 3. Municipal regulations. No county, city, town or village shall have
power to modify or change the plans or specifications for facilities to
be constructed, acquired, reconstructed, rehabilitated or improved for
state university purposes, or the construction, plumbing, heating,
lighting or other mechanical branch of work necessary to complete the
work in question, nor to require that any person, firm or corporation
employed on any such work shall perform such work in any other or
different manner than that provided by such plans and specifications,
nor to require that any such person, firm or corporation obtain any
other or additional authority or permit from such county, city, town or
village as a condition of doing such work, nor shall any condition
whatever be imposed by any such county, city, town or village in
relation to the work being done pursuant to this article, but such work
shall be under the sole control of the supervising architect or engineer
in accordance with the drawings, plans, specifications and contracts in
relation thereto; and the doing of any such work for the fund by any
person, firm or corporation in accordance with the terms of such
drawings, plans, specifications or contracts shall not subject said
person, firm or corporation to any liability or penalty, civil or
criminal, other than as may be stated in such contracts or incidental to
the proper enforcement thereof.
 § 376. Letting of construction contracts. 1. After May first, nineteen
hundred sixty-two, the fund as agent for the state university shall
construct, acquire, reconstruct, rehabilitate and improve, or cause to
be constructed, acquired, reconstructed, rehabilitated and improved, all
academic buildings, dormitories and other facilities to be constructed,
acquired, reconstructed, rehabilitated or improved at state-operated
institutions or statutory or contract colleges under the jurisdiction of
the state university, provided that legislation or appropriations
authorizing the same (i) have been requested by the state university
trustees, (ii) have been recommended by the governor in a budget bill
relating to a state fiscal year commencing on or after April first,
nineteen hundred sixty-two which specifies the facilities to be
constructed, acquired, reconstructed, rehabilitated or improved and the
total estimated cost for each such facility, and (iii) have been
approved by the legislature for such state fiscal year. With respect to
state fiscal years commencing on or after April first, nineteen hundred
sixty-three, the budget bill referred to in the preceding sentence shall
include in addition to the items stated the date when it is desired that
the construction, acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or
improvement of each facility referred to therein be completed, and all
work for such purposes shall be performed in such manner as to assure
completion, so far as practicable, by the dates specified.
 2. The fund may construct, acquire, reconstruct, rehabilitate and
improve such facilities, other than dormitories, by its own employees,
by agreement with a state retirement system or any state agency
authorized to perform such work, or by contract awarded pursuant to
subdivision eight of this section.
 3. The fund may construct, acquire, reconstruct, rehabilitate and
improve dormitories only by agreement with the dormitory authority
established under title four of the public authorities law, except that
if the dormitory authority indicates its unwillingness to enter into
such an agreement with the fund for such purpose, the fund may
construct, acquire, reconstruct, rehabilitate and improve such
dormitories by its own employees, by agreement with a state retirement
system or any state agency (other than the dormitory authority)
authorized to perform such work, or by contract awarded pursuant to
subdivision eight of this section, subject, however, to the rights of
holders of outstanding bonds and notes of the dormitory authority with
respect to existing dormitories.
 4. In the event that the dormitory authority enters into an agreement
with the fund for construction, acquisition, reconstruction,
rehabilitation or improvement of a facility for the state university, it
shall perform the work required or cause the work required to be
performed in accordance with the terms of such agreement either by its
own employees or by contract awarded pursuant to the provisions of title
four of the public authorities law. In the event any state agency other
than the dormitory authority enters into an agreement with the fund for
such work it shall perform the same either by its own employees or by
contract awarded pursuant to subdivision eight of this section.
 5. No contract for the construction, acquisition, reconstruction,
rehabilitation or improvement of academic buildings, dormitories and
other facilities shall be awarded by any letting agency unless the state
university trustees shall have approved the architectural concept of the
facility to be constructed, acquired, reconstructed, rehabilitated or
improved and unless the fund shall have approved the proposed terms of
such contract, including the detailed plans and specifications for such
facility.
 6. Each contract for the construction, acquisition, reconstruction,
rehabilitation or improvement of academic buildings, dormitories and
other facilities shall include a provision that the architect who
designed the facility, or an architect or engineer, or, for projects
authorized by section three hundred seventy-two-a of this article a
construction manager or other consultant, retained specifically for the
purpose of supervision, shall supervise the work to be performed through
to completion and shall see to it that the materials furnished and the
work performed are in accordance with the drawings, plans,
specifications and contract therefor.
 7. Any letting agency may in its discretion award one contract for all
the work to be performed in construction, acquisition, reconstruction,
rehabilitation or improvement without separate and independent bidding
or letting on subdivisions of work to be performed.
 8. * All contracts which are to be awarded pursuant to this
subdivision shall be awarded by public letting in accordance with the
following provisions, notwithstanding any contrary provision of section
one hundred thirty-five, one hundred thirty-six, one hundred thirty-nine
or one hundred forty of the state finance law or any other law,
provided, however, that where the estimated expense of any contract
which may be awarded pursuant to this subdivision is less than two
hundred fifty thousand dollars, a performance bond and a bond for the
payment of labor and material may, in the discretion of the fund, not be
required, and except that in the discretion of the fund, a contract may
be entered into for such purposes without public letting where the
estimated expense thereof is less than twenty thousand dollars, or where
in the judgment of the fund an emergency condition exists as a result of
damage to an existing academic building, dormitory or other facility
which has been caused by an act of God, fire or other casualty, or any
other unanticipated, sudden and unexpected occurrence, that has resulted
in damage to or a malfunction in an existing academic building,
dormitory or other facility and involves a pressing necessity for
immediate repair, reconstruction or maintenance in order to permit the
safe continuation of the use or function of such facility, or to protect
the facility or the life, health or safety of any person, and the nature
of the work is such that in the judgment of the fund it would be
impractical and against the public interest to have public letting;
provided, however, that the fund, prior to awarding a contract hereunder
because of an emergency condition notify the comptroller of its intent
to award such a contract:
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * All contracts which are to be awarded pursuant to this subdivision
shall be awarded by public letting in accordance with the following
provisions, notwithstanding any contrary provision of section one
hundred thirty-five, one hundred thirty-six, one hundred thirty-nine or
one hundred forty of the state finance law, provided, however, that
where the estimated expense of any contract which may be awarded
pursuant to this subdivision is less than fifty thousand dollars, a
performance bond and a bond for the payment of labor and material may,
in the discretion of the fund, not be required, and except that in the
discretion of the fund, a contract may be entered into for such purposes
without public letting where the estimated expense thereof is less than
twenty thousand dollars, or where in the judgment of the fund an
emergency condition exists as a result of damage to an existing academic
building, dormitory or other facility which has been caused by an act of
God, fire or other casualty, or any other unanticipated, sudden and
unexpected occurrence, that has resulted in damage to or a malfunction
in an existing academic building, dormitory or other facility and
involves a pressing necessity for immediate repair, reconstruction or
maintenance in order to permit the safe continuation of the use or
function of such facility, or to protect the facility or the life,
health or safety of any person, and the nature of the work is such that
in the judgment of the fund it would be impractical and against the
public interest to have public letting; provided, however, that the
fund, prior to awarding a contract hereunder because of an emergency
condition notify the comptroller of its intent to award such a contract:
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 a. If contracts are to be publicly let, the letting agency shall
advertise the invitation to bid in a newspaper published in the city of
Albany and in such other newspapers as will be most likely in its
opinion to give adequate notice to contractors of the work required and
of the invitation to bid provided, however, that where the estimated
expense of any contract which may be awarded pursuant to this
subdivision is less than fifty thousand dollars, the letting agency may
advertise the invitation to bid solely through the procurement
opportunities newsletter published pursuant to section one hundred
forty-two of the economic development law. The invitation to bid shall
contain such information as the letting agency shall deem appropriate
and a statement of the time and place where all bids received pursuant
to such notice will be publicly opened and read.
 b. The letting agency shall not award any contract after public
bidding except to the lowest bidder who in its opinion is qualified to
perform the work required and is responsible and reliable. The letting
agency may, however, reject any or all bids, again advertise for bids,
or waive any informality in a bid if it believes that the public
interest will be promoted thereby.
 c. The invitation to bid and the contract awarded shall contain such
other terms and conditions, and such provisions for penalties, as the
letting agency may deem desirable.
 * d. Any contract awarded pursuant to this subdivision shall contain a
clause that the contract shall be deemed executory to the extent of the
moneys available and that no liability shall be incurred by the fund
beyond the moneys available therefor.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * d. The form of any contract awarded pursuant to this subdivision
shall be approved by the attorney general and by the comptroller and
shall contain a clause that the contract shall be deemed executory to
the extent of the moneys available and that no liability shall be
incurred by the fund beyond the moneys available therefor.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 e. The letting agency shall require such deposits, bonds and security
in connection with the submission of bids, the award of contracts and
the performance of work as it shall determine to be in the public
interest and for the protection of the state, the state university, the
fund and the letting agency.
 f. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law to the contrary,
all contracts for public work awarded by the state university
construction fund pursuant to this subdivision shall be in accordance
with section one hundred thirty-nine-f of the state finance law.
 9. No payments shall be made by the comptroller from appropriated
moneys on account of any construction contract for a facility until the
bills or estimates presented for such payment shall have been duly
certified to be correct (i) by the chairman of the fund or by an officer
of the fund duly designated for that purpose, or (ii) if the dormitory
authority is the letting agency, by the chairman thereof or by an
officer or employee thereof duly designated for that purpose.
 10. Whenever the fund deems it necessary as a result of or in
connection with the construction, acquisition, reconstruction,
rehabilitation and improvement of any academic building, dormitory, and
other facility, to provide for the removal, relocation, replacement,
reconstruction, repair or extension by a municipality, county, town,
village or public service corporation, of water mains, sewer pipes,
telephone lines and other facilities maintained for public use and owned
by such municipality, county, town, village or public service
corporation, it shall have the power to contract with such municipality,
county, town, village or public service corporation and such
municipality, county, town, village or public service corporation shall
have the power to contract with the fund, for such removal, relocation,
replacement, reconstruction, repair or extension. The contract for such
removal, relocation, replacement, reconstruction, repair or extension
may, at the discretion of the fund, be entered into by the fund without
the necessity of public bidding or public letting. Upon the completion
and acceptance by the fund of the performance of such removal,
relocation, replacement, reconstruction, repair or extension, said water
mains, sewer pipes, telephone lines and other facilities shall be
maintained by the municipality, county, town, village or public service
corporation, as the case may be.
 11. (a) Each contract involving the awarding of a large-scale
construction project shall require the use of a project labor agreement,
as defined in subdivision one of section two hundred twenty-two of the
labor law, for all contractors and subcontractors on the project,
consistent with paragraph (a) of subdivision two of section two hundred
twenty-two of the labor law, except as otherwise provided in paragraph
(b) of this subdivision.
 (b) The fund shall not be required to use a project labor agreement
where it determines that such agreement would be inconsistent with
paragraph (a) of subdivision two of section two hundred twenty-two of
the labor law or state competitive bidding laws. Any such determination
shall be provided in a written explanation for a particular project
contract by the solicitation date. The goals and requirements of article
fifteen-A of the executive law and article three of the veteran services
law shall apply to all project labor agreements.
 (c) An agency may require the use of a project labor agreement on
construction projects where the total cost to the fund is less than that
for a large-scale construction project, if consistent with paragraph (a)
of subdivision two of section two hundred twenty-two of the labor law.
 § 376-a. Notices of claim and commencement of actions against the
fund. 1. In every action against the fund for damages for injuries to
real or personal property, or for the destruction thereof, or for
personal injuries or death, the complaint shall contain an allegation
that at least thirty days have elapsed since the demand, claim or claims
upon which such action is founded were presented to a trustee or officer
of the fund and that the fund has neglected or refused to make an
adjustment or payment thereof for thirty days after such presentment.
 2. Except in an action for wrongful death, an action against the fund
for damages for injuries to real or personal property, or for the
destruction thereof, or for personal injuries, alleged to have been
sustained, shall not be commenced more than one year and ninety days
after the cause of action therefor shall have accrued, nor unless a
notice of claim shall have been served on the fund within the time limit
established by, and in compliance with all requirements of section
fifty-e of the general municipal law. An action against the fund for
wrongful death shall be commenced in accordance with the notice of claim
and time limitation provisions of title eleven of article nine of the
public authorities law.
 § 377. Resources of fund. 1. The fund may receive, accept, invest,
administer, expend and disburse for its corporate purposes appropriation
from the capital construction fund and the state purposes fund of the
state, and other revenues and moneys made available or to be made
available to it from any or all sources for the construction,
acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation and improvement of academic
buildings, dormitories and other facilities, including gifts, grants and
loans from the federal government, any state agency, any county, city,
town or village, any private foundation, organization or individual, or
any other source.
 2. All moneys of the fund, other than appropriations and except as
otherwise authorized or provided in this article, shall be paid to the
commissioner of taxation and finance as agent of the fund, who shall not
commingle such moneys with any other moneys. Such moneys shall be
deposited in two or more separate bank accounts, and one of such
accounts, to which shall be credited all income from investments or
other accounts and all other moneys received or to be received annually
by the fund on a recurring basis, shall be denominated the "state
university construction fund income account". The moneys in such
accounts shall be paid out on checks signed by the commissioner of
taxation and finance on requisition of the chairman of the fund or of
such other officer or employee or officers or employees as the fund
shall authorize to make such requisition. All deposits of such moneys
shall, if required by the commissioner of taxation and finance or the
agency, be secured by obligations of the United States or of the state
of a market value equal at all times to the amount of the deposit and
all banks and trust companies are authorized to give such security for
such deposits.
 3. Any such moneys of the fund not required for immediate use may, at
the discretion of the fund, be invested by the commissioner of taxation
and finance in obligations of the United States or the state or
obligations the principal and interest of which are guaranteed by the
United States or the state, or in accordance with the provisions of
section ninety-eight-a of the state finance law.
 4. Monies received by the fund, in connection with approved
university-related economic development facilities, other than state
appropriations to the fund, may be deposited in a general account and
other such accounts as the fund may deem necessary, for the transaction
of its business or in relation to construction or property management
activities undertaken in connection with such projects and shall be paid
out on checks signed by the chairman of the fund or such other person or
persons as the trustees of the fund may authorize.
 5. The comptroller, or his legally authorized representative, is
hereby authorized and empowered from time to time to examine the books
and accounts of the fund including its receipts, disbursements,
contracts, reserve funds, investments, and any other matters relating to
its financial standing. Such an examination shall be conducted by the
comptroller at least once in every five years; the comptroller is
authorized, however, to accept from the fund, in lieu of such an
examination, an external examination of its books and accounts made at
the request of the fund.
 § 378. Lease agreements. 1. Any agreement entered into between the
fund and a state retirement system pursuant to section three hundred
seventy-six of this chapter shall provide for (i) the construction,
acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of one or
more facilities, (ii) the leasing thereof and of the land upon which the
same is erected to the fund upon completion of construction,
acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement for a term
not exceeding thirty years and upon such terms and conditions including
annual rental as may be agreed upon, and (iii) the conveyance to the
state of title to any such facility at the expiration of the term of the
lease or upon the earlier payment in full of the total amount specified
therein, without additional charge therefor. The state university shall
approve any such agreement and shall be a party thereto. Any
construction contract entered into by a state retirement system in
connection with such lease agreement shall be let, or otherwise entered
into, by the retirement system or its agent pursuant to the provisions
of section three hundred seventy-six of this chapter. If so designated
by a state retirement system, the fund may act as the agent of such
retirement system in connection with the construction, acquisition,
reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement which the lease agreement
requires.
 2. Any agreement entered into between the fund and the dormitory
authority pursuant to section three hundred seventy-six of this chapter
shall provide for (i) the construction, acquisition, reconstruction,
rehabilitation or improvement of one or more dormitories, and (ii) the
leasing thereof to the state university for a term not exceeding forty
years and upon such terms and conditions including annual rental as may
be agreed upon. The state university shall approve any such contract and
shall be a party to any lease made pursuant to its terms.
 3. Any agreement entered into between the fund and a state agency
(other than the dormitory authority) which is a public benefit
corporation shall provide for (i) the construction, acquisition,
reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of one or more facilities,
and (ii) the leasing thereof to the fund upon completion of
construction, acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement
for a term not exceeding thirty years and upon such terms and conditions
including annual rental as may be agreed upon. The state university
shall approve any such agreement and shall be a party thereto.
 4. To secure the payment of rentals due or to become due in any year
under any lease agreement entered into pursuant to subdivision one or
subdivision three of this section, the fund may pledge or assign any or
all moneys in the state university construction fund income account and
in any rental reserve account established pursuant to subdivision five
of this section, and any or all moneys which may be in either or both
such accounts in the future, whether equal to or in excess of the amount
of such rentals due or becoming due in any year, and any or all right,
title and interest of the fund in and to the moneys in or to be
deposited in such accounts.
 5. The fund may create and establish one or more separate accounts to
be known as "rental reserve accounts" and may pay into such reserve
accounts (i) any moneys apportioned and paid by the state for the
purposes of such reserve accounts pursuant to this subdivision, (ii) any
moneys in the state university construction fund income account directed
to be transferred by the fund to such reserve accounts, and (iii) any
other moneys which may be made available to the fund from any source or
sources specifically for the purposes of such reserve accounts.
 The moneys credited to any rental reserve account established under
this subdivision shall be used, except as hereinafter provided, solely
for the payment of rentals as they become due under one or more of the
lease agreements referred to in subdivision one or subdivision three of
this section, provided, however, that the moneys in such account shall
not be withdrawn therefrom at any time in such amount as would reduce
the amount thereof to less than the maximum amount of rental becoming
due in any succeeding calendar year under such lease agreements, except
for the purpose of paying such rentals becoming due for the payment of
which other moneys of the fund are not available.
 Moneys in a rental reserve account not required for immediate use or
disbursement may be invested in obligations of the United States or the
state or obligations the principal and interest of which are guaranteed
by the United States or the state. In computing the amount of a rental
reserve account for the purposes of this subdivision, securities in
which all or a portion of the account are invested shall be valued at
their market value on a date within seven days of the computation or at
their cost to the fund, whichever is less.
 Any excess in a rental reserve account at the end of any fiscal year
of the fund over the maximum amount of rental becoming due in any
succeeding calendar year under such lease agreements shall be withdrawn
by the fund from such account and transferred to the state university
construction fund income account to be used for the corporate purposes
of the fund.
 In order further to secure the maintenance in all rental reserve
accounts established pursuant to this subdivision of an amount equal to
the maximum amount of rental becoming due in any succeeding calendar
year under the lease agreements to which the reserve account relates,
there shall be annually apportioned and paid to the fund for deposit in
such rental reserve accounts such sum, if any, as shall be certified by
the chairman of the fund to the governor and director of the budget as
necessary to restore such accounts to an amount equal to the maximum
amount of rental becoming due in any succeeding calendar year under such
lease agreements. The chairman of the fund shall annually, on or before
December first, make and deliver to the governor and director of the
budget his certificate stating the amount, if any, required to restore
such rental reserve accounts to the amount aforesaid and the amount so
stated in said certificate, if any, shall be apportioned and paid to the
fund during the then current state fiscal year.
 No lease agreement which contains a provision for the establishment or
maintenance of a rental reserve account shall be entered into pursuant
to this section unless the governor, or where so designated by the
governor for such purpose, the director of the budget, shall have
approved the terms thereof.
 6. The attorney general shall pass upon the form and sufficiency and
manner of execution of any lease agreement entered into pursuant to this
section and the same shall not be effective unless so approved by him.
 7. The state shall not be liable for any rentals payable by the fund
pursuant to the terms of a lease agreement entered into pursuant to this
section and such agreement shall contain among its terms a statement to
such effect.
 § 379. Transfer of jurisdiction to state university. As soon as
practicable after the completion of work, the fund shall make available
to the state university trustees for the purposes intended the academic
buildings, dormitories and other facilities constructed, acquired,
reconstructed, rehabilitated or improved under this article.
Responsibility for the maintenance and routine repair of facilities
other than dormitories and for the maintenance and upkeep of adjacent
real property shall remain in the fund after the completion of work and
shall be transferred from the fund to the state university trustees
pursuant to agreement between them, and upon such transfer all right,
title and interest of the fund in such facilities shall terminate;
provided that in the case of facilities constructed, acquired,
reconstructed, rehabilitated or improved solely out of appropriations
and grants or gifts of money, such responsibilities shall be so
transferred not later than four months after the completion of work.
Prior to the transfer of such responsibilities, the state university
trustees may act as agent for the fund for the maintenance and routine
repair of such facilities and for the maintenance and upkeep of adjacent
real property. This section shall not apply when the state university
construction fund acts as agent for a foundation or other not-for-profit
entity created by or for the state university of New York or when
providing facilities or projects authorized by section three hundred
seventy-two-a of this article.
 § 380. Tax exemption of moneys and property of fund. The moneys and
property of the fund and its operations shall be exempt from taxation.
 § 381. Cooperation and assistance from other state agencies. The
state education department, the state department of transportation, the
dormitory authority, the state housing finance agency, the division of
the budget, the office of general services and all other state agencies
shall cooperate with and assist the fund in the fulfillment of its
corporate purposes and in the exercise of its corporate powers under
this article and may render such services to the fund within their
respective functions as the fund may reasonably request.
 § 382. Annual report of trustees. 1. The fund shall submit to the
governor, the regents, the state university trustees, the legislature,
the chairs of the senate finance committee and the assembly ways and
means committee, annually on or before January first, a full report of
its activities and operations through the thirtieth day of the preceding
September, including details as to state university construction
projects in planning, in construction and completed, the performance
record of the fund in completing construction in accordance with the
desired completion dates and within the estimated costs recommended by
the governor and approved by the legislature, the architects, engineers
and other private consultants engaged by the fund on a contract basis
and a statement of the total amount paid and yet to be paid, or
estimated yet to be paid, under such contract, the letting agency and
successful bidder for each construction project, the moneys made
available for the purposes of the fund, details as to any lease
agreements executed by the fund and the annual rentals required to be
paid on account thereof, and such other information related to the
activities and operations of the fund as it may consider pertinent. Such
report shall also contain details as to all contracts which, pursuant to
section three hundred seventy-six of this chapter, have been entered
into without public letting where an emergency condition exists,
including the nature of such emergency condition and the state-operated
institution at which the condition occurred.
 2. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision one of this section,
on or before November fifteenth of each year, the state university
construction fund shall submit, and thereafter may resubmit, to the
director of the budget, the state comptroller, the chairman of the
senate finance committee and the chairman of the assembly ways and means
committee a report setting forth the amounts, if any, of all annual
rentals and other payments estimated to become due in the succeeding
state fiscal year to the dormitory authority from the fund pursuant to
any leases, subleases or other agreements between the dormitory
authority and the fund entered into on or after July first, nineteen
hundred eighty-eight, to provide state university educational facilities
for the state university of New York. Such report shall separately state
the amount of income earned on the investment of moneys in the state
university construction fund educational facilities payment account
since the date of the last such report.
 § 383. Article not affected if in part unconstitutional or
ineffective. If any section, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause
or provision of this article shall be unconstitutional or be ineffective
in whole or in part, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional or
ineffective, it shall be valid or effective and no other section,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or provision shall on account
thereof be deemed invalid or ineffective.
 § 384. Inconsistent provisions of other acts superseded. Insofar as
the provisions of this article are inconsistent with the provisions of
any other act, general or special, the provisions of this article shall
be controlling.
 ARTICLE 8-B
 STATE UNIVERSITY OPTIONAL RETIREMENT PROGRAM
Section 390. Definitions.
 391. Optional retirement program established.
 392. Rates of contribution.
 393. Election.
 394. Survivor's benefits.
 395. Social security.
 396. Employer not liable for payment of benefits.
 396-a. Deductions from benefits of certain retired members.
 397. Inconsistent provisions of other acts superseded.
 § 390. Definitions. Wherever used in this article:
 1. The term "board" means the board of trustees of the state
university of New York.
 2. The term "state university" means the state university of New York
and the term "community college" means a college established and
operated under article one hundred twenty-six of this chapter.
 3. The term "eligible employees" means those employees in positions
requiring the performance of educational functions in teacher education,
agriculture, home economics, forestry, ceramics, liberal and applied
arts and sciences, engineering, technical skills, crafts, business
education, labor and industrial relations, medicine, dentistry,
veterinary medicine, pharmacy, nursing, law, public affairs, maritime
officer training, academic administration, library service, student
activities, student personnel service and other professions required to
carry on the work of the state university and the colleges, schools,
institutes, research centers, facilities and institutions comprising it
and of the community colleges. Such positions in the state university,
including those at the state colleges of agriculture, home economics,
veterinary medicine or industrial and labor relations, the state
agricultural experiment station at Geneva, or any other institution or
agency under the management and control of Cornell university as
representative of the board, and at the state college of ceramics under
the management and control of Alfred university as the representative of
the board, and such positions in the community colleges shall be those
certified to the board by the chancellor of state university as
requiring the performance of such functions. No person receiving a
benefit by reason of his retirement from any retirement or pension
system of New York state or any political subdivision thereof shall be
eligible to elect the optional retirement program.
 3-a. Beginning July first, two thousand thirteen, the term "eligible
employees" shall also mean any person excluded from or not encompassed
within a negotiating unit within the meaning of article fourteen of the
civil service law who would otherwise be entitled to receive a benefit
under the retirement and social security law or the education law
initially hired on or after July first, two thousand thirteen with
estimated annual wages of seventy-five thousand per annum or greater.
Such estimate of annual wages to determine eligibility for the purposes
of this subdivision shall be provided by the employer. For the purposes
of this subdivision, a newly hired state employee whose immediate
preceding employment was with another department, division, or agency of
the state shall not be deemed to be an eligible employee.
 4. The term "optional retirement program" means the retirement program
established pursuant to this article.
 5. The term "electing employee" shall mean any eligible employee who
exercises his election pursuant to this article to come under the
optional retirement program.
 6. The term "salary" means all amounts paid by or for the state as
compensation for services rendered by an eligible employee holding a
position with the state university or by or for a community college as
compensation for services rendered by an eligible employee holding a
position at such college.
 7. The term "insurer" shall mean a life insurance corporation, or
other corporation subject to department of financial services
supervision.
 8. The term "electing employer" means a community college which elects
to offer the optional retirement program as herein provided.
 8-a. Beginning July first, two thousand thirteen, the term "electing
employer" shall also mean any public employer within the state of New
York that employs one or more employees who have elected to participate
in the optional retirement program established pursuant to this article.
 9. The term "local sponsor" means any city, county, intermediate
school district, or school district approved by the board, sponsoring or
participating in the establishment or operation of a community college.
 § 391. Optional retirement program established. 1. There is hereby
established an optional retirement program which shall provide for the
purchase of contracts providing retirement and death benefits for or on
behalf of electing employees. Under such program the state or an
electing employer and such employees shall contribute, to the extent
authorized or required, towards the purchase of such contracts, which
shall be issued to, and become the property of, such employees. The
board of trustees of a community college may elect to offer the optional
retirement program to eligible employees of such college by resolution,
which shall become effective upon approval of the local sponsor acting
through its local legislative body or board or other appropriate
governing agency.
 2. The board shall designate the insurer or insurers to which payment
of such contributions may be made and shall approve the form and content
of such contracts. In making such designation and giving such approval
the board shall give due consideration to (i) the nature and extent of
the rights and benefits to be provided by such contracts for electing
employees and their beneficiaries, (ii) the relation of such rights and
benefits to the amount of contributions to be made under this article,
(iii) the suitability of such rights and benefits to the needs and
interests of electing employees and to the interests of state university
and of electing employers in the employment and retention of eligible
employees, and (iv) the authority and ability of the designated insurer
or insurers to provide rights and benefits under such contracts.
 3. The board is hereby authorized to provide for the administration of
such optional retirement program and to perform or authorize the
performance of such functions as may be necessary for such purposes in
accordance with this article.
 § 392. Rates of contribution. 1. Employer contributions. In the case
of any electing employee initially appointed on or before June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety-two, the state, with respect to
employees of state university, and the electing employer, with respect
to employees of a community college, shall, during continuance of his
employment, make contributions at the rate of nine percentum of that
portion of his salary upon which contributions, if any, are or may
hereafter be paid to the secretary of the treasury of the United States
pursuant to article three of the retirement and social security law and
at the rate of twelve percentum of any portion of his salary upon which
such contributions are not paid, out of monies which shall be
appropriated to state university or which shall be available to the
electing employer for such purpose. In the case of any electing employee
initially appointed on or after July first, nineteen hundred ninety-two,
the state, with respect to employees of the state university and the
electing employer, with respect to employees of a community college,
shall, during continuance of his employment, make contributions at the
rate of eight percentum of his salary during the first seven years of
such employment and at the rate of ten percentum of his salary
thereafter, out of monies which shall be appropriated to the state
university or which shall be available to the electing employer for such
purpose. For purposes of this subdivision, that portion of the
employee's salary upon which contributions are or may thereafter be paid
to the secretary of the treasury of the United States pursuant to
article three of the retirement and social security law shall be deemed
not to exceed sixteen thousand five hundred dollars.
 1-a. Employer contributions. In the case of any electing employee
excluded from or not encompassed within a negotiating unit within the
meaning of article fourteen of the civil service law initially hired on
or after July first, two thousand thirteen, the state and the electing
employer shall, during the continuance of his or her employment, make
contributions at the rate of eight per centum of his or her salary.
 2. Employee contributions. (a) In the case of any electing employee,
contributions at the rate of three percentum of his salary shall be
deducted as the employee contribution by the comptroller, or by the
appropriate fiscal officer with respect to an electing employer,
provided however, that such employee contribution shall be made by (i)
the state for employees other than those employed by an electing
employer in accordance with subdivision one of this section during such
period as (a) either section seventy-a of the retirement and social
security law or section five hundred twenty-eight of this title provides
that the contribution of each member of the New York state employees'
retirement system or the New York state teachers' retirement system in
the employ of the state shall be reduced by at least eight percentum of
his compensation or (b) employee contributions to either such system are
no longer required by reason of such system becoming noncontributory for
state employees, or (ii) by the electing employer in accordance with
subdivision one of this section during such period as the contributions
of any members of either the New York state employees' retirement system
or the New York state teachers' retirement system or of any other public
retirement system in this state in its employ shall (a) be reduced by at
least eight percentum of their compensation in accordance with section
seventy-a of the retirement and social security law or section five
hundred twenty-nine of this title or section B3-36.1 or section B20-41.1
of the administrative code of the city of New York or (b) employee
contributions to any such system of which any of its employees are
members are no longer required by reasons of such system becoming non
contributory for such employees; and provided further, however, that
such employee contribution with respect to the fiscal year of the city
of New York beginning on July first, nineteen hundred seventy-two and
ending on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred seventy-three shall be made
by the electing employer in the case of any electing employee who is
employed by a community college operated in such city, notwithstanding
any of the foregoing provisions of this subdivision to the contrary.
 (b) Notwithstanding any provision of paragraph (a) of this subdivision
or any other provision of law to the contrary, but subject to the
provisions of subdivision d of section six hundred thirteen of the
retirement and social security law, in the case of any electing employee
initially appointed on or after July first, nineteen hundred ninety-two
who is employed by a community college subject to the provisions of this
article which is operated in the city of New York, contributions at the
rate of three percentum of his or her salary shall be deducted as the
employee contribution by the appropriate fiscal officer with respect to
such community college.
 (c) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section or any other
law to the contrary, (1) on and after April first, two thousand eight
for a member who joined the optional retirement program established
pursuant to this article before April first, two thousand twelve and who
has ten or more years of membership in such optional retirement program,
the state shall contribute one-third of the three percent employee
contribution required pursuant to the provisions of this section on
behalf of such employee; and (2) on and after April first, two thousand
nine for a member who joined the optional retirement program established
pursuant to this article before April first, two thousand twelve and who
has ten or more years of membership in such optional retirement program,
the state shall contribute two-thirds of the three percent employee
contribution required pursuant to the provisions of this section on
behalf of such employee; and (3) on and after April first, two thousand
ten for a member who joined the optional retirement program established
pursuant to this article before April first, two thousand twelve and who
has ten or more years of membership in such optional retirement program,
the state shall contribute the three percent employee contribution
required pursuant to the provisions of this section on behalf of such
employee. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to any
electing employee who becomes a member of the optional retirement
program on or after April first, two thousand twelve.
 (d) Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, beginning April
first, two thousand thirteen any electing employee appointed on or after
April first, two thousand twelve, the rate at which each such employee
shall contribute in any current plan year (January first to December
thirty-first) shall be determined by reference to the wages of such
member in the second plan year (January first to December thirty-first)
preceding such current plan year as follows:
 (i) members with wages of forty-five thousand dollars per annum or
less shall contribute three per centum of annual wages;
 (ii) members with wages greater than forty-five thousand per annum,
but not more than fifty-five thousand per annum shall contribute three
and one-half per centum of annual wages;
 (iii) members with wages greater than fifty-five thousand per annum,
but not more than seventy-five thousand per annum shall contribute four
and one-half per centum of annual wages;
 (iv) members with wages greater than seventy-five thousand per annum
but not more than one hundred thousand per annum shall contribute five
and three-quarters per centum of annual wages; and
 (v) members with wages greater than one hundred thousand per annum
shall contribute six per centum of annual wages.
 Notwithstanding the foregoing, during each of the first three plan
years (January first to December thirty-first) in which such member has
established membership in the State University Optional Retirement
Program, such employee shall contribute a percent of annual wages in
accordance with the preceding schedule based upon a projection of annual
wages provided by the employer.
 3. Payment of contributions pursuant to subdivisions one and two of
this section shall be made to the designated insurer or insurers upon
audit and warrant of the comptroller for employees of the state
university and by the appropriate fiscal officer for employees of an
electing employer.
 4. In the case of an electing employee initially appointed on or after
July first, nineteen hundred sixty-four, no contributions pursuant to
subdivisions one and two of this section shall be made by the state or
by the electing employer until his completion of one year of service and
continuance in service thereafter. Employee contributions, if any,
required during this initial year of service shall be deducted and held
by the comptroller or by the appropriate fiscal officer of an electing
employer. At the end of his initial year of service, a single
contribution in an amount determined pursuant to subdivisions one and
two of this section, with interest at the rate of four percentum per
annum, shall be made by the state, upon audit and warrant of the
comptroller, and by the appropriate fiscal officer for an electing
employer, to the designated insurer or insurers, on behalf of such
employee continued in service. In the case of an electing employee who
does not continue in service with state university or with a community
college beyond his initial year of service, the amount of employee
contribution, if any, deducted from his salary shall be refunded to him,
with interest at the rate of four percentum per annum.
 5. The provisions of subdivision four of this section shall not apply
to any electing employee other than an employee appointed for a
specified period of less than three months who, at the time of initial
appointment, owns a contract determined by the board to be similar to
those contracts to be purchased under the optional retirement program
and issued by the designated insurer or insurers.
 § 393. Election. 1. Election of the optional retirement program.
 (a) Each eligible employee initially appointed on or after July first,
nineteen hundred sixty-four, within thirty days of his entry into
service, shall elect (i) to join either the New York state teachers'
retirement system or the New York state employees' retirement system or
other public retirement system in this state in accordance with the
provisions of law applicable thereto or (ii) to elect the optional
retirement program established pursuant to this article; provided
however, that (1) such persons initially entering service during the
period July first, nineteen hundred sixty-four through November fourth,
nineteen hundred sixty-four may defer such election until December
fourth, nineteen hundred sixty-four, and (2) eligible employees of an
electing employer initially appointed on or after the effective date of
the election to offer such program may defer such election until the
ninetieth day following such effective date of the election to offer
such program established by an electing employer. Any such deferred
election shall be effective as of the date of entry into service or the
effective date of such offer, whichever is later.
 (b) In the event an eligible employee fails to make an election as
provided in paragraph (a) of this subdivision, he shall be deemed to
have elected membership in the New York state teachers' retirement
system, or such public retirement system in this state in which his
membership may be otherwise required in accordance with law, except that
eligible employees of institutions under the management and control of
Cornell university or Alfred university as the representative of the
state university trustees shall be deemed to have elected membership in
the New York state employees' retirement system. Such membership shall
be effective as of the date of entry into service, or in the case of
membership in the New York city employees retirement system, at the time
otherwise required by law.
 (c) The amount, if any, required to have been contributed by any
employee in accordance with an election, a deferred election or failure
to elect pursuant to paragraph (a) or paragraph (b) of this subdivision
shall be collected by payroll deductions in such manner as may be
provided by the comptroller for employees of state university electing
the optional retirement program, or by the appropriate fiscal officer
for employees of an electing employer, or in the case of membership in
either the New York state employees' retirement system or the New York
state teachers' retirement system or other public retirement system in
this state, by the retirement system concerned.
 (d) Eligible employees other than those employed by an electing
employer appointed on or before June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
sixty-four, may elect the optional retirement program established
pursuant to this article. Such election shall be made on or before
December fourth, nineteen hundred sixty-four, and shall become effective
as of January first, nineteen hundred sixty-five. Eligible employees of
an electing employer appointed before the effective date of the election
to offer such program may elect the optional retirement program
established pursuant to this article. Such election shall be made on or
before the ninetieth day following the effective date of such offer and
shall become effective on or as of the first day of January next
following the effective date of such offer.
 (e) Any state employee or employee of an electing employer who becomes
eligible to elect the optional retirement program by reason of (i) the
certification of the position held by him pursuant to paragraph three of
section three hundred ninety of this article or (ii) his appointment,
promotion, transfer or reclassification to a position previously so
certified, may elect the optional retirement program established
pursuant to this article. Such election shall be made within thirty days
after notice in writing to such employee of his eligibility, and shall
become effective on the date of such election, except that in no case
shall such election by a state employee become effective prior to
January first, nineteen hundred sixty-five, or in the case of an
eligible employee of an electing employer, prior to the first day of
January next following the effective date of the offer of such program.
 (f) Any eligible employee who was employed by the University of
Buffalo prior to its merger into state university and who elected to
continue in the retirement program theretofore provided by the
University of Buffalo in accordance with section three of chapter nine
hundred eighty of the laws of nineteen hundred sixty-two and who elects
the optional retirement program established pursuant to this article as
provided in paragraphs (d) or (e) of this subdivision shall become
ineligible to continue in the retirement program provided by the
University of Buffalo prior to merger on the effective date of such
election. Such election shall constitute a waiver of all rights and
benefits provided under sections three and seven of chapter nine hundred
eighty of the laws of nineteen hundred sixty-two.
 (g) No election by an eligible employee of the optional retirement
program shall be effective unless it shall be accompanied by an
appropriate application, where required, for the issuance of a contract
or contracts under the program.
 2. Ineligibility for retirement system membership. Any employee who
elects the optional retirement program shall be ineligible for
membership in the New York state employees' retirement system, the New
York state teachers' retirement system or any other public retirement
system in this state so long as he shall remain continuously employed in
any position by state university or the institutions under the
management and control of Cornell university or Alfred university as
representative of the board or by an electing employer and shall
continue in the optional retirement program.
 3. (a) Any eligible employee who is a member of either the New York
state employees' retirement system or the New York state teachers'
retirement system at the time he elects the optional retirement program
established pursuant to this article, shall be deemed to be a person who
discontinues service on the effective date of such election, for the
purpose of determining his eligibility for rights and benefits in either
such system; provided however, that if he does not withdraw his
accumulated contributions, (i) his continued service with state
university while under the optional retirement program shall be deemed
to be member service in either the New York state employees' retirement
system or the New York state teachers' retirement system for the purpose
of determining his eligibility for any vested retirement allowance,
retirement allowance or ordinary death benefit under either such system
dependent upon a specified period of total service or upon attainment of
a specified age while in service or upon death while in service; and
(ii) the amount of any such benefit to which he or his estate or person
designated by him may become entitled under either such system shall be
computed only on the basis of service otherwise creditable to him
therein and his compensation during such service.
 (b) Electing employees and their beneficiaries shall not be entitled
to any right or benefit under either the New York state employees'
retirement system or the New York state teachers' retirement system
other than a vested retirement allowance, retirement allowance or
ordinary death benefit to the extent expressly provided for in this
section.
 4. (a) Any eligible employee of an electing employer who is a member
or transferred contributor of either the New York city teachers'
retirement system or the New York city employees' retirement system at
the time he elects the optional retirement program offered by an
electing employer pursuant to this article shall be deemed to be a
person who terminates membership on the effective date of such election,
for the purpose of determining his eligibility for rights and benefits
in either such system; provided however, that if he does not withdraw
his accumulated contributions, (i) his continued service at a community
college whose employees are otherwise eligible for the New York city
teachers' retirement system, or the New York city employees' retirement
system shall be deemed to be member service in either the New York city
teachers' retirement system or the New York city employees' retirement
system for the purpose of determining his eligibility for any retirement
allowance or ordinary death benefit under either such system dependent
upon a specified period of total service or upon attainment of a
specified age while in service or upon death while in service; and (ii)
the amount of any such benefit to which he or his estate or person
designated by him may become entitled under either such system shall be
computed only on the basis of service otherwise creditable to him
therein and his compensation during such service. (b) Electing employees
and their beneficiaries shall not be entitled to any right or benefit
under either the New York city teachers' retirement system or the New
York city employees' retirement system other than a retirement allowance
or ordinary death benefit to the extent expressly provided for in this
section. Such employee shall not be eligible for any benefit pursuant to
section B3-36.0, subdivision two or section B3-36.0, subdivision three
of the administrative code of the city of New York or section two
hundred forty-five of the military law.
 5. (a) Subdivision two of this section shall not apply to any eligible
employee who has elected the optional retirement program and after June
thirtieth, two thousand two, renders service which is creditable in the
New York state teachers' retirement system, other than service for which
a contribution is made to the optional retirement program.
 (b) Subdivision three of this section shall not apply to any member of
the New York state teachers' retirement system who, after joining such
system, elects the optional retirement program.
 (c) Anything in subdivision three of this section notwithstanding, any
eligible employee who is a member of the New York state teachers'
retirement system and had elected the optional retirement program prior
to July first, two thousand two, may obtain credit for service, other
than service for which a contribution is made to the optional retirement
program, which is creditable in such system, was rendered after such
member had elected the education department optional retirement program,
and was rendered between December first, nineteen hundred ninety-one and
June thirtieth, two thousand two, provided (i) such member has rendered
at least five years of service credited with the New York state
teachers' retirement system at the time such service is credited, and
(ii) in the case of such member subject to the provisions of article
fourteen or fifteen of the retirement and social security law, the
member contributes three percent of the wages earned for such service
together with interest at the rate of five percent per annum compounded
annually from the date of such service until payment is made.
 (d) Anything in this subdivision five notwithstanding, service as an
eligible employee for which a contribution is made to the optional
retirement program shall neither entitle any eligible employee to join
or rejoin the New York state teachers' retirement system nor be
creditable in such system.
 § 394. Survivor's benefits. In the case of the death of any electing
employee, after the effective date of this election and before
retirement, the value of the death benefits provided by the contract or
contracts purchased under the optional retirement program which is
attributable to the state's contribution as determined by the board,
shall be deemed to be an ordinary death benefit provided under a public
pension plan within the meaning of section one hundred fifty-four of the
civil service law. Notwithstanding the provisions of such section of
the civil service law, a survivors benefit payable thereunder on account
of the death of any electing employee while in the employ of state
university, after the effective date of such election and before
retirement, including an employee subject to the provisions of
subdivision three of section three hundred ninety-three of this article,
shall be paid to such person or persons as such employee shall have
nominated to receive the death benefits provided by the contract or
contracts purchased under the optional retirement program. In the event
such designated beneficiary or beneficiaries do not survive the
employee, or if a beneficiary was not so designated, the survivors
benefit shall be paid to the deceased employee's estate or as provided
in section one hundred three-a of the decedent estate law.
 § 395. Social security. Every electing employee shall have old-age,
survivors, and disability insurance coverage provided by the federal
social security act in accordance with the provisions of article three
of the retirement and social security law.
 § 396. Employer not liable for payment of benefits. Neither the
state, nor state university, nor any electing employer or its local
sponsor shall be a party to any contract purchased in whole or in part
with contributions made under the optional retirement program
established and administered pursuant to this article. No retirement,
death, or other benefits shall be payable by the state, or by state
university, or by any electing employer or its local sponsor under such
optional retirement program. Such benefits shall be paid to electing
employees or their beneficiaries by the designated insurer or insurers
in accordance with the terms of their contracts.
 § 396-a. Deductions from benefits of certain retired members. 1.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an electing employee who is
retired from the optional retirement system shall have the right, at any
time after such electing employee's retirement, to execute and file a
deduction authorization card with the designated insurer or insurers
upon audit and warrant of the comptroller for employees of the state
university and by the appropriate fiscal officer for employees of an
electing employer authorizing the deduction from such electing
employee's retirement allowance of membership dues and such electing
employee's share of the cost for employee organization-sponsored benefit
plans and the payment thereof to a retiree organization of which the
electing employee is then a member and which is then affiliated with
either an employee organization certified or recognized as the
collective bargaining representative of all employees in the negotiating
unit of which the electing employee was a part prior to his or her
retirement or with an employee organization with which such employee
organization is then affiliated. The designated insurer or insurers upon
audit and warrant of the comptroller for employees of the state
university and by the appropriate fiscal officer for employees of an
electing employer shall thereafter deduct from the retirement allowance
of such electing employee the amount of membership dues and such amounts
required to be paid by such electing employee for such authorized
employee organization-sponsored benefit plans, and shall transmit the
sum so deducted to said retiree organization. Such authorization shall
continue in effect until revoked in writing by such electing employee.
For purposes of this section, the term "employee organization-sponsored
benefit plans" shall include any and all insurance plans and/or other
benefit plans sponsored by such retiree organization whether provided by
(a) a not-for-profit corporation licensed under article forty-three of
the insurance law; (b) any insurance company authorized to do business
in this state; (c) a health maintenance organization issued a
certificate of authority pursuant to article forty-four of the public
health law; or (d) a self-insurance arrangement, welfare fund or benefit
fund.
 2. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a retired elected
employee shall have the right, at any time after his or her retirement,
to execute and file a deduction authorization card with the designated
insurer or insurers upon audit and warrant of the comptroller for
employees of the state university and by the appropriate fiscal officer
for employees of an electing employer authorizing the payment of
voluntary contributions to the political committee, as defined in
subdivision one of section 14-100 of the election law, of such electing
employee's employee organization, provided such organization is
certified or recognized pursuant to article fourteen of the civil
service law as the representative of all employees in the negotiating
unit in which such retired electing employee was then employed. Such
authorization shall continue in effect until revoked in writing by such
electing employee. The designated insurer or insurers upon audit and
warrant of the comptroller for employees of the state university and by
the appropriate fiscal officer for employees of an electing employer
shall determine the cost of administering deductions for voluntary
contributions to the political committee and the cost incurred for
administering such contributions shall be paid from the funds of the
political committee.
 § 397. Inconsistent provisions of other acts superseded. Insofar as
the provisions of this article are inconsistent with the provisions of
any other act, general or special, the provisions of this article shall
be controlling.
 ARTICLE 8-C
 SPECIAL ANNUITY
Section 398. Definitions.
 398-a. Reduction of salaries for investment in custodial
 accounts.
 399. Special annuity and custodial account programs
 authorized.
 399-a. Reduction of salaries for tax-deferred annuities.
 § 398. Definitions. Whenever used in this article:
 1. The term "employer" means the state university of New York, the
board of higher education of the city of New York, or a community
college established and operated under article one hundred twenty-six of
this chapter.
 2. The term "employee" means a person employed by the state
university, the board of higher education of the city of New York, or a
community college established and operated under article one hundred
twenty-six of this chapter.
 3. The term "comptroller" means the comptroller of the state of New
York with respect to the state university or the appropriate fiscal
officer with respect to other employers.
 4. The term "salary" means that amount fixed by or pursuant to law and
paid by or for an employer to an employee as compensation for services
rendered by the employee to the employer.
 5. The term "insurer" means a life insurance corporation or other
corporation subject to department of financial services supervision.
 § 398-a. Reduction of salaries for investment in custodial accounts.
Each employer, in his discretion, may enter into a written agreement
with any employee to reduce the annual salary as otherwise payable by
law of such employee for the purpose of investing in a custodial account
as permitted under section 403(b) of the United States Internal Revenue
Code, as amended, for such employee. Any such agreement may be
terminated at any time upon written notice by either such employee or
employer and shall be governed by the otherwise consistent provisions of
section three hundred ninety-nine of this article. Nothing contained in
this section shall be construed to diminish or impair any benefits to
which such employee or his legal representatives or beneficiaries would
be otherwise entitled had such salary reduction agreement not been
entered into in accordance with the provisions of this section.
 § 399. Special annuity and custodial account programs authorized. 1.
An employer is hereby authorized to establish by resolution special
annuity and custodial account programs which shall provide for the
purchase of contracts or establishment of custodial accounts providing
retirement and death benefits for or on behalf of employees electing to
enter into an agreement with such employer providing for a reduction of
annual salary for the purpose of purchasing such contracts or for making
contributions to such custodial accounts.
 2. Where the employer has established a special annuity and/or
custodial account program authorized by this article, any employee may
enter into an agreement with his employer for the reduction of his
salary which is earned after the effective date of such agreement and
for contributions to the purchase of an annuity contract or to a
custodial account for such employee by his employer in an amount equal
to the reduction in salary so agreed on. The employer shall purchase the
annuity contract or make contributions to the custodial account for such
employee entering into such an agreement from the insurer or custodian
designated pursuant to subdivision four of this section. Such annuity
contract shall be issued to, and become the property of, such employee
whose rights therein shall be non-forfeitable except for failure to pay
future premiums or such custodial account shall be established on behalf
of such employee whose rights therein are non-forfeitable. Neither the
state, or a political subdivision thereof, nor an employer shall be a
party to any annuity contract purchased or custodial account established
in whole or in part with payments pursuant to said agreement, and no
retirement, death or other benefit shall be payable by the state, or
political subdivision thereof, or by an employer under such agreement or
such annuity contract or custodial account.
 3. Subject to approval and filing, as hereinafter provided by the
comptroller, any such agreement shall specify the amount of such
reduction, and the effective date thereof, and shall be binding and
irrevocable as to both parties thereto during the continuation of such
employee's employment with the employer; provided, however, that such
agreement may be terminated in accordance with university guidelines
upon notice in writing by either party. Such termination shall take
effect at the beginning of the payroll period the first day of which is
nearest to the thirtieth day following the day on which such
notification of termination was (i) received by the employer, in the
event such termination is initiated by the employee, or (ii) sent to the
employee in the event such termination is initiated by the employer.
 4. The board of trustees of state university with respect to the state
university and the community colleges, and the board of trustees of the
city university with respect to employees of the city university of New
York, shall designate the insurer or insurers from which such annuity
contracts or in the case of custodial accounts, the company or companies
from whom regulated investment company shares shall be purchased. In
making such designation, due consideration shall be given to (a) the
nature and extent of the rights and benefits to be provided by contracts
for such special annuity or custodial account for employees and their
beneficiaries, (b) the relation of such rights and benefits to the
amount of contributions to be made for such contracts, (c) the
suitability of such rights and benefits to the needs and interests of
employees, and to the interests of employers in the employment and
retention of employees, and (d) the authority and ability of the
designated insurer or insurers or designated company or companies to
provide rights and benefits under such contracts or custodial accounts.
 5. The board of trustees of state university, with respect to the
state university and the community colleges, and the board of trustees
of the city of New York with respect to the city university, are hereby
authorized to provide for the administration of a program for the
purchase of such special annuities or establishment of custodial
accounts, and to perform or authorize the performance of such functions
as may be necessary for such purpose in accordance with this section.
 6. No agreement for reduction of salary as authorized by this section
or any termination thereof shall become effective until approved by and
filed with the comptroller. Upon such approval and filing the
comptroller shall reduce an employee's salary pursuant to said agreement
and pay an amount equal to the amount agreed upon for such salary
reduction as an employer contribution to the designated insurer or
insurers or designated custodian or custodians. Notwithstanding the
reductions of salary authorized by this article, (i) the amount of
employer and employee contributions otherwise required on behalf of an
employee electing the optional retirement program pursuant to articles
eight-B or one hundred twenty-five-A of this chapter, as the case may
be, shall continue to be made on the basis of the salary of such
employee without regard to such reduction, or (ii) in the event a member
of a public retirement system in this state agrees to a reduction of his
salary in accordance with this subdivision, such agreement shall not
cause him to lose any benefits under such public retirement system to
which he would be otherwise entitled had he not agreed to reduce his
salary for the purpose of having a special annuity purchased or
contributions to a custodial account made on his behalf, and any
required employer and employee contributions shall continue to be made
on the basis of the salary of such employee without regard to such
reduction. Any survivor's benefit payable pursuant to the civil service
law shall be based upon the salary of such employee without regard to
the reduction authorized by this article.
 7. Any payroll deduction, other than income tax withholdings as
required by law, which may be required or authorized pursuant to law,
contract, agreement, or any other instrument, the amount of which is
determined in relation to an employee's earnings, shall be based on the
salary of such employee without regard to reduction thereof pursuant to
any agreement authorized by this article.
 8. An employee agreeing to have his salary reduced in accordance with
this article shall be paid an amount equal to his salary less the amount
of the reduction pursuant to such agreement and any deductions
authorized by law, such amount to be paid in equal installments in
accordance with the payroll procedure otherwise appropriate.
 9. Payments for contracts providing for a special annuity or custodial
account shall be made by the comptroller to the designated insurer or
insurers or designated custodians out of moneys otherwise available in
accordance with law for salaries of the employees for whom such
annuities are purchased or contributions to such custodial accounts are
made.
 10. Nothing contained in this section shall impair or prevent any
agreements which have heretofore, or may hereafter be, entered into
between Alfred university and any employee of the state college of
ceramics under the management and control of Alfred university as the
representative of the state university trustees, or between Cornell
university and any employee of the state colleges of agriculture, home
economics, veterinary medicine or industrial and labor relations, the
state agricultural experiment station at Geneva, or any other
institution or agency under the management and control of Cornell
university as representative of the state university trustees for
reduction of the basic annual salary of any such employee as otherwise
fixed by or pursuant to law and purchase of a special annuity or
contribution to a custodial account on his behalf. In the case of any
such employee whose salary is paid directly to him by the state, the
comptroller is hereby authorized to reduce his salary in accordance with
any such agreement as certified on the appropriate payroll and upon the
audit and warrant of the comptroller the amount of any such reduction
shall be paid to Alfred university or Cornell university, as the case
may be, out of moneys appropriated and otherwise available for the
payment of such employee's salary, for the purchase by such university
of a special annuity or contribution to a custodial account for such
employee. No agreement for reduction of salary and purchase of a special
annuity or contribution to a custodial account by any employee to whom
this subdivision is applicable shall cause him to lose any benefits to
which he would otherwise be entitled by reason of membership in the New
York state and local employees' retirement system and any required
employer and employee contributions to such system shall continue to be
made on the basis of the salary of such employee without regard to such
reduction. In the case of any such employee electing the optional
retirement program the amount of employer and employee contributions
otherwise required shall continue to be made on the basis of the salary
of such employee without regard to such reduction. Any survivor's
benefit payable pursuant to the civil service law shall be based on the
salary of any employee to whom this subdivision is applicable without
regard to his agreement for reduction thereof. Subdivisions seven and
eight of this section shall apply to employees to whom this subdivision
is applicable who enter into agreements for reduction of salary and
purchase of special annuities or contribution to a custodial account.
 § 399-A. Reduction of salaries for tax-deferred annuities. The board
of higher education of a city having a population of one million or
more, in its discretion, may enter into a written agreement with any of
its employees to reduce the annual salary, as otherwise earned and
payable by law, of such employee for the purpose of providing a
tax-deferred annuity for such employee under the retirement system in
which such employee is currently a member; but only if such retirement
system specifically provides for such tax-deferred annuities, and
subject to any provisions and limitations applicable thereto. Any such
agreement may be terminated upon written notice by either such employee
or such board. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to
diminish or impair any benefits to which such employee or his legal
representatives or beneficiaries would be otherwise entitled had such
salary reduction agreement not been entered into in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
 ARTICLE 9
 SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND SITES
Section 401. Sites; designation and change.
 402. Sale of former schoolhouse or site.
 402-a. Procedures for closing a school building.
 403. Application of proceeds of sale.
 403-a. Leasing of school property.
 403-b. Leasing of school buildings and facilities.
 404. Acquisition of real property.
 405. Conveyance of property to public corporations.
 406. Vesting of title of lands in certain cases.
 407. Application to certain districts.
 407-a. Authorization for dormitory authority financing of
 capital facilities for special act school districts.
 407-b. Authorization for dormitory authority financing of
 capital facilities for state-supported schools for
 blind and deaf students.
 408. Plans and specifications of school buildings must be
 approved by commissioner of education.
 408-a. Plans and specifications for construction of new school
 buildings.
 408-b. Submitting plans and specifications of school buildings
 with local fire and law enforcement officials.
 409. School building regulations in relation to health and
 safety.
 409-a. Eye safety devices for certain students and teachers.
 409-b. Use of mercury vapor or metal halide lamps within school
 buildings.
 409-c. Athletic safety equipment.
 409-d. Comprehensive public school building safety program.
 409-e. Uniform code of public school buildings inspection,
 safety rating and monitoring.
 409-f. Electrically operated partition and door safety.
 409-g. Purchase and use of paradichlorobenzene deodorizers.
 409-h. Requirements for notification of pesticide applications.
 409-i. Procurement and use of environmentally-sensitive cleaning
 and maintenance products.
 409-j. Emergency alert notification system in public schools;
 cities with a population of one million or more.
 409-k. Pesticide alternatives.
 409-l. Posting child abuse hotline telephone number.
 409-m. Gender neutral single-occupancy bathroom facilities.
 409-n. Maximum temperatures in school buildings and facilities.
 410. Officials not to be interested in sales, leases or
 contracts.
 412. Condemnation of schoolhouse and erection of new
 schoolhouse in place thereof.
 413. Use of school buildings for examinations.
 414. Use of schoolhouse and grounds.
 415. No schoolhouse shall be built on town line.
 416. School taxes and school bonds.
 417. Allocation of moneys by regents for extraordinary relief
 to school districts.
 418. Purchase and display of flag.
 419. Display of flags in assembly rooms.
 419-a. Display of flags in classrooms.
 420. Rules and regulations.
 § 401. Sites; designation and change. 1. The designation of a site by
any school district meeting shall be by written resolution containing a
description thereof by metes and bounds, and such resolution must
receive the assent of a majority of the qualified voters present and
voting at said meeting, to be ascertained by taking and recording the
ayes and noes, or by ballot.
 2. A board of education in a union free school district containing a
population of five thousand or more may, without a vote of the qualified
voters of said district, designate sites or additions thereto for school
houses or for any other school purpose.
 3. No site of a schoolhouse shall be changed unless a majority of the
legal voters present and voting at a district meeting shall adopt a
resolution designating a new site and describing such site by metes and
bounds. Such resolution shall be adopted either by ballot or by taking
and recording the ayes and noes.
 § 402. Sale of former schoolhouse or site. 1. Whenever the site of a
schoolhouse shall have been changed, as herein provided, and after the
value of such property has been appraised by the local assessor or a
qualified private real property appraiser, the inhabitants of a district
entitled to vote, lawfully assembled at any district meeting, shall have
power, by a majority of the votes of those present and voting, to direct
the sale of the former site or lot, and the buildings thereon and
appurtenances or any part thereof, at such price and upon such terms as
they shall deem proper; and any deed duly executed by the trustees of
such district, or a majority of them, in pursuance of such direction,
shall be valid and effectual to pass all the estate or interest of such
school district in the premises.
 2. Whenever the education of all the children of any school district
shall have been provided outside the district for a period of two years,
or more, pursuant to the provisions of article forty-one of this
chapter, and the site of the schoolhouse or other grounds used for
school purposes shall have been unused for a like period, and after the
value of such property has been appraised by the local assessor or a
qualified private real property appraiser, the inhabitants of a district
entitled to vote, shall have the power, by a majority of the votes of
those present and voting, to determine that such site or grounds, and
buildings thereon, are of no further use to the district and to direct
the sale thereof, subject to the approval of the commissioner, at such
price and upon such terms as they shall deem proper; and any deed duly
executed by the trustees of such district, or a majority of them, in
pursuance of such direction, shall be valid and effective to pass all
the estate or interest of such school district in the premises. Prior to
the sale of school buildings and site or grounds, as provided by this
subdivision, the board of education or the trustees, having jurisdiction
thereof, may lease such school buildings and site or grounds, or any
part thereof, for residential purposes for periods not in excess of one
year. Rentals therefor shall be in such amounts and payable at such
times as the board shall determine.
 Prior to such sale such board of education or trustees may lease such
school buildings and site or grounds, or any part thereof, as provided
in section four hundred three-a of this chapter.
 3. When a credit shall be directed to be given upon such sale for the
consideration money, or any part thereof, the trustees are hereby
authorized to take in their corporate name such security by bond and
mortgage, or otherwise, for the payment thereof, as they shall deem
best, and shall hold the same as a corporation, and account therefor to
their successors in office and to the district, in the manner they are
now required by law to account for moneys received by them; and the
trustees of any such district and their successors may, in the name of
their office, sue for and recover the moneys due and unpaid upon any
security so taken by them or their predecessors.
 § 402-a. Procedures for closing a school building. 1. At least six
months in advance of a proposed school closing, the trustees or board of
education of a school district in which such building is located are
hereby authorized and recommended to establish an advisory committee on
school building utilization to investigate the educational impact of
such a closing. In a city with a population of one million or more, when
the city board is considering the closing of any school building, such
city board is hereby authorized and recommended to establish such
advisory committee on school building utilization for schools within its
jurisdiction and delegate to the appropriate community school board the
responsibility for appointing such a committee for any school within the
jurisdiction of such community school board. Each committee may be
comprised of but not limited to school district authorities, teaching
and nonteaching personnel, parents of pupils who attend public schools
in the district, other residents of the district, and representatives
from business, labor and local government. Such committee, if
established, shall prepare in writing an educational impact statement
which shall consider the criteria stated in subdivision two of this
section.
 2. The factors to be considered by the committee in the educational
impact statement shall include, but not be limited to:
 (a) The current and projected pupil enrollment, the prospective need
for such building, the ramifications of such closing upon the community,
initial costs and savings resulting from such closing, the potential
disposability of the closed school;
 (b) Possible use of such school building for other educational
programs or administrative services;
 (c) The effect of such closing on personnel needs, and on the costs of
instruction, administration, transportation and other support services;
 (d) Type, age and physical condition of such building, outstanding
indebtedness, maintenance and energy costs, recent or planned
improvements for the building, and such building's special features;
 (e) Ability of the other schools in the affected district to
accommodate pupils if such school building closes; and
 (f) Possible shared utilization of space in such school building
during or after regular school hours, as permitted in section four
hundred fourteen of this chapter.
 3. (a) Such educational impact statement shall be filed with the board
of education or in a city with a population of one million or more, with
the city board and/or the appropriate community school board. Such board
of education shall publish a notice of such proposed closing in at least
one newspaper of general circulation in the community once a week for
two weeks, and shall post a notice conspicuously in the affected school
district, which shall also be circulated to elected state and local
public officials who represent the affected communities.
 (b) After the statement has been filed and circulated, the board of
education, and in a city with a population of one million or more, the
city board or, where applicable, the community school board shall hold a
public hearing to evaluate the impact of the proposed closing on the
affected district. Such hearing shall be held within sixty days of the
issuance of the educational impact statement at times and places
convenient and accessible to the public. Notice of such hearing shall be
published by such board of education in at least one newspaper of
general circulation in the community once a week for two weeks, and
shall be posted conspicuously in the affected school district, and shall
also be circulated to elected state and local public officials who
represent the affected communities. At such hearing, factors enumerated
in subdivision two of this section shall be considered and alternatives
may be presented by interested parties.
 (c) The board of education shall render a decision at a regular or
special meeting, the results of which shall be recorded and made
available to the public. In a city having a population of one million or
more, the community school board shall submit written recommendations
for schools within its jurisdiction to the city board. The city board
shall render a decision for all proposed school building closings at a
regular or special meeting, the results of which shall be recorded and
made available to the public.
 § 403. Application of proceeds of sale. All moneys arising from any
sale made in pursuance of the last preceding section, shall be applied
to the expenses incurred in procuring a new site, and in removing or
erecting thereon a schoolhouse, and improving and furnishing such site
and building and their appurtenances, so far as such application shall
be necessary; and the surplus, if any, shall be devoted to the purchase
of school apparatus and the support of the school, as the voters of the
district at any meeting shall direct.
 § 403-a. Leasing of school property. 1. The board of education or
trustees of a school district are hereby authorized to adopt a
resolution providing that specific real property of such district is not
currently needed for school district purposes and that the leasing of
such real property is in the best interest of the school district. The
terms of such lease shall be subject to the following:
 (a) The rental payment shall not be less than the fair market rental
value as determined by the board of education.
 (b) The term of the lease shall not exceed ten years.
 (c) Upon termination, the lessee shall be obligated to restore the
real property to its original condition less ordinary depreciation,
provided that the school district may waive such requirement if the
tenant has made improvements to such real property which may not be
removed without causing substantial damage to such real property.
 2. Upon the consent of the commissioner, renewal of a lease may be
made for a period of up to ten years.
 3. The board of education or trustees of a school district are hereby
authorized to lease real property upon such terms and conditions as the
board of education or trustees may deem appropriate to any person,
partnership or corporation such board of education or trustees shall
have determined who will provide the most benefit to the school district
for periods not to exceed ten years. Such leases may also be renewed for
a period of up to ten years upon the consent of the commissioner.
 4. Upon termination of the lease, if the school district incurs
expenses in restoring the real property to school use, such expenses
shall not be included in computing any apportionment or state building
aid to such district.
 5. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (b) of subdivision one
hereof the board of education or trustees of a school district are
hereby authorized to enter into a lease agreement in accordance with the
provisions of this section for a period in excess of ten years subject,
however, to voter approval by referendum.
 6. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the board of education or
trustees of a school district from entering into a lease agreement which
provides for the cancellation of the same by such board or trustees
upon:
 (a) a substantial increase or decrease in pupil enrollment; or
 (b) a substantial change in the needs and requirements of a school
district with respect to facilities; or
 (c) any other change which substantially affects the needs or
requirements of a school district or the community in which it is
located.
 § 403-b. Leasing of school buildings and facilities. 1. The board of
education of any union free or central school district is hereby
authorized to enter into a lease with any other union free or central
school district providing for the use and occupancy by any such school
district of a school building, or a portion thereof, owned by such other
school district, provided such lessee school district is within a
reasonable distance, as determined by the commissioner, from the lessor
school district, subject to the conditions set forth in this
subdivision. The board of education of any union free or central school
district is hereby authorized to enter into a lease with any person,
partnership or corporation for use and occupancy of a building or
facility, or a portion thereof, owned by such person, partnership, or
corporation for use as a school facility provided that such building or
facility is located within the school district and subject to the
conditions set forth in this subdivision.
 a. No such lease shall be for a period of more than five years,
except that the term of such a lease may exceed five years if the
approval of the voters of the school district which will become the
lessee is obtained before the lease is executed. Notwithstanding any
other provision of this section to the contrary, the initial term of
such a lease, not including any renewals thereof, may not exceed the
period of probable usefulness that would be prescribed for such building
or facilities by the local finance law if the building or facility were
owned by a school district.
 b. The approval of the voters of the school district which will
become the lessee shall be obtained for any capital project to be
undertaken in a leased building or facility during the term of the
lease, provided however that any such capital project shall be subject
to the prior approval of the commissioner and shall only be approved
where the commissioner finds that the need for such project has been
established to the commissioner's satisfaction.
 c. Such lease shall not become effective until the commissioner shall
have approved the same. In approving such leases, the commissioner shall
determine: (i) that the leased facility meets all applicable standards
for the health, safety and comfort of occupants; (ii) that the leased
facility is educationally adequate as determined by the commissioner for
new construction or rehabilitation, and (iii) that district has a
current five-year facilities plan, or other long-range facilities plan
as applicable, that is consistent with the regulations of the
commissioner, and includes the proposed lease as well as all other
planned acquisitions, disposals and leasing of buildings or facilities
for school purposes during the period of the plan.
 d. Any such lease may be renewed, provided however that the approval
of the voters of the school district which will become the lessee shall
be obtained before such renewal is executed.
 e. To be eligible for aid pursuant to subdivision six of section
thirty-six hundred two of this chapter, such leased school or facility
shall meet requirements for access by individuals with disabilities to
both facilities and programs, as defined in regulations of the
commissioner, and the leased space shall be used to house programs for
pupils in grades prekindergarten through twelve, other than programs
funded pursuant to section forty-four hundred ten of this chapter, with
minimal associated administrative and support services space as approved
by the commissioner.
 f. The term "lease", as used in this section, shall not include a
lease with an option to purchase. Any lease entered pursuant to this
section shall include a provision that the lease shall be void and
unenforceable if entered into in violation of section eight hundred one
of the general municipal law or section four hundred ten of this
chapter.
 2. Any union free or central school district which shall have leased a
school building from another school district or from a person,
partnership or corporation pursuant to the provisions of this section is
hereby authorized to operate and conduct school in such building in all
respects as though such school building were owned by and located within
the boundaries of such school district. The average daily attendance of
pupils attending such school shall be included in the average daily
attendance of such lessee district as certified to the commissioner in
the report of the board of education.
 3. A school district providing transportation between a school
building leased from another district and the homes of the children
attending such school shall be entitled to transportation aid as though
such school were located within the lessee school district.
 § 404. Acquisition of real property. Real property may be acquired in
any school district and in any city having less than seventy thousand
inhabitants, for school purposes and for any other purpose for which
such property may be acquired as provided in this chapter, as follows:
 1. By gift, grant, devise or purchase.
 2. By involuntary acquisition, if an agreement cannot be made with the
owner for the purchase thereof. Such proceedings shall be instituted
and conducted by the trustee or board of education, in the name of the
district under the provisions of the eminent domain procedure law.
 3. This section does not permit the acquisition by condemnation of
less than the whole of a city or village lot with the erections and
improvements thereon.
 § 405. Conveyance of property to public corporations. In addition to
any other power conferred or possessed by virtue of any provisions of
this chapter, the board of education, trustee or trustees of any school
district may convey any school site or lot and the buildings thereon and
appurtenances or any part thereof, provided that title to any such
school property is in such board, trustee or trustees, and when no
longer needed, either without consideration or for such consideration
and upon terms and conditions as such board, trustee or trustees may
determine to a public corporation, as defined in the general
construction law, provided that such real property is to be used by such
corporation for the purposes of the corporation or for a public use. In
any school district, except a city school district in a city having a
population of one hundred twenty-five thousand inhabitants or more, such
sale and conveyance shall be submitted to the voters of the district for
approval at an annual or special district meeting in the same manner as
is now provided by law for the submission of propositions. A board of
cooperative educational services or a board of education, without
approval of the voters of the school district and upon such
consideration as the board may determine, may convey an easement or
right of way over school property for public utility services to any
municipality, municipal district, authority or public utility. In any
city of over one hundred twenty-five thousand population any sale or
conveyance shall be subject to approval by the local governing body of
such city.
 § 406. Vesting of title of lands in certain cases. Boards of
education in cities having less than seventy thousand inhabitants are
hereby clothed with all the powers of trustees, and the title to any and
all lands acquired in any city under the provisions of section four
hundred four of this chapter shall vest in the board of education
thereof, or such other corporate body as is by law vested with the title
to the school lands in such city. But nothing herein contained shall be
construed to limit or circumscribe the powers and duties heretofore
lodged in such board of education by law.
 § 407. Application to certain districts. The provision of section
four hundred four of this article shall apply to union free school
districts and to districts organized under special laws; and the
trustees of such districts and the boards of education organized under
special laws shall be and are hereby clothed with all the powers vested
in trustees in the three preceding sections.
 § 407-a. Authorization for dormitory authority financing of capital
facilities for special act school districts. 1. The legislature
declares that it is in the interest of the state, the school districts
and the children of the state to assure that special act school
districts educating children with handicapping conditions pursuant to
contracts with public school districts or social services districts have
sufficient facilities related to the education of such children. The
legislature finds that special act school districts providing such
education are in need of improved and additional facilities related to
the education of such children, and the means to finance the
construction of such improvements and additional facilities. The
legislature, therefore, enacts the following provisions.
 2. This section shall apply to special act school districts listed in
chapter five hundred sixty-six of the laws of nineteen hundred
sixty-seven, as amended, which contract with public school districts or
social services districts for the education of children with
handicapping conditions pursuant to article eighty-one or eighty-nine of
this chapter.
 3. Such special act school districts may enter into leases, subleases
or other agreements with the dormitory authority pursuant to title four
of article eight of the public authorities law for the financing of the
design, construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, improvement,
renovation or otherwise providing for, furnishing or equipping of
capital facilities which are educational facilities where the total
estimated cost of such facilities exceeds ten thousand dollars. The
plans and specifications of such capital facilities shall be subject to
the approval of the commissioner with respect to educational facilities.
Such capital facilities may be constructed only on land owned by such
special act school district or, if the land is leased, where the lease
is for a period at least equal to the appropriate period of probable
usefulness for such facilities as listed in section 11.00 of the local
finance law, or the length of the lease, sublease or other agreement
with the dormitory authority, whichever is longer.
 4. Each such special act school district shall, notwithstanding any
other provision of law, have the power to convey, lease, sublease or
otherwise make available to the dormitory authority without
consideration, title or any other rights in real property satisfactory
to the dormitory authority.
 5. In addition to providing for all other matters deemed necessary and
proper, such leases, subleases and other agreements shall (a) require
such special act school district to pay to the dormitory authority
annual rentals which shall include the amount required to pay the
principal of and interest on obligations of the dormitory authority
issued in relation to providing such facilities and all incidental
expenses of the dormitory authority incurred in relation thereto, (b)
require the special act school district to include an amount sufficient
to meet its obligations under the lease, sublease or other agreement in
each proposed budget submitted during the term of the lease, sublease or
other agreement and (c) include a provision that such agreement shall
not be effective unless and until it is approved by the commissioner
with respect to educational facilities.
 6. Title or other real property rights to the capital facilities
financed pursuant to this section shall remain with the dormitory
authority until the dormitory authority certifies to the commissioner
with respect to educational facilities and the comptroller the receipt
by it of the amount necessary to pay the total aggregate amount of
annual rentals to the dormitory authority. At such time, title or other
real property rights thereto shall be transferred by the dormitory
authority to such special act school district for use for educational
purposes. In order to avail itself of the provisions of this section,
each such special act school district must also agree to continue to
operate a program for the education of children pursuant to contract
with public school districts or social services districts, and such
lease, sublease or other agreement with the dormitory authority shall
provide that, if the special act school district shall cease to operate
such a program at any time during the term of the agreement, the state
will have the option to take title or other real property rights in
land, buildings, equipment and other properties which the special act
school district uses for its program upon, subject to appropriations,
payment by the state to the dormitory authority of the amount required
to pay the total aggregate amount of annual rentals to the dormitory
authority.
 7. On or before November fifteenth of each year, the dormitory
authority shall submit, and thereafter may resubmit, to the director of
the budget, the state comptroller, the chairman of the senate finance
committee and the chairman of the assembly ways and means committee a
report setting forth the amounts, if any, of all annual rentals
estimated to become due in the succeeding state fiscal year to the
dormitory authority from the special act school districts pursuant to
any leases, subleases or other agreements between the dormitory
authority and such special act school districts to provide educational
facilities for such special act school district. The state comptroller
shall pay over to the dormitory authority pursuant to appropriations
therefor solely from moneys available in the school capital facilities
financing reserve fund the amount set forth in such report at the times
and in the amounts set forth in the certificate filed with the
comptroller by the dormitory authority pursuant to subparagraph (iv) of
paragraph (b) of subdivision eight of this section.
 8. Method of payment; reserve fund. (a) Each special act school
district which elects to avail itself of the provisions of this section
shall have established with the state comptroller a school capital
facilities financing reserve account which shall be used to pay to the
dormitory authority the annual rentals payable to the dormitory
authority by special act school districts which have entered into
leases, subleases or other agreements with the dormitory authority to
provide educational facilities pursuant to the provisions of this
section. The dormitory authority shall identify to the state comptroller
and to the commissioner with respect to educational facilities, the
special act school districts with which it has leases, subleases or
other agreements pursuant to this section and shall annually certify the
amount of annual rentals required to be paid pursuant to such leases,
subleases or other agreements.
 (b) (i) There is hereby established in the custody of the state
comptroller a special fund to be known as the school capital facilities
financing reserve fund. Within such fund, there is hereby established a
special account for each special act school district which enters into a
lease, sublease or other agreement with the dormitory authority pursuant
to this section.
 (ii) Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law, such fund shall
consist of part of the tuition payments from public school districts and
social services districts as determined by the commissioner, and state
aid to special act school districts pursuant to subdivision six of
section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter as determined by the
commissioner. The comptroller shall maintain sufficient amounts in the
fund in order to pay when due the annual rentals due to the dormitory
authority from each such special act school district pursuant to any
lease, sublease or other agreement entered into pursuant to the
provisions of this section. The dormitory authority shall certify to
the state comptroller the dates and amount of such annual payments as
scheduled in its leases, subleases or other agreements with such special
act school districts. The commissioner with respect to educational
facilities shall certify the amount of payments due the fund from public
school districts and social services districts, respectively and such
public school districts and social services districts shall make such
payments to the fund at such times as shall be prescribed by the
commissioner with respect to educational facilities, subject to the
approval of the director of the budget, and after consultation with the
dormitory authority.
 (iii) Revenues in any special account in the school capital facilities
financing reserve fund may be commingled with any other moneys in such
fund. All deposits of such revenues with banks and trust companies shall
be secured by obligations of the United States or of the state of New
York or its political subdivisions. Such obligations shall have a
market value at least equal at all times to, but not less than, one
hundred five percent of the amount of such deposits. All banks and trust
companies are authorized to give security for such deposits. Any such
revenues in such fund may, in the discretion of the comptroller, be
invested in obligations of the United States or the state or obligations
the principal of and interest on which are guaranteed by the United
States or by the state. Any interest earned shall be credited to such
fund.
 (iv) Upon receipt by the comptroller of a certificate or certificates
from the dormitory authority that it requires a payment or payments from
the appropriate special account established for a special act school
district in order for such special act school district to comply with
any lease, sublease or other agreement pursuant to this section, each of
which certificates shall specify the required payment or payments and
the date when the payment or payments is required, the comptroller shall
pay from such special account on or before the specified date or within
thirty days after receipt of such certificate or certificates, whichever
is later, to the paying agent designated by the dormitory authority in
any such certificate, the amount or amounts so certified.
 (v) All payments of money from the school capital facilities financing
reserve fund shall be made on the audit and warrant of the state
comptroller.
 9. Notwithstanding the provisions of any contract pursuant to article
eighty-one or eighty-nine of this chapter between a social services
district or a public school district and a special act school district,
if the special act school district enters into a lease, sublease or
other agreement with the dormitory authority pursuant to this section,
payments due from the public school district or social services district
shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this section.
 10. All state and local officials are authorized and required to take
whatever actions are necessary to carry out the provisions of this
section and the provisions of any leases, subleases or other agreements
entered into pursuant to this section, including making the required
payments to the dormitory authority.
 11. Any contract undertaken or financed by the dormitory authority for
any construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement for any
special act school district shall comply with the provisions of sections
one hundred one and one hundred three of the general municipal law.
 12. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the
dormitory authority may execute leases, subleases, or other agreements
with special act school districts for financing of the design,
construction, rehabilitation, improvement, renovation, acquisition or
provision, furnishing or equipping of capital facilities; provided,
however, that during the two year period commencing July first, nineteen
hundred ninety-five, the amount of bonds inclusive of principal,
interest and issuance costs to be issued for each individual lease,
sublease, or other agreement shall not exceed fifteen million dollars
annually; and provided further that the total amount of such bonds for
all such leases, subleases, or agreements with special act school
districts during such period shall not exceed twenty million dollars.
On or before September first of each year, the commissioner shall submit
to the chairs of the assembly ways and means committee, the senate
finance committee and the director of the budget, a capital plan for
those projects expected to be bonded for special act school districts
pursuant to this section, within such twenty million dollar allowance.
After application of the principles of the capital assets preservation
program, such plan shall accord priority to health and safety
considerations and shall specify the name, location, estimated total
cost of the project at the time the project is to be bid, the
anticipated bid date and the anticipated completion date and may contain
any further recommendations the commissioner may deem appropriate.
 § 407-b. Authorization for dormitory authority financing of capital
facilities for state-supported schools for blind and deaf students. 1.
The legislature declares that it is in the interest of the state and the
children of the state to assure that state-supported schools for the
instruction of blind and deaf students and other children with
handicapping conditions pursuant to article eighty-five of this chapter
and chapter one thousand sixty of the laws of nineteen hundred
seventy-four have sufficient facilities related to the education of such
children. The legislature finds that state-supported schools for blind
and deaf students providing such education are in need of improved and
additional facilities related to the education of such children, and the
means to finance the construction of such improvements and additional
facilities. The legislature, therefore, enacts the following provisions.
 2. This section shall apply to state-supported schools for the
instruction of the blind and deaf students and children with other
handicapping conditions, subject to the appointment of the commissioner,
pursuant to article eighty-five of this chapter and chapter one thousand
sixty of the laws of nineteen hundred seventy-four.
 3. Such state-supported schools may enter into leases, subleases or
other agreements with the dormitory authority pursuant to title four of
article eight of the public authorities law for the financing of the
design, construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, improvement,
renovation or otherwise providing for furnishing or equipping of
educational or residential facilities where the total estimated cost of
such facilities exceeds ten thousand dollars. The plans and
specifications of such capital facilities shall be subject to approval
of the commissioner. Such educational or residential facilities may be
constructed only on land owned by such state-supported school or, if the
land is leased, where the lease is for a period at least equal to the
appropriate period of probable usefulness for such facilities as listed
in section 11.00 of the local finance law, or the length of the lease,
sublease or other agreement with the dormitory authority, whichever is
longer.
 4. Each state-supported school shall, notwithstanding any other
provision of law, have the power to convey, lease, sublease or otherwise
make available to the dormitory authority without consideration, title
or any other rights in real property satisfactory to the dormitory
authority.
 5. In addition to providing for all other matters deemed necessary and
proper, such leases, subleases and other agreements shall (a) require
the state-supported school to pay to the dormitory authority annual
rentals which shall include the amount required to pay the principal of
and interest on obligations of the dormitory authority issued in
relation to providing such facilities and all incidental expenses of the
dormitory authority incurred in relation thereto, (b) require the
state-supported school to include an amount sufficient to meet its
obligations under the lease, sublease or other agreement in each
proposed budget submitted during the term of the lease, sublease or
other agreement, and (c) a provision that such agreement shall not be
effective unless and until it is approved by the commissioner and the
director of the budget.
 6. Title or other real property rights, to the capital facilities
financed pursuant to this section shall remain with the dormitory
authority until the dormitory authority certifies to the commissioner
and the comptroller the receipt by it of the amount necessary to pay the
aggregate amount of annual rentals to the dormitory authority. At such
time, title or other real property rights thereto shall be transferred
by the dormitory authority to the state-supported school. In order to
avail itself of the provisions of this section, each state-supported
school must also agree to continue to operate a program for the
education of children pursuant to article eighty-five of this chapter
and chapter one thousand sixty of the laws of nineteen hundred
seventy-four, and any lease, sublease or other agreement with the
dormitory authority shall provide that, if the state-supported school
shall cease to operate at any time during the term of the agreement, the
school shall have the obligation to pay the total aggregate amount of
annual rentals to the dormitory authority. Upon a determination that the
state-supported school is unable to satisfy such obligations, the state
may take such title or other real property rights of the dormitory
authority in such land, buildings, equipment and other properties which
the state-supported school uses for its program upon payments, subject
to appropriations, by the state to the dormitory authority of the amount
required to pay the total aggregate amount of annual rentals to the
dormitory authority.
 7. On or before November fifteenth of each year, the dormitory
authority shall submit, and thereafter may resubmit, to the director of
the budget, the state comptroller, the chairman of the senate finance
committee and the chairman of the assembly ways and means committee a
report setting forth the amounts, if any, of all annual rentals
estimated to become due in the succeeding state fiscal year to the
dormitory authority from the state-supported schools pursuant to any
leases, subleases or other agreements between the dormitory authority
and state-supported schools to provide educational and residential
facilities for such state-supported schools.
 The state comptroller shall pay over to the dormitory authority
pursuant to appropriations therefor solely from moneys available in the
school capital facilities financing reserve fund the amount set forth in
such report at the times and in the amounts set forth in the certificate
filed with the comptroller by the dormitory authority pursuant to
subparagraph (iv) of paragraph (b) of subdivision eight of this section.
 8. Method of payment; reserve fund. (a) Each state-supported school
which elects to avail itself of the provisions of this section shall
have established with the state comptroller a school capital facilities
financing reserve account which shall be used to pay to the dormitory
authority the annual rentals payable to the dormitory authority by
state-supported schools which have entered into leases, subleases or
other agreements with the dormitory authority to provide educational or
residential facilities pursuant to this section or to reimburse the
state for expenditures from appropriations made pursuant to subdivision
seven of this section. The dormitory authority shall identify to the
state comptroller and to the commissioner the state-supported schools
with which it has leases, subleases or other agreements pursuant to this
section and shall annually certify the amount of annual rentals required
to be paid pursuant to such leases, subleases or other agreements.
 (b) (i) There is hereby established in the custody of the state
comptroller a special fund to be known as the school capital facilities
financing reserve fund. Within such fund, there is hereby established a
special account for each state-supported school which enters into a
lease, sublease or other agreement with the dormitory authority pursuant
to this section.
 (ii) Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law, such fund shall
consist of payments as made and determined by the commissioner. The
comptroller shall maintain sufficient amounts in the fund in order to
pay when due the annual rentals due to the dormitory authority from each
such state-supported school pursuant to any lease, sublease or other
agreement entered into pursuant to the provisions of this section. The
dormitory authority shall certify to the state comptroller the dates and
amounts of such payments as scheduled in its lease, subleases or other
agreements with such state-supported school. The commissioner shall
certify the amount of payments due the fund from state-supported
schools, and shall make such payments to the fund at such times as
appropriate, subject to the approval of the director of the budget, and
after consultation with the dormitory authority.
 (iii) Revenues in any special account in the school capital facilities
financing reserve fund may be commingled with any other moneys in such
fund. All deposits of such revenues shall be secured by obligations of
the United States or of the state of New York or its political
subdivisions. Such obligations shall have a market value not less than
one hundred five percent of the amount of such deposits. All the banks
and trust companies are authorized to give security for such deposits.
Any such revenues in such fund may, in the discretion of the
comptroller, be invested in obligations of the United States or the
state or obligations the principal of and interest on which are
guaranteed by the United States or by the state. Any interest earned
shall be credited to such fund.
 (iv) Upon receipt by the comptroller of a certificate or certificates
from the dormitory authority that it requires a payment or payments from
the appropriate special account established for a state-supported school
to comply with any lease, sublease or other agreement pursuant to this
section, each of which certificate shall specify the required payment or
payments and the date when the payment or payments is required, the
comptroller shall pay from such special account on or before the
specified date or within thirty days after receipt of such certificate
or certificates, whichever is later, to the paying agent designated by
the dormitory authority in any such certificate, the amount or amounts
so certified.
 (v) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this subdivision to the
extent that the state makes appropriations for the payment of annual
rentals to the dormitory authority required to be paid pursuant to the
terms of any lease, sublease or other agreement between the dormitory
authority and any state-supported schools and makes such payments,
moneys in the school capital facilities financing reserve fund shall be
used to reimburse the state for moneys so expended from such
appropriation.
 (vi) All payments of money from the school capital facilities
financing reserve fund shall be made on the audit and warrant of the
state comptroller.
 9. All state officials are authorized and required to take whatever
actions are necessary to carry out the provisions of this section and
any leases, subleases or other agreements entered into pursuant to this
section, including making the required payments to the dormitory
authority.
 10. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the
dormitory authority may execute leases, subleases, or other agreements
with state supported schools for financing of the design, construction,
rehabilitation, improvement, renovation, acquisition or provision,
furnishing or equipping of capital facilities; provided, however, that
during the two year period commencing July first, nineteen hundred
ninety-five, the amount of bonds inclusive of principal, interest and
issuance costs to be issued for each individual lease, sublease, or
other agreement shall not exceed fifteen million dollars annually;
provided further that the interest on such bonds may not be deferred
through additional borrowing; and provided finally that the total amount
of such bonds for all such leases, subleases, or agreements with state
supported schools during such period shall not exceed sixty-five million
dollars.
 On or before September first of each year, the commissioner shall
submit to the chairs of the assembly ways and means committee, the
senate finance committee and the director of the budget, a capital plan
for those projects expected to be bonded for state supported schools
pursuant to this section, within such sixty-five million dollar
allowance. After application of the principles of the capital assets
preservation program, such plan shall accord priority to health and
safety considerations and shall specify the name, location, estimated
total cost of the project at the time the project is to be bid, the
anticipated bid date and the anticipated completion date and may contain
any further recommendations the commissioner may deem appropriate.
 § 408. Plans and specifications of school buildings must be approved
by commissioner of education. 1. No schoolhouse shall hereafter be
erected, purchased, repaired, enlarged or remodeled nor shall the
advertisement for bids for the execution of the plans and specifications
for such schoolhouses be placed, in any school district except in a city
school district in a city having seventy thousand inhabitants or more,
at an expense which shall exceed one hundred thousand dollars, until the
plans and specifications shall have been submitted to the commissioner
of education and his approval endorsed thereon. Such plans and
specifications shall show in detail the ventilation, heating and
lighting of such buildings.
 In the case of a school district in a city having seventy thousand
inhabitants or more, all the provisions previously set forth in this
subdivision shall apply, except that the commissioner may waive the
requirement for submission of plans and specifications and substitute
therefor the requirement for submission of an outline of such plans and
specifications for his review. Such outline shall be in a form which he
may prescribe from time to time.
 In either case, the commissioner may, in his discretion, review plans
and specifications for projects estimated at an expense of less than one
hundred thousand dollars.
 In the case of a school district in a city having a million
inhabitants or more, all of the provisions previously set forth in this
subdivision shall apply, except that such school district shall only be
required to submit an outline of the plans and specifications to the
commissioner of education for his information where a schoolhouse is to
be erected in conjunction with the development of a project to be
developed under the provisions of article two or five of the private
housing finance law and where both the school and the project are to
have rights or interests in the same land, regardless of the similarity
or equality thereof, including fee interests, easements, space rights or
other rights or interests.
 2. The commissioner of education shall not approve the plans for the
erection or purchase of any school building or addition thereto or
remodeling thereof unless the same shall provide for heating,
ventilation, lighting, sanitation, storm drainage and health, fire and
accident protection adequate to maintain healthful, safe and comfortable
conditions therein and unless the county superintendent of highways or
commissioner of public works has been advised of the location of all
temporary and permanent entrances and exits upon all public highways and
the storm drainage plan which is to be used.
 3. The commissioner shall approve the plans and specifications,
heretofore or hereafter submitted pursuant to this section, for the
erection or purchase of any school building or addition thereto or
remodeling thereof on the site or sites selected therefor pursuant to
this chapter, if such plans conform to the requirements and provisions
of this chapter and the regulations of the commissioner adopted pursuant
to this chapter in all other respects; provided, however, that the
commissioner of education shall not approve the plans for the erection
or purchase of any school building or addition thereto unless the site
has been selected with reasonable consideration of the following
factors; its place in a comprehensive, long-term school building
program; area required for outdoor educational activities; educational
adaptability, environment, accessibility; soil conditions; initial and
ultimate cost. In developing such plans and specifications, school
districts are encouraged to review the energy conservation and saving
best practices available from the department and the New York state
energy research and development authority.
 * 3-a. (a) The commissioner shall not approve the plans for the
erection of any new schoolhouse within five hundred feet of a
controlled-access highway as defined in this subdivision unless the
commissioner determines that (i) space is so limited that there is no
other appropriate site to erect such schoolhouse; (ii) plans for such
schoolhouse include adequate engineering controls to address air
quality; and (iii) the school district has demonstrated that other
potential sites would pose equal or greater hazards to health and
safety.
 (b) For purposes of this subdivision, the construction of a new
schoolhouse upon the site of an existing schoolhouse, or the
construction of an addition or annex constructed to serve an existing
schoolhouse, shall not be considered erection of a new schoolhouse.
 (c) For purposes of this subdivision, a "controlled-access highway"
shall mean: (i) a controlled-access highway as defined by section one
hundred nine of the vehicle and traffic law under the jurisdiction of
the commissioner of transportation which has been functionally
classified by the department of transportation as principal arterial -
interstate or principal arterial - other freeway/expressway on official
functional classification maps approved by the federal highway
administration pursuant to part 470.105 of title 23 of the code of
federal regulations, as amended from time to time; and (ii) a divided
highway under the jurisdiction of the New York state thruway authority
for mixed traffic with access limited as the authority may determine and
generally with grade separations at intersections.
 (d) Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to create a private
right of action to enforce the terms of this subdivision.
 * NB Effective December 21, 2029
 4. No funds voted by a district meeting or other competent authority
in any school district to which the provisions of subdivision one of
this section are applicable, exceeding the amounts specified in such
subdivision, shall be expended by the trustees or board of education
until the commissioner of education shall certify that the plans and
specifications for the same comply with the provisions of this section.
 5. In a city having a population of one million or more, all
designing, draughting and inspecting necessary in connection with the
construction, additions to, alterations and maintenance of schoolhouses
shall be performed by a bureau established and maintained for this
purpose under the board of education. The work of this bureau shall be
performed by civil service employees in the classified civil service
under the direction of the superintendent of school buildings, design
and construction, except that repairs, betterment and maintenance of
heating and ventilating plants and equipment, elevators and mechanical
equipment shall remain under the direction of the superintendent of
plant operation and maintenance. In a special case upon approval of the
board of estimate, such designing, draughting or inspecting may be
otherwise performed.
 6. The commissioner may promulgate regulations relating to the
purchase of existing school buildings. Such regulations shall provide
for an appraisal of such buildings as school buildings and the land on
which they are situated as school sites by the commissioner of taxation
and finance, such estimates of the cost of renovation and construction
as may be necessary and limitations on the cost of acquisition and
renovation, in taking into consideration the age and condition of such
existing buildings, in relation to the estimated cost of constructing a
new building containing comparable facilities. Such regulations may also
require the prior approval of the commissioner of any renovations
proposed to be made to such existing school buildings.
 7. The commissioner shall issue guidance informing all school
districts of the manner in which building aid may be utilized to support
district-operated universal prekindergarten programs pursuant to
sections thirty-six hundred two-e and thirty-six hundred two-ee of this
chapter.
 § 408-a. Plans and specifications for construction of new school
buildings. 1. The commissioner of general services, after consultation
with the commissioner of education and subject to the approval of the
director of the budget, shall promptly prepare or acquire as many master
sets of complete plans and specifications for the construction of new
school buildings and appurtenant facilities as shall be sufficient to
provide at least six different master sets each for elementary, junior
high and high schools, based on the number of pupils to be accommodated
therein. Such plans and specifications shall be prepared so as to
provide adequate classrooms and other necessary space and facilities at
the lowest cost consistent with sound construction principles and
practices, and the attainment of educational objectives, and shall
provide for heating, ventilation, lighting, sanitation and health, fire
and accident protection adequate to maintain healthful, safe, and
comfortable conditions therein. Such plans and specifications shall be
so prepared that any possible future addition to any such school
building may be economically effectuated. In addition, the commissioner
of general services shall, as often as he deems advisable but at least
annually, review such master sets and, after consultation with the
commissioner of education, and subject to approval of the director of
the budget, may revise or cancel any of such sets or prepare new sets.
 2. The commissioner shall cause duplicates of such master plans and
specifications to be made, and he shall furnish the same to any school
district making a request therefor for a reasonable charge sufficient to
cover the cost of reproducing such plans and specifications.
 3. Plans and specifications prepared and furnished pursuant to the
provisions of this section may be adopted and used in any school
district as the plans and specifications for the construction of any new
school building or appurtenant facility hereafter to be erected.
 4. Nothing herein contained shall preclude any school district from
retaining an architect and/or engineer in connection with the use of
such master plans and specifications.
 § 408-b. Submitting plans and specifications of school buildings with
local fire and law enforcement officials. The appropriate authorities
for each public and private school building in the state shall submit
the most current plans and specifications for each school building under
their responsibility to the fire and law enforcement officials in the
city, towns or village where the school building is located. The
commissioner may adopt such rules and regulations as are necessary and
appropriate to implement the provisions of this section to facilitate
its purpose of providing quick and easy access to and passage through
school buildings should it be necessary for fire or law enforcement
reasons. Such regulations shall authorize submittal of simplified plans
showing access and passage ways for older schools where original plans
or blueprints may not exist or where the school authorities can justify
a claim of hardship in meeting the requirements of this section.
 § 409. School building regulations in relation to health and safety.
1. All school buildings of common, union free, central, central high
school and city school districts other than city school districts of
cities having one hundred twenty-five thousand inhabitants or more and
boards of cooperative educational services shall comply with such
regulations as the commissioner shall adopt from time to time for the
purpose of insuring the health and safety of pupils and staff in
relation to proper heating, lighting, ventilation, sanitation and
health, fire and accident protection.
 2. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law, rule or
regulation, tobacco use shall not be permitted and no person shall use
tobacco on school grounds. "School grounds" means any building,
structure and surrounding outdoor grounds, including entrances or exits,
contained within a public or private pre-school, nursery school,
elementary or secondary school's legally defined property boundaries as
registered in a county clerk's office.
 § 409-a. Eye safety devices for certain students and teachers. 1. The
board of education, trustees, principal or other person in charge of
every public or private school or educational institution within the
state, wherein shops or laboratories are conducted providing
instructional or experimental programs involving:
 a. Hot solids, liquids or molten metals; or
 b. Milling, sawing, turning, shaping, cutting, or stamping of any
solid materials; or
 c. Heat treatment, tempering, or kiln firing of any metal or other
materials; or
 d. Gas or electric arc welding; or
 e. Repair or servicing of any vehicle; or
 f. Caustic or explosive chemicals or materials, shall arrange for and
require, in accordance with regulations of the commissioner, that every
student and teacher participating in any such program wear eye safety
devices at the times and under the conditions prescribed in such
regulations.
 2. The commissioner shall by regulation prescribe the safety standards
to be met before the use of any eye safety device may be required and
shall include in such regulations requirements relating to the times and
conditions when and under which such eye safety devices shall be worn.
 3. Visitors to such shops or laboratories shall be furnished with and
required to wear such eye safety devices at the times and under the
conditions prescribed in such regulations while in such shops or
laboratories.
 § 409-b. Use of mercury vapor or metal halide lamps within school
buildings. 1. Every new or replacement mercury vapor or metal halide
lamp which is used within any school building in the state, for the
purpose of providing illumination, shall be of the safety type or
variety which self-extinguishes upon the breaking, cracking or removal
of the outer shield protecting the lamp or if such self-extinguishing
variety is not available, each such lamp or its fixture shall be
equipped with a shield adequate to protect against and to absorb
ultraviolet radiation if the lamp were to break or become defective
within the shielded fixture.
 2. Jurisdiction is hereby conferred on the commissioner in order to
provide for the enforcement of this section through rules and
regulations which the commissioner shall establish.
 § 409-c. Athletic safety equipment. The board of education or
trustees of every school district and the principal or other person in
charge of every nonpublic elementary or secondary school within the
state shall arrange for and require that batboys or batgirls
participating in baseball or softball competition conducted as an
activity of such school district or nonpublic school shall wear
protective headgear at all times when a game is in play and such batboys
or batgirls are on the playing field.
 § 409-d. Comprehensive public school building safety program. 1.
Program establishment. The commissioner is authorized and directed to
establish, develop and monitor a comprehensive public school building
safety program which shall include a uniform inspection, safety rating
and monitoring system. Such program shall require the inspections of all
public school buildings throughout the state (i) at least once between
the period commencing with the first day of January, two thousand twenty
and ending with the thirty-first day of December, two thousand twenty
and (ii) at least once between the period commencing with the first day
of January, two thousand twenty-two and ending with the thirty-first day
of December, two thousand twenty-two, provided that such inspections
shall exclude public school buildings in a school district required to
conduct building condition surveys between January first, two thousand
twenty and the end of such period in accordance with regulations of the
commissioner adopted pursuant to subparagraph one-a of paragraph c of
subdivision four of section thirty-six hundred forty-one of this
chapter, and provided further that such exclusion shall not apply in the
case of a school district which has not completed the building condition
surveys so required and submitted the same to the department. Under such
program, the commissioner may require inspections of public school
buildings as deemed necessary to maintain the safety of school buildings
and the welfare of the occupants, and such program shall establish a
safety rating system for such school buildings to assess the need for
maintenance, repairs, rehabilitation, reconstruction, construction and
other improvements related to the structural integrity and overall
safety of public school buildings including but not limited to building
systems related to electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilation, and air
conditioning, sanitation and health, fire and accident protection; and
require that such ratings be used for the purpose of developing a
buildings condition survey as required pursuant to subdivision four of
section thirty-six hundred forty-one of this chapter and a five year
facilities plan as required pursuant to clause (i) of subparagraph two
of paragraph b of subdivision six of section thirty-six hundred two of
this chapter.
 2. Commissioner's authorization. In implementing the program, the
commissioner is authorized to:
 (a) require the inspection of every public school building and
prescribe qualifications of persons who may perform or supervise such
inspections in accordance with the provisions of this section.
 (b) establish a safety rating system keyed to the structural integrity
and overall safety of the building. Such system shall rate every major
building system contained within a building and where practicable
identify critical maintenance and include such information in the plan
required in subdivision ten of section thirty-six hundred forty-one of
this chapter;
 (c) require each school district to develop a buildings condition
survey;
 (d) require each school district to develop a five year capital
facilities plan;
 (e) establish a process for monitoring all school buildings; and
 (f) provide for waivers of the requirements of this section and/or
section four hundred nine-e of this article for districts whose school
building safety inspection procedures in existence on the effective date
of this section are in substantial compliance with such requirements.
 3. Notification. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the
contrary, the commissioner shall be authorized to notify in writing any
school district or board of cooperative educational services the
existence of a hazardous condition found in any school building within
the school district that is in violation of applicable building, health,
or safety codes or regulations that may threaten the health and/or
safety of students or staffs. Such notice must be acknowledged and
responded to within five business days or less. Such notice shall be
delivered to the superintendent of the school district or the district
superintendent of the board of cooperative educational services. In the
case of a city school district in a city having a population of one
million or more inhabitants such notice shall be delivered to the
chancellor of the city district.
 § 409-e. Uniform code of public school buildings inspection, safety
rating and monitoring. 1. Code development, rules and regulations. The
commissioner shall, after at least one public hearing, promulgate a
uniform code of public school building inspections, safety rating and
monitoring, hereinafter referred to as the "code", by rule and
regulation. The commissioner shall periodically review the code to
ensure that it effectuates the purposes of this section, provided
however nothing herein shall prevent a school district from enacting
stricter local codes so long as such code is consistent with the state
code and provided further nothing herein shall affect a separate
requirement to inspect and maintain school buildings pursuant to any
other state or local law or regulation.
 2. Periodic inspections. (a) The commissioner may require inspections
of public school buildings as deemed necessary to maintain the safety of
school buildings and the welfare of their occupants.
 (b) As provided in paragraph (a) of this subdivision such inspections
shall:
 (i) be conducted in a manner and by persons meeting the
qualifications, as established in the code;
 (ii) result in a safety rating of every building as required pursuant
to this article; and
 (iii) be reported on forms prescribed by the commissioner, subscribed
by the person or persons who conducted the inspection and filed with the
commissioner within sixty days of the completion of the inspection.
 (c) In the case of a city school district in a city having a
population of one million or more inhabitants, each school shall be
inspected periodically by the department of buildings pursuant to
section 27-211 of the New York city building code, or any successor or
substantially similar section.
 3. Safety rating system. The commissioner shall develop pursuant to
regulations a safety rating system to be used by all school districts
and boards of cooperative educational services keyed to the structural
integrity and overall safety of the building and shall be developed
using data obtained from the building's annual inspection as required by
this article. Such safety rating system shall identify and assess the
condition of every major system component of every school building
including interior structures; building systems such as heating,
ventilation, plumbing and electrical systems; exterior structures
including but not limited to roofs, masonry, stairs, and chimneys; and
develop a system which rates each building component based on at least
the following factors: overall safety; structural integrity; probable
useful life; need for repair or replacement; and maintenance. Such
safety rating shall include mechanisms which facilitate more frequent
inspections and repairs as determined necessary to protect the welfare
and safety of students and staff residing in such school buildings. This
information shall be used for purposes of developing a buildings
condition survey as required pursuant to section thirty-six hundred
forty-one of this chapter and a five year facilities plan as required
pursuant to clause (i) of subparagraph two of paragraph (b) of
subdivision six of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter.
 4. Monitoring system. The commissioner shall develop pursuant to
regulations a monitoring system to oversee the safety of public school
buildings. Such system shall include but not be limited to the following
components:
 (a) a process that identifies and provides a comprehensive maintenance
plan for all major building systems for each school building to ensure
that all buildings are maintained in a state of good repair; and
 (b) establishment of uniform safety standards governing all
construction projects. The safety standards shall be designed to promote
the safety of pupils, staff and other building occupants during periods
of maintenance, repair, reconstruction, construction or any other
construction-related activity.
 (c) establishment of a process to monitor the condition of public
school buildings to provide they are safe and maintained in a state of
good repair.
 § 409-f. Electrically operated partition and door safety. The board of
education, trustees, principal or other person in charge of every public
or private school or educational institution within the state, wherein
classrooms or other facilities used by students are found to have
electrically operated partitions, doors or room dividers, shall arrange
for, and require, that:
 1. Appropriate and conspicuous notice regarding the safe and proper
operation and supervision of the electrical device operating such
partition, door or room divider is posted in the immediate vicinity of
the operating mechanism;
 2. There is established a procedure for the notification of all school
employees and all other persons who regularly make use of the area where
such device is located of the safe and proper procedure for the
operation of the mechanism and of the applicable penalties for disabling
safety equipment required pursuant to this section; and
 3. Every electrically operated partition or room divider shall be
equipped with safety devices which, subject to standards established in
rules and regulations promulgated by the commissioner, stop the forward
motion of the partition or room divider and stop the stacking motion of
the partition or room divider when a body passes between the leading
panel of such partition or divider and a wall, or when a body is present
in the stacking area of such partition or divider.
 Any person who disables or directs another person to disable any
safety equipment required pursuant to this section shall be guilty of a
violation punishable by not more than fifteen days imprisonment, or a
fine not to exceed one hundred dollars, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
 § 409-g. Purchase and use of paradichlorobenzene deodorizers. 1. No
board of education or trustees, principal or other person in charge of
any public or private, elementary or secondary school shall authorize
the purchase of or purchase any urinal or toilet deodorizer containing
paradichlorobenzene.
 2. No public or private, elementary or secondary school shall use or
authorize the use of any toilet or urinal deodorizer containing
paradichlorobenzene in any toilet or urinal in any school building or
any other facility under the control of such school.
 § 409-h. Requirements for notification of pesticide applications. 1.
For purposes of this section the following terms shall have the meanings
set forth below:
 (a) "School" shall mean any public school district or private or
parochial school or board of cooperative educational services.
 (b) "Pesticide" shall have the same meaning as in subdivision
thirty-five of section 33-0101 of the environmental conservation law.
 (c) "Facility" means any school building used for instructional
purposes and its surrounding grounds, sites and other grounds to be used
for playgrounds, athletics and other instructional purposes, and any
administrative offices.
 (d) "Written notification" shall mean notice in writing that is:
provided directly to the student or staff; or delivered to a receptacle
designated for that student or staff; or mailed to the student's or
staff's last known address; or delivered by any other reasonable methods
authorized by the commissioner.
 (e) "School year" shall mean the period commencing on the first day of
regular instruction and shall end on the last day of session.
 (f) "Relevant facility" shall mean any facility where the staff person
receiving notification regularly works or where a child of the person in
parental relation receiving notification regularly receives instruction.
 2. Schools shall establish a pesticide notification procedure to
provide information on pesticide applications at school facilities.
Schools shall provide written notification of pesticide applications at
any relevant facility to staff and persons in parental relation
according to the following provisions:
 (a) The school shall provide written notification to all staff and
persons in parental relation at the beginning of each school year.
Provided however, that if a child enrolls after the beginning of the
school year, notification shall be provided within one week of such
enrollment. The notification provided at the beginning of the school
year shall include at a minimum the following information:
 (i) a statement that pesticide products may be used periodically
throughout the school year;
 (ii) a statement that schools are required to maintain a list of staff
and persons in parental relation who wish to receive forty-eight hour
prior written notification of pesticide applications at relevant
facilities, and instructions on how to register with the school to be on
such list for notification; and
 (iii) the name of a school representative and contact number to obtain
further information.
 (b) Within ten days of the end of the school year and within two
school days of the end of winter recess and spring recess, the school
shall provide written notification to all staff and persons in parental
relation listing the date, location and product used, for each
application which required prior notification and each emergency
application made, at relevant facilities, during the period of time
since the previous notice. Such notification shall also include a
statement that schools are required to maintain a list of staff and
persons in parental relation who wish to receive forty-eight hour prior
written notification of pesticide applications and instructions on how
to register with the school to be on such list for prior notification;
how to obtain further information about the products being applied,
including any warnings that appear on the label of the pesticides that
are pertinent to the protection of humans, animals or the environment;
and the name of a school representative and contact number for
additional information.
 (c) Each school shall establish and maintain a list of staff and
persons in parental relation requesting written notification forty-eight
hours in advance of pesticide applications at relevant facilities.
Schools shall add any staff or person in parental relation to such list
upon request.
 (d) Not less than forty-eight hours prior to the application of a
pesticide at a facility, a school shall provide to those on the list
relevant to such facility, written notification which shall include, at
a minimum the following information:
 (i) the specific date and location of the application at the relevant
facility. In case of outdoor applications the notice must provide a
specific date, and may include two alternative dates in case the
application cannot be made due to weather conditions;
 (ii) the product name and pesticide registration number assigned by
the United States Environmental Protection Agency;
 (iii) the following statements: "This notice is to inform you of a
pending pesticide application to a school facility. You may wish to
discuss with the designated school representative what precautions are
being taken to protect your child from exposure to these pesticides.
Further information about the product(s) being applied, including any
warnings that appear on the label of the pesticide(s) that are pertinent
to the protection of humans, animals or the environment, can be obtained
by calling the National Pesticide Telecommunications Network information
phone number 1-800-858-7378 or the New York State Department of Health
Center for Environmental Health Info line at 1-800-458-1158."; and
 (iv) the name of a school representative and contact number for
additional information.
 (e) For purposes of this section the following pesticide applications
shall not be subject to prior notification requirements:
 (i) the application of anti-microbial pesticides and anti-microbial
products as defined by FIFRA in 7 U.S.C. § 136 (mm) and 136q (h)(2);
 (ii) the use of an aerosol product with a directed spray, in
containers of eighteen fluid ounces, or less, when used to protect
individuals from an imminent threat from stinging and biting insects
including venomous spiders, bees, wasps, and hornets. This section shall
not exempt from notification the use of any fogger product or aerosol
product that discharges to a wide area;
 (iii) any application where the school facility remains unoccupied for
a continuous seventy-two hour period following the application of the
pesticide;
 (iv) nonvolatile rodenticides in tamper resistant bait stations or in
areas inaccessible to children;
 (v) silica gels and other nonvolatile ready-to-use, paste, foam or gel
formulations of insecticides in areas inaccessible to children;
 (vi) nonvolatile insecticidal baits in tamper resistant bait stations
or in areas inaccessible to children;
 (vii) application of a pesticide classified by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency as an exempt material under Section 40
CFR Part 152.25;
 (viii) boric acid and disodium octaborate tetrahydrate;
 (ix) the application of a pesticide which the United States
Environmental Protection Agency has determined satisfies its reduced
risk criteria, including a biopesticide; or
 (x) any emergency application of a pesticide when necessary to protect
against an imminent threat to human health, provided however, that prior
to any such emergency application, the person making such application
shall make a good faith effort to supply the written notice required
pursuant to this section. Upon making such an emergency application, the
person making such application shall notify the commissioner of the
department of health, using a form developed by the commissioner for
such purposes that shall include minimally the name of the person making
the application, the pesticide business registration number or certified
applicator number of the person making such application, the location
and date of such application, the product name and USEPA registration
number of the pesticide applied and the reason for such application. The
commissioner shall review such form to ensure that the circumstance did
warrant such emergency application. Such forms shall be kept on file at
the department for three years from the date of application and shall be
available to any individual upon request.
 3. The commissioner is hereby charged with ensuring the compliance of
schools with the requirements of this section, and shall establish a
procedure for parents to notify the state of any school's failure to
comply with the requirements of this section. Whenever it shall have
been demonstrated to the satisfaction of the commissioner that a school
district has failed to adopt a procedure for notification, or to
faithfully and completely implement this section, the commissioner may,
on thirty days notice to the district, withhold from the district monies
to be paid to such district for the current school year pursuant to
section thirty-six hundred nine-a of this chapter, exclusive of monies
to be paid in respect of obligations to the retirement systems for the
school and district staff and pursuant to collective bargaining
agreements. Where it has been demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
commissioner that a private or parochial school has failed to adopt a
procedure for notification, or to faithfully and completely implement
this section, the commissioner may, on thirty days notice to such
school, withhold from the school state aid monies to be paid to such
school for the current school year pursuant to chapter five hundred
seven of the laws of nineteen hundred seventy-four, as amended by
chapter nine hundred three of the laws of nineteen hundred eighty-four.
Prior to such withholding, the commissioner shall provide the school an
opportunity to present evidence of extenuating circumstances; when
combined with evidence that the school shall promptly comply within
short time frames that shall be established by the commissioner as part
of an agreement between the school and the commissioner, the
commissioner may temporarily stay the withholding of such funds pending
implementation of such agreement. If the school is in full compliance
with this section, the commissioner shall abate the withholding in its
entirety.
 4. No school or employee of a school shall be held civilly or
criminally liable for any failure to comply with the requirements of
this section, unless such failure constitutes negligence, gross
negligence, or intentional misconduct. Nothing contained herein shall be
construed as limiting any legal cause of action or remedy at law, in
statute or in equity that existed prior to the effective date of this
section.
 § 409-i. Procurement and use of environmentally-sensitive cleaning and
maintenance products. 1. For the purpose of this section the following
terms shall mean:
 (a) "Elementary or secondary school" means a facility used for
instruction of elementary or secondary students by: (i) any school
district, including a special act school district and a city school
district in a city having a population of one hundred twenty-five
thousand inhabitants or more, (ii) a board of cooperative educational
services, (iii) a charter school, (iv) an approved private school for
the education of students with disabilities, (v) a state-supported
school for the deaf or blind operated pursuant to article eighty-five of
this chapter, and (vi) any other private or parochial elementary or
secondary school.
 (b) "Environmentally-sensitive cleaning and maintenance products"
means those cleaning and maintenance products that minimize adverse
impacts on children's health and the environment.
 (c) "Facility" means any school building or facility used for
instructional purposes and the surrounding grounds or other sites used
for playgrounds, athletics or other instructional purposes.
 2. The commissioner of general services, in consultation with the
commissioner and the commissioners of environmental conservation, health
and labor, shall establish and from time to time amend guidelines and
specifications for environmentally-sensitive cleaning and maintenance
products for use in elementary and secondary school facilities. For the
purpose of developing appropriate criteria for such guidelines and
specifications, such commissioners shall review and evaluate existing
research regarding environmentally-sensitive cleaning and maintenance
products, including but not limited to, research and guidance issued by
the United States environmental protection agency and the office of the
federal environmental executive. In developing such guidelines, the
commissioner of general services shall provide public notice and an
opportunity to comment. Such guidelines shall be followed by elementary
and secondary schools to identify and procure environmentally-sensitive
cleaning and maintenance products which are available in the form,
function and utility generally used by elementary and secondary schools
in their facilities.
 3. The commissioner of general services shall disseminate to all
elementary and secondary schools guidelines and specifications for the
purchase and use of environmentally-sensitive cleaning and maintenance
products in elementary and secondary schools for use in their
facilities. The commissioner of general services shall also prepare and
disseminate to all elementary and secondary schools a sample list of
such environmentally-sensitive cleaning and maintenance products that
meet these guidelines or specifications. The commissioner of general
services shall provide assistance and guidance to elementary and
secondary schools in carrying out the requirements of this section.
Elementary and secondary schools shall follow such guidelines,
specifications and sample list when purchasing cleaning and maintenance
products for use in their facilities.
 4. Elementary and secondary schools shall notify their personnel of
the availability of such guidelines, specifications and sample list.
 5. On or before June first, two thousand seven, the department, in
consultation with the office of general services, shall issue a report
providing an analysis of the impact of such guidelines and
specifications on the purchasing, procurement and use of
environmentally-sensitive cleaning and maintenance products by
elementary and secondary schools. Nothing in this section shall preclude
an elementary or secondary school from depleting existing cleaning and
maintenance supply stores purchased prior to the effective date of this
section.
 § 409-j. Emergency alert notification system in public schools; cities
with a population of one million or more. On or before January first,
two thousand ten, a city school district located in a city of one
million or more inhabitants shall, pursuant to rules and regulations
promulgated by the chancellor of such city school district and
consistent with section twenty-eight hundred one-a of this chapter,
implement an emergency alert notification system to convey timely
information concerning emergency incidents or occurrences, as defined by
such chancellor, that pose an imminent threat to the health or safety of
a substantial number of students, faculty and staff at a particular
educational facility or program. Such emergency alert notification
system shall employ a variety of communication methods including the
automated delivery of text messages, phone calls and/or electronic mail
and shall notify and advise parents or persons in parental relation,
faculty, staff, and elected representatives, who volunteer to receive
emergency alert notifications.
 § 409-k. Pesticide alternatives. 1. For purposes of this section the
following terms shall have the meanings set forth below:
 (a) "School" shall mean any public school district or private or
parochial school or board of cooperative educational services.
 (b) "Pesticide" shall have the same meaning as set forth in
subdivision thirty-five of section 33-0101 of the environmental
conservation law, provided however that it shall not include:
 (i) the application of anti-microbial pesticides and anti-microbial
products as defined by FIFRA in 7 U.S.C. Section 136 (mm) and 136 q (h)
(2);
 (ii) the use of an aerosol product with a directed spray, in
containers of eighteen fluid ounces or less, when used to protect
individuals from an imminent threat from stinging and biting insects,
including venomous spiders, bees, wasps and hornets;
 (iii) the use of non-volatile insect or rodent bait in a tamper
resistant container;
 (iv) the application of a pesticide classified by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency as an exempt material under 40 CFR Part
152.25;
 (v) the use of boric acid and disodium octaborate tetrahydrate; or
 (vi) the use of horticultural soap and oils that do not contain
synthetic pesticides or synergists.
 2. No school shall apply pesticide to any playgrounds, turf, athletic
or playing fields, except that an emergency application of a pesticide
may be made as determined by the county health department or for a
county not having a health department such authority as the county
legislature shall designate, the commissioner of health or his or her
designee, the commissioner of environmental conservation or his or her
designee, or, in the case of a public school, the school board.
 § 409-l. Posting child abuse hotline telephone number. 1. Every public
school including charter schools shall post in English and in Spanish
the toll-free telephone number operated by the office of children and
family services to receive reports of child abuse or neglect established
under section four hundred twenty-two of the social services law and
directions for accessing the office of children and family services
website.
 2. The commissioner shall adopt rules and regulations relating to the
posting required by subdivision one of this section.
 § 409-m. Gender neutral single-occupancy bathroom facilities. The
board of education or trustees of every school district or, in the case
of the city school district of New York, the chancellor, and every board
of cooperative educational services, charter school and nonpublic school
within the state shall develop policies and procedures requiring that
all single-occupancy bathroom facilities are designated as gender
neutral for use by no more than one occupant at a time or for family or
assisted use. Such gender neutral bathroom facilities shall be clearly
designated by the posting of such on or near the entry door of each
facility. For purposes of this section, "single-occupancy bathroom"
shall have the same meaning as paragraph (d) of subdivision one of
section one hundred forty-five of the public buildings law.
 § 409-n. Maximum temperatures in school buildings and facilities. All
common, union free, central, central high schools, city school districts
and boards of cooperative educational services shall develop a policy
for ensuring the health and safety of students, faculty, and other
employees, on extreme heat condition days. For the purpose of this
section, extreme heat condition days shall be defined as days when the
occupiable educational and support services spaces are found to be
eighty-two degrees or greater Fahrenheit. For the purpose of this
section, support services spaces shall not include kitchen areas used in
the preparation of food for consumption by students. For the purpose of
this section, room temperature shall be measured at a shaded location,
three feet above the floor near the center of the room. Schools shall be
required to take action to relieve heat-related discomfort when the
occupied space temperature reaches eighty-two degrees Fahrenheit. These
actions may include, but are not limited to, turning off the overhead
lights, pulling down shades or blinds, turning on fans, opening
classroom doors and windows to increase circulation, turning off unused
electronics that produce heat, and providing water breaks. Such policy
shall include a plan to remove students and staff from occupied spaces
where practicable when educational and support services spaces reach
eighty-eight degrees Fahrenheit.
 § 410. Officials not to be interested in sales, leases or contracts.
A public officer or school officer, who is authorized to sell or lease
any property, or to make any contract in his official capacity, or to
take part in making any such sale, lease or contract, who voluntarily
becomes interested individually in such sale, lease or contract,
directly or indirectly, except in cases where such sale, lease or
contract, or payment under the same, is subject to audit or approval by
the commissioner of education, is guilty of a misdemeanor. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to municipal officers and
employees subject to article eighteen of the general municipal law.
 § 412. Condemnation of schoolhouse and erection of new schoolhouse in
place thereof. 1. A district superintendent, upon the direction of the
commissioner, may make an order condemning a school house, if he or she
finds upon examination that such schoolhouse is wholly unfit for use and
not worth repairing. He or she shall deliver such order to a trustee of
the district and transmit a copy thereof to the commissioner. He or she
shall also state in such order the date on which it shall take effect
and the sum which in his or her opinion will be necessary to erect a
school building available to the needs of the district.
 2. Immediately upon the receipt of said order, the trustees of such
district shall call a special meeting of the voters of said district, to
consider the question of building a new schoolhouse therein. Such
meeting shall have power to determine the size of said schoolhouse, the
material to be used in its erection, and to vote a tax to build the
same. But such meeting shall have no power to reduce the estimate made
by the district superintendent aforesaid by more than twenty-five per
centum of such estimate.
 3. And where no tax for building such schoolhouse shall have been
voted by such district within thirty days from the time of holding the
first meeting to consider the question, it shall be the duty of the
trustees of such district to contract for the building of a schoolhouse
capable of accommodating the children of the district, and to levy a tax
to pay for the same, which tax shall not exceed the sum estimated as
necessary by the district superintendent aforesaid, and which shall not
be less than such estimated sum by more than twenty-five per centum
thereof. But such estimated sum may be increased at any subsequent
school meeting legally held in the district.
 § 413. Use of school buildings for examinations. The use of a school
building shall be granted for any examination. No charge shall be made
therefor, provided always that due and proper care shall be maintained
and the school building be left in such condition as found in relation
to cleanliness and neatness.
 § 414. Use of schoolhouse and grounds. 1. Schoolhouses and the grounds
connected therewith and all property belonging to the district shall be
in the custody and under the control and supervision of the trustees or
board of education of the district. The trustees or board of education
may adopt reasonable regulations for the use of such schoolhouses,
grounds or other property, all portions thereof, when not in use for
school purposes or when the school is in use for school purposes if in
the opinion of the trustees or board of education use will not be
disruptive of normal school operations, for such other public purposes
as are herein provided; except, however, in the city of New York each
community school board shall be authorized to prohibit any use of
schoolhouses and school grounds within its district which would
otherwise be permitted under the provisions of this section. Such
regulations shall provide for the safety and security of the pupils and
shall not conflict with the provisions of this chapter and shall conform
to the purposes and intent of this section and shall be subject to
review on appeal to the commissioner of education as provided by law.
The trustees or board of education of each district may, subject to
regulations adopted as above provided, permit the use of the schoolhouse
and rooms therein, and the grounds and other property of the district,
when not in use for school purposes or when the school is in use for
school purposes if in the opinion of the trustees or board of education
use will not be disruptive of normal school operations, for any of the
following purposes:
 (a) For the purpose of instruction in any branch of education,
learning or the arts.
 (b) For public library purposes, subject to the provisions of this
chapter, or as stations of public libraries.
 (c) For holding social, civic and recreational meetings and
entertainments, and other uses pertaining to the welfare of the
community; but such meetings, entertainment and uses shall be
non-exclusive and shall be open to the general public. Civic meetings
shall include, but not be limited to, meetings of parent associations
and parent-teacher associations.
 (d) For meetings, entertainments and occasions where admission fees
are charged, when the proceeds thereof are to be expended for an
educational or charitable purpose; but such use shall not be permitted
if such meetings, entertainments and occasions are under the exclusive
control, and the said proceeds are to be applied for the benefit of a
society, association or organization of a religious sect or
denomination, or of a fraternal, secret or exclusive society or
organization other than organizations of veterans of the military, naval
and marine service of the United States and organizations of volunteer
firefighters or volunteer ambulance workers.
 (e) For polling places for holding primaries and elections and for the
registration of voters and for holding political meetings. But no
meetings sponsored by political organizations shall be permitted unless
authorized by a vote of a district meeting, held as provided by law, or,
in cities by the board of education thereof. Except in cities, it shall
be the duty of the trustees or board of education to call a special
meeting for such purpose upon the petition of at least ten per centum of
the qualified electors of the district. Authority so granted shall
continue until revoked in like manner and by the same body as granted.
 (f) For civic forums and community centers. Upon the petition of at
least twenty-five citizens residing within the district or city, the
trustees or board of education in each school district or city shall
organize and conduct community centers for civic purposes, and civic
forums in the several school districts and cities, to promote and
advance principles of Americanism among the residents of the state. The
trustees or board of education in each school district or city, when
organizing such community centers or civic forums, shall provide funds
for the maintenance and support of such community centers and civic
forums, and shall prescribe regulations for their conduct and
supervision, provided that nothing herein contained shall prohibit the
trustees of such school district or the board of education to prescribe
and adopt rules and regulations to make such community centers or civic
forums self-supporting as far as practicable. Such community centers and
civic forums shall be at all times under the control of the trustees or
board of education in each school district or city, and shall be
non-exclusive and open to the general public.
 (g) For classes of instruction for minors with developmental
disabilities operated by a private organization approved by the
commissioner.
 (h) For recreation, physical training and athletics, including
competitive athletic contests of children attending a private, nonprofit
school.
 (i) To provide child care services during non-school hours, or to
provide child care services during school hours for the children of
pupils attending the schools of the district and, if there is additional
space available, for children of employees of the district, and, if
there is further additional space available, the
Cobleskill-Richmondville school district shall provide child care
services for children ages three and four who need child care assistance
due to lack of sufficient child care spaces. Such determination shall be
made by each district's board of education, provided that the cost of
such care shall not be a school district charge but shall be paid by the
person responsible for the support of such child; the local social
services district as authorized by law; or by any other public or
private voluntary source or any combination thereof.
 (j) For licensed school-based health, dental or mental health clinics.
(i) For the purposes of this subdivision, the term "licensed
school-based health, dental or mental health clinic" means a clinic that
is located in a school facility of a school district or board of
cooperative educational services, is operated by an entity other than
the school district or board of cooperative educational services and
will provide health, dental or mental health services during school
hours and/or non-school hours to school-age and preschool children, and
that is: (1) a health clinic approved under the provisions of chapter
one hundred ninety-eight of the laws of nineteen hundred seventy-eight;
or (2) another school-based health or dental clinic licensed by the
department of health pursuant to article twenty-eight of the public
health law; or (3) a school-based mental health clinic licensed or
approved by the office of mental health pursuant to article thirty-one
of the mental hygiene law; or (4) a school-based mental health clinic
licensed by the office for people with developmental disabilities
pursuant to article sixteen of the mental hygiene law.
 (ii) Health professionals who provide services in licensed
school-based health, dental or mental health clinics shall be duly
licensed pursuant to the provisions of title eight of this chapter
unless otherwise exempted by law and shall be authorized to provide such
services to the extent permitted by their respective practice acts.
 (iii) Except where otherwise authorized by law, the cost of providing
health, dental or mental health services shall not be a charge upon the
school district or board of cooperative educational services, and shall
be paid from federal, state or other local funds available for such
purpose. Building space used for such a clinic shall be excluded from
the rated capacity of the school building for the purpose of computing
building aid pursuant to subdivision six of section thirty-six hundred
two of this chapter or aid pursuant to subdivision five of section
nineteen hundred fifty of this chapter.
 (iv) Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to justify a cause
of action for damages against a school district or a board of
cooperative educational services by reason of acts of negligence or
misconduct by a school-based health, dental or mental health clinic or
such clinic's officers or employees.
 (k) For graduation exercises held by not-for-profit elementary and
secondary schools, provided that no religious service is performed.
 The board of education in the city of New York may delegate the
authority to judge the appropriateness for uses other than school
purposes to community school boards.
 2. The trustees or board of education shall determine the terms and
conditions for such use which may include rental at least in an amount
sufficient to cover all resulting expenses for the purposes of
paragraphs (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (g), (i), (j) and (k) of subdivision
one of this section. Any such use, pursuant to paragraphs (a), (c), (d),
(h) and (j) of subdivision one of this section, shall not allow the
exclusion of any district child solely because said child is not
attending a district school or not attending the district school which
is sponsoring such use or on which grounds the use is to occur.
 § 415. No schoolhouse shall be built on town line. No schoolhouse
shall be built so as to stand on the division line of any two towns
unless the commissioner of education approves such location.
 § 416. School taxes and school bonds. 1. A majority of the voters of
any school district, present and voting at any annual or special
district meeting, duly convened, may authorize such acts and vote such
taxes as they shall deem expedient for making additions, alterations,
repairs or improvements, to the sites or buildings belonging to the
district, or for altering and equipping for library use any former
schoolhouse belonging to the district, or for the purchase of other
sites or buildings, or for a change of sites, or for the purchase of
land and buildings for agricultural, athletic, playground or social
center purposes, or for the erection of new buildings, or for building a
bus garage, or for buying apparatus, implements, or fixtures, or for
paying the wages of teachers, and the necessary expenses of the school,
or for the purpose of paying any judgment, or for the payment or
refunding of an outstanding bonded indebtedness, or for such other
purpose relating to the support and welfare of the school as they may,
by resolution, approve.
 2. On all propositions arising at said meetings involving the
expenditure of money, or authorizing the levy of a tax in one sum or by
installments, the vote thereon shall be by ballot, or ascertained by
taking and recording the ayes and noes of such qualified voters
attending and voting at such meetings; and they may direct the moneys so
voted to be levied in one sum, or by installments, which shall be of
such amounts and levied in such years as may be determined, within such
limitations as may be fixed by the voters, by the trustees or board of
education. No such tax shall be authorized to be levied by installments
as a condition precedent to the issuance of bonds or capital notes
unless the notice of the meeting shall state that such tax will be
proposed and the object or purpose thereof. Such notice shall comply
with the requirements of section 41.10 of the local finance law.
 3. No addition to or change of site or purchase of a new site or tax
for the purchase of any new site or structure, or for grading or
improving a school site, or for the purchase of an addition to the site
of any schoolhouse, or for the purchase of lands and buildings for
agricultural, athletic, playground or social center purposes, or for
building any new schoolhouse or for the erection of an addition to any
schoolhouse already built, or for the payment or refunding of an
outstanding bonded indebtedness, shall be voted at any such meeting in a
union free school district or a city school district which conducts
annual budget votes in accordance with article forty-one of this chapter
pursuant to section twenty-six hundred one-a of this chapter, unless a
notice by the board of education stating that such tax will be proposed,
and specifying the object thereof and the amount to be expended
therefor, shall have been given in the manner provided herein for the
notice of an annual meeting. In a common school district the notice of a
special meeting to authorize any of the improvements enumerated in this
section shall be given as provided in section two thousand six. The
board of education of a union free school district or a city school
district which conducts annual budget votes in accordance with article
forty-one of this chapter pursuant to section twenty-six hundred one-a
of this chapter, may determine that the vote upon any question to be
submitted at a special meeting as provided in this section shall be by
ballot, in which case it shall state in the notice of such special
meeting the hours during which the polls shall be kept open. Printed
ballots may be prepared by the board in advance of the meeting and the
proposition or propositions called for in the notice of the meeting may
be submitted in substantially the same manner as propositions to be
voted upon at a general election.
 4. And whenever a tax for any of the objects hereinbefore specified
shall be legally voted, the board of trustees or board of education
shall make out their tax list, and attach their warrant thereto, in the
manner provided in article seventy-one of this chapter, for the
collection of school district taxes, and shall cause such taxes or such
instalments to be collected at such times as they shall become due.
 5. No vote to raise money shall be rescinded, nor the amount thereof
be reduced at any subsequent meeting, unless it be an adjourned meeting
or a meeting called by regular and legal notice, which shall specify the
proposed action, and at which the vote upon said proposed reduction or
rescinding shall be taken by ballot or by taking and recording the ayes
and noes of the qualified voters attending and voting thereat.
 6. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, propositions for the construction of a new schoolhouse or an addition to a
present schoolhouse at the same site shall not be submitted for a vote
more than twice during any twelve month period and in no event shall a
proposition be submitted for a vote less than ninety days after a vote
on the same or similar proposition. However, the prohibition of this
subdivision shall not apply to a proposition to approve an additional
amount necessary to carry out a construction project, where the voters
have approved an initial building project and it is determined that the
bids for such project are in excess of the approved amount.
 7. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a city school
district in a city having a population of one hundred twenty-five
thousand inhabitants or more.
 § 417. Allocation of moneys by regents for extraordinary relief to
school districts. The regents may allocate moneys, out of any sums
appropriated for such purpose, to school districts of the state for the
repair, reconstruction or replacement of buildings or equipment from
time to time damaged or destroyed by an act of God, against which
insurance could not reasonably have been provided, where in the light of
all the facts the regents are satisfied that such aid is necessary to
prevent an unreasonable burden on the taxpayers within such districts.
 § 418. Purchase and display of flag. It shall be the duty of the
school authorities of every public school in the several cities and
school districts of the state to purchase a United States flag,
flag-staff and the necessary appliances therefor, and to display such
flag upon or near the public school building during school hours, and at
such other times as such school authorities may direct.
 § 419. Display of flags in assembly rooms. It shall be the duty of
the school authority of every public school in the several cities and
school districts of the state to purchase a sufficient number of United
States flags and the necessary holders and appliances therefor for
display in each assembly room of such school. The commissioner of
education shall prescribe the size and material of such flags and the
manner and place of their display. It shall be the duty of the teacher
or other person in charge of each such assembly room to cause the flag
assigned for use in such room to be displayed at all times in the manner
prescribed. Wilful failure to comply with the provisions of this
section shall be a misdemeanor.
 § 419-a. Display of flags in classrooms. The commissioner shall
encourage public school authorities in the several cities and school
districts of the state to display United States flags in the classroom
of each school, and shall be authorized to accept donations of flags
from individuals or civic organizations for distribution in such cities
and school districts.
 § 420. Rules and regulations. The said school authorities shall
establish rules and regulations for the proper custody, care and display
of the flag, and when the weather will not permit it to be otherwise
displayed, it shall be placed conspicuously in the principal room in the
schoolhouse.
 ARTICLE 10
 NEW YORK CITY EDUCATIONAL CONSTRUCTION FUND
Section 450. Short title.
 451. Statement of legislative findings and purposes.
 452. Definitions.
 453. New York city educational construction fund.
 454. General powers and duties of fund.
 455. Relationship with the board of education and the city of
 New York.
 456. Special provisions relating to acquisition and transfer of
 real property.
 457. Plans and specifications.
 458. Letting of construction contracts.
 459. Resources of the fund.
 460. Lease and other agreements.
 461. Notes and bonds of the fund.
 462. Reserve funds, appropriations and other funds and accounts.
 463. Agreement with the state.
 464. State and city's right to require redemption of bonds.
 465. Remedies of noteholders and bondholders.
 466. Notes and bonds as legal investments.
 467. Actions by and against fund.
 468. Exemptions from taxation.
 469. Annual report of trustees.
 470. Article not affected if in part unconstitutional or
 ineffective.
 471. Inconsistent provisions of other laws superseded.
 § 450. Short title. This article may be cited as the New York City
Educational Construction Fund Act.
 § 451. Statement of legislative findings and purposes. There is
threatened in the city of New York a serious shortage of elementary and
secondary school buildings under the jurisdiction of the board of
education of the city of New York. This shortage is occasioned by the
age and obsolescence of many existing school buildings, the large number
of new school buildings that are needed in various areas of the city of
New York, the scarcity and high cost of available land in the areas
where such schools are needed, the typical under-utilization of land by
elementary and secondary school buildings and the existing limitations
on the amount of state and city funds available for the construction of
such buildings.
 In order to facilitate the timely construction of such school
buildings in combination with other compatible and lawful uses, which
combination would provide a highly desirable and economic utilization of
available land, there should be created a corporate governmental agency
of the state, constituting a public benefit corporation, to be known as
the "New York city educational construction fund," which could receive
and administer moneys for the construction and improvement of elementary
and secondary school buildings in the city of New York and whose
principal purpose would be the timely and responsive provision of such
combined occupancy structures in accordance with the foreseeable needs
of the city of New York for additional or replacement elementary and
secondary educational facilities and the desirability of facilitating
maximum and appropriate utilization of available land. In order to
encourage the investment of private capital in such combined occupancy
structures and enable the construction of additional school facilities
within existing financial limitations through the utilization of
incidental revenue produced thereby, the New York city educational
construction fund should be empowered, through the issuance of its
bonds, notes or other obligations to the private investing public, to
obtain a portion of the funds necessary to finance the construction of
the school portion of such structures and to apply the revenues received
from both the school and non-school portions thereof to the payment of
such bonds, notes or other obligations. In furtherance of these
purposes, the creation, continued operation and solvency of the New York
city educational construction fund, including the maintenance of the
capital reserve fund provided for in subdivision one of section four
hundred sixty-two of this article, is hereby declared to be a school
purpose for which public monies may be appropriated, apportioned and
expended.
 While responsibility for the educational affairs of the city school
district of the city of New York, including the selection of school
sites and the design and construction of school facilities, must
continue in the board of education of the city of New York, title to
such sites and the school facilities constructed thereon pursuant to
this article should be vested in the fund in order to facilitate the
exercise of its powers.
 § 452. Definitions. As used or referred to in this article, unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context:
 1. "Board" or "board of education" shall mean the chancellor or deputy
chancellor of the city school district of the city of New York, except
for the purposes of section four hundred fifty-three of this chapter.
 2. "Bonds" and "notes" shall mean bonds and notes respectively, issued
by the fund pursuant to this article.
 3. "City" shall mean the city of New York.
 4. "City agency" shall mean any officer, administration, department,
board, commission, bureau, division, agency or instrumentality of the
city of New York.
 5. "Combined occupancy structure" shall mean any improvement on real
property or any interests therein or thereto, including fee interest,
easements, space rights or air rights, containing school accommodations
or other facilities of the board of education of the city of New York in
combination with other compatible and lawful non-school uses designed
and intended to increase, from both a planning and an economic
viewpoint, the efficient utilization of available land areas. A combined
occupancy structure shall also include a structure in a project or
development under the auspices of the fund wherein non-school portions
of structures placed upon the overall site are not built in space rights
over the school portion, so long as some part of the non-school portion
is constructed over or under any part of the school portion of the
development.
 6. "Commissioner of education" shall mean the commissioner of
education of the state of New York.
 7. "Comptroller" or "city comptroller" shall mean the comptroller of
the city of New York.
 8. "Corporation counsel" shall mean the corporation counsel of the
city of New York.
 9. "Developer" shall mean and include any private individual,
partnership, trust or private or public corporation approved by the
board of education as being qualified and eligible to enter into one or
more leases, subleases or other agreements with the fund providing for
the construction, acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or
improvement of one or more combined occupancy structures; which
agreements shall be subject to approval by the board of education.
 10. "Director of management and budget" or "city director of
management and budget" shall mean the director of management and budget
of the city of New York.
 11. "Finance commissioner" or "city finance commissioner" shall mean
the commissioner of finance of the city of New York.
 12. "Fund" shall mean the corporate governmental agency created by
section four hundred fifty-three of this article.
 13. "Governor" shall mean the governor of the state of New York.
 14. "Letting agency" shall mean and include the board of education or
any other city agency which by agreement with the fund is to award the
contracts for a particular construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation
or improvement; or the fund itself, if it is to award such contracts.
 14-a. "Maximum debt service reserve fund requirement" shall mean the
amount of money required to be deposited in a debt service reserve fund
authorized by section four hundred sixty-two hereof established pursuant
to a resolution of the fund.
 15. "Mayor" shall mean the mayor of the city of New York.
 15-a. "Owner" shall mean and include any private individual,
partnership, trust or private or public corporation, taking possession
of the non-school portion of a combined occupancy structure pursuant to
a lease, sub-lease, conveyance or other agreement, or acquiring fee
title to or a leasehold or other interest in such non-school portion.
 16. "Planning commission" shall mean the planning commission of the
city of New York.
 17. "Real property" shall mean lands, waters, rights in lands or
waters, structures, franchises and interests in land, including air or
space rights, and any and all other things and rights usually included
within the same term and includes also any and all interests in such
property less than full title, such as easements permanent or temporary,
rights-of-way, uses, leases, licenses and all other incorporeal
hereditaments in every estate, interest or right, legal or equitable.
 18. "School building" shall mean a separate structure entirely devoted
to use and occupancy for public school purposes; including incidental
and appurtenant recreational and other facilities.
 19. "School portion" or "school portion of combined occupancy
structure" shall mean that portion of a combined occupancy structure
designed, constructed, reconstructed, rehabilitated or improved for use
and occupancy for public school purposes; including the real property to
be used in connection therewith together with incidental and appurtenant
recreational and other facilities.
 20. "State" shall mean the state of New York.
 § 453. New York city educational construction fund. * 1. There is
hereby created the "New York city educational construction fund." The
fund shall be a corporate governmental agency constituting a public
benefit corporation. The board of trustees of the fund is hereby
continued. It shall consist of the chancellor of the city school
district of the city of New York, who shall be chair, and two trustees
appointed by the mayor who shall each serve at the pleasure of the
mayor.
 * NB Effective until June 30, 2026
 * 1. There is hereby created the "New York city educational
construction fund." The fund shall be a corporate governmental agency
constituting a public benefit corporation. The board of trustees of the
fund is hereby continued. It shall consist of the chancellor of the city
school district of the city of New York, the president of the interim
board of education or of the board of education, who shall be chairman,
and one trustee appointed by the mayor who shall serve a term
coterminous with that of the mayor.
 * NB Effective June 30, 2026
 2. The trustees of the fund shall serve without salary, but each
trustee shall be entitled to reimbursement for his actual and necessary
expenses incurred in the performance of his official duties.
 3. The trustees of the fund may engage in private employment, or in a
profession or business, subject to the limitations contained in article
eighteen of the general municipal law. The fund shall, for the purposes
of such article, be a "municipal agency", and the trustees thereof shall
be "officers" of the agency.
 4. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of law, general,
special or local, no officer or employee of the state, or of any civil
division thereof, shall be deemed to have forfeited or shall forfeit his
office or employment by reason of his acceptance of appointment as a
trustee, officer or agent of the fund; provided, however, that a
trustee, officer or agent who holds such other public office or
employment shall receive no additional compensation, fee or allowance
for services rendered pursuant to this article, but shall be entitled to
reimbursement for his actual and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of such services.
 5. Any trustee may be removed by the commissioner of education for
cause shown after having been given notice of the charge and an
opportunity of defense, in the manner provided in this chapter for the
removal of members of boards of education of city school districts.
 6. The chairman of the fund shall preside over all meetings of the
trustees and shall have such other duties as the trustees may direct. A
vice-chairman who shall preside over all meetings of the fund in the
absence of the chairman and who shall have such other duties as the
trustees may direct may be designated from time to time by the trustees
from among the other trustees.
 7. The powers of the fund shall be vested in and exercised by no less
than two of the trustees then in office. The fund may delegate to one or
more of its trustees, or officers, agents or employees, such powers and
duties as the trustees may deem proper, provided, however, that all
contracts involving an estimated expense of ten thousand dollars or more
and all leases, subleases or other agreements to be entered into
pursuant to this article shall be approved prior to execution by no less
than two trustees of the fund.
 8. The fund may appoint such officers, employees and agents as it may
deem advisable and may prescribe their duties and fix their
compensation.
 § 454. General powers and duties of fund. The fund shall have the
following powers in addition to those specifically conferred elsewhere
in this article:
 1. To sue and be sued;
 2. To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure;
 3. To make and alter by-laws for its organization and internal
management;
 4. With the approval of the comptroller of the city of New York to
prescribe a system of accounts;
 5. To make rules and regulations governing the exercise of its
corporate powers and the fulfillment of its corporate purposes under
this article, which rules and regulations shall be filed with the
secretary of state in the manner provided by section one hundred two of
the executive law;
 6. With the approval of the board of education, to purchase, receive,
lease or otherwise acquire real and personal property necessary or
convenient for its corporate purposes;
 7. Subject to the terms and conditions of any lease, sublease or other
agreement with the board of education, to possess, hold, use and improve
real and personal property acquired by or on behalf of the fund so long
as its corporate existence shall continue;
 8. Upon a two-thirds vote of the trustees of the fund, and subject to
the approval of the board of education, to design, construct, acquire,
reconstruct, rehabilitate and improve combined occupancy structures and
incidental or appurtenant facilities thereto, or cause such structures
and facilities to be designed, constructed, acquired, reconstructed,
rehabilitated and improved in accordance with the provisions of this
article;
 9. In connection with such design, construction, acquisition,
reconstruction, rehabilitation and improvement, to install or cause to
be installed water, sewer, gas, electrical, telephone, heating, air
conditioning and other utility services, including appropriate
connections;
 10. Subject to the terms and conditions of any lease, sublease or
other agreement with the board of education, to maintain, repair and
keep up the real property held by it and all combined occupancy
structures and facilities constructed, acquired, reconstructed,
rehabilitated or improved pursuant to this article;
 11. Subject to the terms and conditions of any lease, sublease or
other agreement with third parties and to the determination of the board
of education that such real property is unnecessary for the present or
foreseeable future school building needs of the city of New York, to
surrender to the appropriate city official, for other public use or for
sale, lease or other disposition in accordance with law, real property
held by the fund for its corporate purposes;
 12. To make and execute contracts, leases, subleases and all other
instruments or agreements necessary or convenient for the exercise of
its corporate powers and the fulfillment of its corporate purposes under
this article, subject to the approval of the corporation counsel as to
form of all such documents to which the city of New York is a party; the
term of any such lease or sublease or renewal thereof shall not be
limited by any provision of any general, special or local law or charter
applicable to the city of New York or to the board of education of the
city of New York;
 13. To procure insurance against any loss in connection with its
property and other assets in such amounts and from such insurers as it
deems desirable;
 14. With the consent of the board of education to use the agents,
employees and facilities of the board;
 15. To engage the services of construction, engineering,
architectural, legal and financial consultants, surveyors and
appraisers, on a contract basis or as employees, for professional
service and technical assistance and advice;
 16. To assist generally, the department of general services of the
city of New York in making land surveys, topographical surveys and
valuation appraisals of real property sought to be acquired by the board
of education of the city of New York;
 17. To borrow money and issue negotiable notes, bonds or other
obligations and to provide for the rights of the holders thereof;
 18. To invest any moneys held in any funds or accounts not required
for immediate use or disbursement, at the discretion of the fund, in
obligations of the city, the state or the United States government or
obligations the principal of and interest on which are guaranteed by the
city, the state or the United States government or obligations of
agencies or instrumentalities of the United States government which may
from time to time be legally purchased by savings banks of the state as
investments of funds belonging to them or in their control; and
temporarily to deposit or invest moneys not required for immediate use
or disbursement in interest bearing time deposits or certificates of
deposit issued by, a bank or trust company located and authorized to do
business in this state, provided, however, that such time deposits or
certificates of deposit shall be payable within such time as the
proceeds shall be needed and provided further that such time deposits or
certificates of deposit be secured by a pledge of obligations of the
United States of America, or any obligation fully guaranteed or insured
as to interest and principal by the United States of America acting
through an agency, subdivision, department or division thereof, or
obligations of the state of New York or of a corporate agency or
instrumentality of the state of New York, including the fund itself, or
obligations of the city of New York.
 19. To accept any gifts or grants or loans of funds and property or
financial or other aid in any form from the federal government or any
agency or instrumentality thereof or from the state or from any other
source and to comply, subject to the provisions of this article, with
the terms and conditions thereof;
 20. At the request or with the approval of the board of education, to
grant, sell, license, lease or otherwise transfer without public auction
or bidding any real property or any rights or interests therein or
thereto, including fee interests, easements, space rights or air rights,
held by it and occupied or reserved for school purposes and needed
therefor, to a private individual or private or public corporation
solely and exclusively for the purpose of developing and constructing
therein or thereon a combined occupancy structure, or a part or portion
thereof, or for the purpose of rehabilitating or improving an existing
school to become part of a combined occupancy structure within the
meaning of this article subject to a prior and enforceable agreement
approved by the board of education for the reconveyance, retransfer or
leaseback of the school portion thereof, upon completion, for use and
occupancy by the said board of education in those instances where a
grant, sale or lease has been made to such private individual or private
or public corporation; provided, however, that no such sale, lease or
transfer of lands or rights therein or thereto is authorized where the
development of a combined occupancy structure contemplates the erection
of nonschool facilities or improvements over an existing playground
unless such combined occupancy structure to be constructed over such
playground shall provide playground area at least equal in size to the
then existing playground area;
 21. At the request or with the approval of the board of education, to
contract with the owner or other developer of a combined occupancy
structure for the purchase or lease of the school portion thereof upon
completion for use and occupancy by the board of education of the city
of New York;
 22. To grant, sell, lease, sublease or otherwise convey the school
portion of combined occupancy structures to the city of New York for use
and occupancy by the board of education of the city of New York; and
 23. To do any and all things necessary or convenient to carry out its
corporate purposes and exercise the powers given and granted to it in
this article.
 § 455. Relationship with the board of education and the city of New
York. In order most effectively to carry out its corporate purposes,
the fund shall cooperate with the director of management and budget and
the board of education of the city of New York in matters relating to
land acquisition and capital planning for school buildings and
facilities. During the course of construction, reconstruction,
rehabilitation and improvement of combined occupancy structures the fund
shall consult with personnel of such board as the work progresses in
matters relating to space requirements, site plans, architectural
concept, and substantial changes in the plans and specifications
therefor, and in matters relating to the original furnishings,
equipment, machinery and apparatus needed to furnish and equip the
school portion of such buildings and structures, upon the completion of
work. The board, on its part, shall perform such functions and services
for the fund as may be requested and the fund shall pay to the board,
from any monies of the fund available for such purpose, the reasonable
cost of such functions and services.
 § 456. Special provisions relating to acquisition and transfer of real
property. Notwithstanding any contrary provisions of any general,
special or local law, charter or ordinance:
 1. Provided that the trustees of the fund shall have formally approved
by a two-thirds vote the acquisition of such real property for the
development of one or more combined occupancy structures, any public
corporation or officer responsible for the acquisition of real property
for school purposes in the city of New York is hereby authorized for and
on behalf and in the name of the city of New York, to execute and
deliver to the fund, on such terms and for such consideration, if any,
as may be determined by such public corporation or officer and the fund,
but not to exceed the cost of acquisition thereof and the cost of
improvements thereon, or lease for a term not exceeding ninety-nine
years, a quitclaim deed conveying to the fund all right, title and
interest of such public corporation and of the city of New York, in and
to any of the lands acquired by such public corporation or officer for
school purposes, and in and to any of the improvements thereon, for the
purpose of constructing, reconstructing, rehabilitating or improving
thereon one or more combined occupancy structures pursuant to this
article for subsequent lease or sublease of the school portion of such
combined occupancy structures to such public corporation or officer, in
accordance with the terms of an agreement entered into among them
pursuant to this article. The fund is hereby authorized to accept such
lease or conveyance; to lease, sublease or otherwise transfer or convey,
such lands and improvements and all or any part of the buildings or
structures constructed, reconstructed, rehabilitated or improved
thereon, to third parties and to such public corporation or officer in
accordance with the provisions of this article, and to hold the same
subject to the terms of any such lease, conveyance, sublease or other
agreement; and such public corporation or officer is hereby authorized
to lease or sublease from the fund any such lands or improvements or the
school portion of any combined occupancy structure, constructed,
reconstructed, rehabilitated or improved thereon pursuant to this
article or other provisions of law, and to hold such lands,
improvements, buildings and school portions of combined occupancy
structures subject to the terms of any such lease, sublease or other
agreement.
 2. In the event that the fund shall fail, within five years from the
date of a lease or conveyance authorized pursuant to subdivision one of
this section, to construct, reconstruct, rehabilitate or improve the
buildings or structures thereon for which the conveyance was made, as
provided for in a lease, sublease or other agreement entered into with
such public corporation or officer, or in the event that such buildings
or structures shall cease to be used for the purposes intended, then and
in either event but subject to the terms of any lease, sublease or other
agreement undertaken by the fund, such lands, and the improvements and
buildings or structures thereon, shall revert to the city of New York
with right of re-entry thereupon, and such lease or deed shall be made
subject to such conditions; provided, however, that as a condition
precedent to the exercise of such right of re-entry the city of New
York, or such public corporation or officer, shall pay to the fund an
amount equal to the purchase price of such lands and improvements, the
depreciated cost of any buildings or structures constructed,
reconstructed, rehabilitated or improved thereon, and all other costs of
the fund incident to the acquisition of such lands and the financing of
construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement relating to
such buildings or structures, all as provided in the aforesaid lease,
sublease or other agreement entered into with such public corporation or
officer.
 § 457. Plans and specifications. 1. (a) No combined occupancy
structure shall be acquired, leased, erected, repaired, enlarged or
remodeled by the fund until the detailed plans and specifications and
cost estimates for the school portion thereof have been submitted to the
board of education and its approval has been endorsed thereon.
 (b) The board of education shall also review and approve the
architectural concept, including an outline of the plans and
specifications therefor, of the non-school portion of any combined
occupancy structure to be erected, repaired, enlarged or remodeled in
accordance with the provisions of any lease or other agreement between
the fund and any developer.
 2. Notwithstanding any other provision of law applicable to the city
school district of the city of New York or the board of education of the
city of New York, such district and such board shall only be required to
submit an outline of the plans and specifications for a combined
occupancy structure, and for the school portion thereof, to the
commissioner of education for his information.
 3. Every contract, lease or other agreement executed by or on behalf
of the fund which makes provision for the construction, acquisition,
reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the school portion of
any combined occupancy structure shall include a provision that the
architect who designed the facility, or an architect or engineer
retained specifically for the purpose of supervision, shall supervise
the work to be performed through to completion and shall see to it that
the materials furnished are in accordance with the drawings, plans,
specifications and contractual provisions therefor.
 § 458. Letting of construction contracts. 1. Any contract let by the
fund or by any letting agency on behalf of the fund for the
construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of a
combined occupancy structure or of the school portion thereof, shall be
in conformity with the provisions of section one hundred one of the
general municipal law.
 2. Except as otherwise provided in section two hundred twenty-two of
the labor law, every contract, lease or other agreement entered into by
or on behalf of the fund for the acquisition, lease, construction,
reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the school portion of
the work in any combined occupancy structure shall contain a provision
that, when the entire cost of any such contemplated construction,
reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement for the school portion of
the work shall exceed three million dollars in the counties of the
Bronx, Kings, New York, Queens, and Richmond; one million five hundred
thousand dollars in the counties of Nassau, Suffolk and Westchester; and
five hundred thousand dollars in all other counties within the state,
separate specifications shall be prepared for the following three
subdivisions of the work on the school portion to be performed:
 a. Plumbing and gas fitting;
 b. Steam heating, hot water heating, ventilating and air conditioning
apparatus; and
 c. Electric wiring and standard illuminating fixtures.
 Such specifications shall be drawn so as to permit the letting of
separate and independent contracts for each of the above three
subdivisions of work. Within the above three subdivisions of work, any
equipment, apparatus and/or installations which shall be designed to
service the entire combined occupancy structure shall be included within
the school portion of the work or let as separate and independent
contracts even if physically located within the non-school portion of
the work. Except as otherwise provided by the public housing law, the
provisions of which shall apply when the developer is the New York city
housing authority, every developer or general contractor undertaking the
construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of any such
combined occupancy structure pursuant to or in furtherance of the
provisions of this article shall let separate contracts to the lowest
responsible bidder for the three subdivisions of the above specified
work to persons, firms or corporations approved by the chairman of the
fund as being qualified, responsible and reliable bidders engaged in
these classes of work. All such qualified bidders engaged in the above
specified work shall be entitled to bid and to receive, upon request, a
copy of the plans and specifications. All such bids shall be submitted
to the fund and shall be opened publicly at a stated time and place.
 2-a. Each bidder on a public work contract, where the preparation of
separate specifications is not required, shall submit with its bid a
separate sealed list that names each subcontractor that the bidder will
use to perform work on the contract, and the agreed-upon amount to be
paid to each, for: a. plumbing and gas fitting, b. steam heating, hot
water heating, ventilating and air conditioning apparatus and c.
electric wiring and standard illuminating fixtures. After the low bid is
announced, the sealed list of subcontractors submitted with such low bid
shall be opened and the names of such subcontractors shall be announced,
and thereafter any change of subcontractor or agreed-upon amount to be
paid to each shall require the approval of the public owner, upon a
showing presented to the public owner of legitimate construction need
for such change, which shall be open to public inspection. Legitimate
construction need shall include, but not be limited to, a change in
project specifications, a change in construction material costs, a
change to subcontractor status as determined pursuant to paragraph (e)
of subdivision two of section two hundred twenty-two of the labor law,
or the subcontractor has become otherwise unwilling, unable or
unavailable to perform the subcontract. The sealed lists of
subcontractors submitted by all other bidders shall be returned to them
unopened after the contract award.
 3. a. In addition to other bond or bonds, if any, required by law for
the completion of the school portion of a combined occupancy structure,
or in the absence of any such requirement, the fund shall nevertheless
require, prior to the approval of any lease or other agreement providing
for the construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of
any combined occupancy structure, that the developer, if other than the
New York city housing authority, or general contractor, furnish a bond
guaranteeing prompt payment of moneys due to all persons furnishing
labor or materials to or for the person furnishing said bond or to his
subcontractors in the prosecution of the entire work provided for in
such lease or other agreement. Whenever the developer is the New York
city housing authority, it shall require each of its contractors to
furnish such bonds to said authority and fund with respect to the work
to be performed and materials supplied by such contractor, and no
separate or other payment bond shall be required to be furnished to the
fund. In those instances where the developer or general contractor is an
agency of the state or a public-benefit corporation created by an act of
the state legislature and in instances where said developer or general
contractor or the guarantor of payment of the construction costs of the
non-school portion of the combined "occupancy structure" is a public
utility corporation or a bank, trust company or savings bank as defined
in section two of the banking law, or a national bank having its office
and principal place of business in this state, or a subsidiary of such a
bank or trust company of which at least eighty (80%) percent of whose
stock is owned by it, the said developer or general contractor shall
only be required to furnish said payment bond with respect to the school
portion of the combined occupancy structure. In such instances, the said
payment bond shall not be required by the fund with respect to the
non-school portion of the combined occupancy structure, but, in lieu
thereof, such fund shall require said agency, public benefit
corporation, public utility corporation or banking institution, as the
case may be to guarantee payment of all construction costs with respect
to the non-school portion of the combined occupancy structure.
 b. A copy of such payment bond shall be kept in the office of the
chairman of the fund and a copy shall also be kept in the office of the
board of education; such copies shall be open to public inspection.
 c. Every person who has furnished labor or material, to or for the
developer or contractor furnishing such payment bond or to his or her
subcontractors in the prosecution of the work provided for in the lease
or other agreement for which said bond is furnished and who has not been
paid in full therefor before the expiration of a period of ninety days
after the day on which the last of the labor was performed or material
was furnished by him or her for which the claim is made, shall have the
right to sue on such payment bond in his or her own name for the amount,
or the balance thereof, unpaid at the time of commencement of the
action; provided, however, that a person having a direct contractual
relationship with a subcontractor of the developer or contractor
furnishing the payment bond but no contractual relationship express or
implied with such developer or contractor shall not have a right of
action upon the bond unless he or she shall have given written notice to
such developer or contractor furnishing the bond within ninety days from
the date on which the last of the labor was performed or the last of the
material was furnished, for which his or her claim is made, stating with
substantial accuracy the amount claimed and the name of the party to
whom the material was furnished or for whom the labor was performed. The
notice shall be served by delivering the same personally to the
developer or contractor furnishing said bond or by mailing the same by
registered mail, postage prepaid, in an envelope addressed to such
developer or contractor at any place where he maintains an office or
conducts his or her business or at his or her residence.
 § 459. Resources of the fund. 1. The fund may receive, accept,
invest, administer, expend and disburse for its corporate purposes
appropriations or advances from the city of New York, and other revenues
and moneys made available or to be made available to the fund from any
or all sources, including gifts, grants, loans and payments from the
federal government, any state agency, any private foundation,
organization or individual, or any other source, for the construction,
acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation and improvement of combined
occupancy structures, for the maintenance and repair of such structures,
or for the costs of personal service and maintenance and operation of
the fund.
 2. All moneys of the fund, except as otherwise authorized or provided
in this article, shall be paid to the comptroller of the city of New
York as agent of the fund, who shall not commingle such moneys with any
other moneys. Such moneys shall be deposited in two or more separate
bank accounts. The moneys in any account shall be paid out of checks
signed by the comptroller on requisition of the chairman of the fund or
of such other officer or employee or officers or employees as the fund
shall authorize to make such requisition. All deposits of such money
shall, if required by the comptroller or the trustees of the fund, be
secured by obligations of the United States or of the city or the state
of a market value equal at all times to the amount of the deposit and
all banks and trust companies are authorized to give such security for
such deposits.
 3. Subject to the terms of any lease, sublease or other agreement
undertaken by the fund, any such moneys of the fund not required for
immediate use may, at the discretion of the fund, be invested by the
comptroller in obligations of the United States, the state or the city
or in obligations the principal and interest of which are guaranteed by
the United States, the state or the city.
 4. The chairman of the fund shall annually, on or before January
first, prepare and submit to the mayor and the director of the budget of
the city of New York, on behalf of the trustees of the fund, an itemized
budget for the administration of the fund during the city's next
succeeding fiscal year and information as to the payment or provision
for payment of obligations of the fund expected to be required during
such year.
 5. The city comptroller, or his legally authorized representative, is
hereby authorized and empowered from time to time to examine the books
and accounts of the fund including its receipts, disbursements,
contracts, reserves, investments, and any other matters relating to its
financial standing. Such an examination shall be conducted by the
comptroller at least once in every five years; the comptroller is
authorized, however, to accept from the fund, in lieu of such an
examination, an external examination of its books and accounts made at
the request of the trustees of the fund.
 § 460. Lease and other agreements. 1. Any agreement entered into
between the fund and the owner or developer of a proposed combined
occupancy structure pursuant to section four hundred fifty-four of this
chapter shall provide for (i) the construction, acquisition,
reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of one or more combined
occupancy structures, and the purchase or acquisition of the original
furnishings, equipment, machinery and apparatus to be used in the school
portion of a combined occupancy structure upon completion of the work,
(ii) the reconveyance, retransfer or leasing of all or any portion
thereof and of the real property or interest therein related thereto,
including real property originally acquired by the board of education in
the name of the city of New York, upon the completion of construction,
acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement upon such
terms and conditions as may be agreed upon in those instances where
there has been a prior conveyance, transfer or lease by the Fund to the
owner or developer, (iii) the leasing or subleasing of such combined
occupancy structures and property, or separately of the school and
non-school portions thereof, by the fund upon completion for a term not
exceeding ninety-nine years and upon such terms and conditions including
annual rental as may be agreed upon, and (iv) the conveyance to the
board of education in the name of the city of New York of title to the
school portion of any such combined occupancy structures at the
expiration of the term of the lease, or any renewal or extension
thereof, or upon earlier payment in full of the total amount specified
therein, without additional charge therefore. The board of education
shall approve any such agreement.
 2. a. Any lease, sublease or other agreement entered into between the
fund and the owner or developer of a proposed combined occupancy
structure shall provide for payment to the fund of the fair market value
of such easements, space rights, air rights or other fee or leasehold
interests as are to be held or retained by such owner or developer or
his successor in interest under the terms of such agreement; provided
that where subsidized housing, as hereinafter defined, is intended to be
built in or on said easements, space rights, air rights or other fee or
leasehold interests, the appropriate document may provide, in the
discretion of the fund, for payment to the fund of less than the fair
market value of such easements, space rights, air rights, or other fee
or leasehold interests. As used in this paragraph, subsidized housing
shall mean dwelling units aided by one or more federal, state or
municipal programs designed to provide low or moderate income housing.
 b. Whenever the easements, space rights, air rights or other fee or
leasehold interests held or retained by such owner or developer, if
other than the New York city housing authority, and/or the non-school
improvements constructed or erected therein or thereon, shall be exempt
from real property taxes pursuant to the provisions of section four
hundred sixty-eight of this article, such lease, sublease or other
agreement shall also provide for the payment to the fund of annual or
other periodic amounts equal to the amount of real property taxes that
would otherwise have been paid or payable with respect to such
easements, space rights, air rights or other fee or leasehold interests,
and with respect to the non-school improvements constructed or erected
therein or thereon, over the term of such lease, sublease or other
agreement. Where such lease, sublease, or other agreement provides for
the annual or other periodic payment of a fixed sum or sums as a tax
equivalency payment during the term of such a lease, sublease, or other
agreement, or any part thereof, the sum or sums to be paid may be either
greater or less than the actual amount of real property taxes that would
otherwise have been paid or payable with respect to the said property
rights affected, if said property rights were not exempt, provided the
city shall approve such provision. In the event provision is made for
the annual or other periodic payment of a fixed sum or sums as a tax
equivalency payment, such lease, sublease, or other agreement may
further provide, upon approval by the city of such provision, that (i)
such lessee, sublessee or vendee shall be required to pay such fixed sum
or sums to the fund during the term of such lease, sublease, or other
agreement regardless of whether the said property rights are exempt from
real property taxes, (ii) if for any year during such term an ad valorem
tax shall be levied and paid by such lessee, sublessee or vendee on the
said property rights, such lessee, sublessee or vendee shall receive a
credit against any taxes thereafter payable by it to the city the amount
of such ad valorem tax paid by it, and (iii) in the event during such
term a substitute tax, in place either in whole or in part of a real
property tax on said property rights, is levied and paid by such lessee,
sublessee or vendee, such lessee, sublessee, or vendee shall receive a
credit against any taxes thereafter payable by it to the city for the
amount of such substitute tax paid by it.
 c. (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of section fifty-two of the
public housing law, whenever the New York city housing authority is such
owner or developer, such lease, sublease or other agreement shall also
provide for the payment by such authority to the fund or the city of
such amount, for any year or years, as payment in lieu of real property
taxes on the non-school portion constituting a project, as defined by
the public housing law, as may be agreed upon among the fund, the city
and the authority, and as may be approved by the commissioner of the
state division of housing and community renewal if such project is a
state project as defined in the public housing law, and by the federal
government if such project is a federal project as defined in the public
housing law.
 (2) For any of the purposes of the public housing law, including,
specifically, section seventy-three thereof, and notwithstanding any
other provision in the public housing law for establishing the amount of
taxes paid or payable with respect to a project for such year and the
resulting amount of tax exemption, in computing the amount of tax
exemption granted to such non-school portion constituting a project, as
defined by the public housing law, the amount of such payment in lieu of
taxes paid or payable with respect thereto for any year shall be deemed
to be the amount of taxes paid or payable for such year.
 3. Any lease, sublease or other agreement entered into between the
fund and the city of New York or the board of education pursuant to
section four hundred fifty-four of this chapter shall provide for (i)
the construction, acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or
improvement of one or more combined occupancy structures and (ii) the
leasing or subleasing of the school portion of such structures to the
city or the board for a term not exceeding ninety-nine years, upon such
terms and conditions as may be agreed upon.
 4. Every lease, sublease or other agreement executed pursuant to this
article shall be subject to the approval of the commissioner of general
services and the director of management and budget with respect to all
rentals or other payments to be made thereunder by the city of New York,
the board of education or by the owner or developer of a combined
occupancy structure and shall contain a clause that any agreement of the
city of New York thereunder shall be deemed executory to the extent of
the moneys available to the city therefor and no liability on account
thereof shall be incurred by the city beyond the moneys available for
the purpose thereof.
 § 461. Notes and bonds of the fund. 1. (a) Subject to the provisions
of section four hundred sixty-two of this chapter, the fund shall have
the power and is hereby authorized from time to time to issue its
negotiable bonds and notes in such principal amount as, in the opinion
of the fund, shall be necessary, after taking into account other monies
which may be available for the purpose, to provide sufficient funds for
achieving its corporate purposes, including the construction,
acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the school
portion of combined occupancy structures pursuant to this article, the
payment of interest on bonds and notes of the fund, establishment of
reserves to secure such bonds and notes, and all other expenditures of
the fund incident to and necessary or convenient to carry out its
corporate purposes and powers;
 (b) The fund shall have power, from time to time, to issue renewal
notes, to issue bonds to pay notes and whenever it deem refunding
expedient, to refund any bonds by the issuance of new bonds, whether the
bonds to be refunded have or have not matured, and to issue bonds partly
to refund bonds then outstanding and partly for any other purpose. The
refunding bonds shall be sold and the proceeds applied to the purchase,
redemption or payment of the bonds to be refunded;
 (c) Except as may otherwise be expressly provided by the fund, every
issue of its notes or bonds shall be general obligations of the fund
payable out of any revenues or monies of the fund, subject only to any
agreements with the holders of particular notes or bonds pledging any
particular receipts or revenues;
 (d) Whether or not the notes or bonds are of such form and character
as to be negotiable instruments under the provisions of article eight of
the uniform commercial code, the notes or bonds shall be and hereby are
made negotiable instruments within the meaning of and for all the
purposes of the uniform commercial code, subject only to the provisions
of the notes or bonds for registration.
 2. The notes and bonds of the fund shall be authorized by resolution
of the trustees, shall bear such date or dates, and shall mature at such
time or times, in the case of any such note, or any renewals thereof,
not exceeding five years, from the date of issue of such original note,
and in the case of any such bond not exceeding forty years from the date
of issue, as such resolution or resolutions may provide. The notes and
bonds shall bear interest at such rate or rates, be in such
denominations, be in such form, either coupon or registered, carry such
registration privileges, be executed in such manner, be payable in such
medium of payment, at such place or places and be subject to such terms
of redemption as such resolution or resolutions may provide. The notes
and bonds of the fund may be sold by the fund, at public or private
sale, at such price or prices as the fund shall determine. No notes or
bonds of the fund may be sold by the fund at private sale, however,
unless such sale and the terms thereof have been approved in writing by
the city comptroller.
 3. Any resolution or resolutions authorizing any notes or bonds or any
issue thereof may contain provisions, which shall be a part of the
contract with the holders thereof, as to:
 (a) pledging all or any part of the fees and charges made or received
by the fund, and all or any part of (i) the rentals or other payments to
be received by the fund with respect to the school portion of combined
occupancy structures financed with the proceeds of such bonds and notes,
and (ii) the rentals or other payments to be received by the fund with
respect to the non-school portion of combined occupancy structures and
(iii) any other monies, assets or accounts received or to be received by
the fund or pledged or assigned to the fund to secure the payment of
such notes or bonds or of any issue thereof, subject to such agreements
with bondholders or noteholders as may then exist;
 (b) pledging all or any part of the assets of the fund to secure the
payment of such notes or bonds or of any issue of notes or bonds,
subject to such agreements with noteholders or bondholders as may then
exist;
 (c) the use and disposition of the gross income of the fund in
connection with combined occupancy structures financed or constructed,
acquired, reconstructed, rehabilitated or improved by it or on its
behalf;
 (d) the setting aside of reserves or sinking funds and the regulation
and disposition thereof;
 (e) limitations on the purpose to which the proceeds of sale of notes
or bonds may be applied and pledging such proceeds to secure the payment
of the notes or bonds or of any issue thereof;
 (f) limitations on the issuance of additional notes or bonds; the
terms upon which additional notes or bonds may be issued and secured;
the refunding of outstanding or other notes or bonds;
 (g) the procedure, if any, by which the terms of any contract with
noteholders or bondholders may be amended or abrogated, the amount of
notes or bonds the holders of which must consent thereto, and the manner
in which such consent may be given;
 (h) limitations on the amount of monies to be expended by the fund for
operating, administrative or other expenses of the fund;
 (i) vesting in a trustee or trustees such property, rights, powers and
duties in trust as the fund may determine, which may include any or all
of the rights, powers and duties of the trustee appointed by the
bondholders pursuant to this article, and limiting or abrogating the
right of the bondholders to appoint a trustee under this article or
limiting the rights, powers and duties of such trustee;
 (j) any other matters, of like or different character, which in any
way affect the security or protection of the notes or bonds.
 4. It is the intention hereof that any pledge made by the fund shall
be valid and binding from the time when the pledge is made; that the
monies or property so pledged and thereafter received by the fund shall
immediately be subject to the lien of such pledge without any physical
delivery thereof or further act; and that the lien of any such pledge
shall be valid and binding as against all parties having claims of any
kind in tort, contract or otherwise against the fund, irrespective of
whether such parties have notice thereof. Neither the resolution nor any
other instrument by which a pledge is created need be recorded.
 5. Neither the trustees of the fund nor any person executing the notes
or bonds shall be liable personally on the notes or bonds or be subject
to any personal liability or accountability by reason of the issuance
thereof.
 6. The fund, subject to such agreements with noteholders or
bondholders as may then exist, shall have power out of any funds
available therefor to purchase notes or bonds of the fund, which shall
thereupon be cancelled, at a price not exceeding (a) if the notes or
bonds are then redeemable, the redemption price then applicable plus
accrued interest to the next interest payment date thereon, or (b) if
the notes or bonds are not then redeemable, the redemption price
applicable on the first date after such purchase upon which the notes or
bonds become subject to redemption plus accrued interest to such date.
 7. Neither the state nor the city of New York shall be liable on the
notes or bonds of the fund and such notes and bonds shall not be a debt
of the city or the state, and such notes and bonds shall contain on the
face thereof a statement to such effect.
 § 462. Reserve funds, appropriations and other funds and accounts. 1.
(a) The fund shall create and establish a special fund (herein referred
to as capital reserve fund), and, to secure bonds of the fund issued
prior to the twenty-fourth day of July, nineteen hundred seventy-six,
shall pay into such capital reserve fund (1) any monies appropriated and
made available by the state or the city of New York for the purposes of
such fund, (2) any proceeds of sale of notes or bonds to the extent
provided in the resolution of the fund authorizing the issuance thereof,
and (3) any other monies which may be made available to the fund for the
purpose of such capital reserve fund from any other source or sources.
All moneys held in the capital reserve fund, established for bonds of
the fund secured by such capital reserve fund except as hereinafter
provided, shall be used solely for the payment of the principal of such
bonds as the same mature, required payments to any sinking fund
established for the amortization of such term bonds (hereinafter
referred to as "sinking fund payments"), the purchase or redemption of
such bonds, the payment of interest on such bonds or the payment of any
redemption premium required to be paid when such bonds are redeemed
prior to maturity; provided, however, that moneys in such capital
reserve fund shall not be withdrawn therefrom at any time in such amount
as would reduce the amount of such fund to less than the maximum amount
of principal and interest maturing and becoming due and sinking fund
payments required to be made in any succeeding fiscal year on all bonds
of the fund secured by the capital reserve fund then outstanding, except
for the purpose of paying principal, interest and sinking fund payments
becoming due on such bonds of the fund maturing and becoming due and for
the payment of which other monies of the fund are not available. For the
purposes of this subdivision, in computing the maximum amount of
principal maturing in any succeeding calendar year, the principal amount
of any term bonds which are to be amortized by sinking fund payments
shall not be included in the computation. Any income or interest earned
by, or increment to, the capital reserve fund due to the investment
thereof may be transferred to other funds or accounts to the extent it
does not reduce the amount of the capital reserve fund below the maximum
amount of principal and interest maturing and becoming due and sinking
fund payments required to be made in any succeeding calendar year on all
bonds of the fund then outstanding secured by the capital reserve fund.
 (b) The fund shall not issue bonds secured by the capital reserve fund
at any time if the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing and
becoming due and sinking fund payments required to be made in a
succeeding fiscal year on the bonds then to be issued and on all other
bonds of the fund then outstanding secured by the capital reserve fund
will exceed the amount of the capital reserve fund at the time of
issuance unless the fund, at the time of issuance of such bonds, shall
deposit in the capital reserve fund from the proceeds of the bonds so to
be issued, or otherwise, an amount which, together with the amount then
in such fund, will be not less than the maximum amount of principal and
interest maturing and becoming due and sinking fund payments required to
be made in any succeeding fiscal year on such bonds then to be issued
and on all other bonds of the fund then outstanding secured by the
capital reserve fund.
 (c) To assure the continued operation and solvency of the capital
reserve fund for the carrying out of the public purposes of this
article, provision is made in paragraph (a) of this subdivision for the
accumulation in the capital reserve fund of an amount equal to the
maximum amount of principal and interest maturing and becoming due and
sinking fund payments required to be made in any succeeding fiscal year
on all bonds of the fund then outstanding secured by the capital reserve
fund. In order further to assure such maintenance of the capital reserve
fund, the board of education shall annually request from the city of New
York and pay over to the fund, for deposit in the capital reserve fund,
such sum, if any, as shall be certified by the chairman of the fund to
the board, the mayor and the director of management and budget of the
city of New York as necessary to restore the capital reserve fund to an
amount equal to the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing
and becoming due and sinking fund payments required to be made in the
next succeeding fiscal year on the bonds of the fund then outstanding
secured by the capital reserve fund; provided, however, that such sum
shall have been first appropriated by the city to the board or shall
otherwise have been made lawfully available to the board for such
purpose. The chairman of the fund shall annually, not later than the
fifteenth day of February in each year, make and deliver to the board,
the mayor and the director of management and budget his certificate
stating the amount, if any, required to restore the capital reserve fund
to the amount aforesaid and the amount so stated, if any, shall be paid
to the fund by the board during the then current fiscal year of the
fund. In the event of the failure or inability of the board to pay over
the stated amount to the fund on or before August first of the same
year, the chairman of the fund shall forthwith make and deliver to the
comptroller of the state of New York a further certificate restating the
amount so required and, after the comptroller of the state of New York
shall have given written notice to the commissioner of education, the
mayor and director of management and budget, such amount shall be paid
over to the fund by the comptroller of the state of New York out of the
next payment of state aid apportioned to the city of New York on behalf
of the city school district of the city of New York for the support of
common schools or such other aid or assistance payable in support of
common schools as shall supersede or supplement such state aid for the
support of common schools, including federal moneys apportioned by the
state to the city of New York on behalf of the city school district for
the support of common schools. Any amount so paid over to the fund shall
be deducted from the corresponding apportionment of state education aid
or other aid or assistance for education otherwise credited to the board
of education for its purposes and shall not obligate the state to make
or entitle the city or the board of education to receive any additional
or increased apportionment or payment of state aid for school purposes.
 (d) In computing the amount of the capital reserve fund for the
purposes of this section, securities in which all or a portion of such
fund shall be invested shall be valued at par, or if purchased at less
than par, at their cost to the fund.
 2. The fund may create and establish with the comptroller or with a
trustee one or more additional funds or accounts and, subject to
agreements with bondholders and noteholders, may pay into such funds or
accounts (i) fees and charges collected by the fund, (ii) monies which
shall be transferred from the capital reserve fund pursuant to the
provisions of paragraph (a) of subdivision one of this section, and
(iii) any other monies which may be made available to the fund from any
other source or sources. The monies held in or credited to any such
reserve fund or account may, in the discretion of the fund but subject
to agreements with bondholders and noteholders, be used by the fund (a)
for the repayment of advances from the city of New York, (b) to
reimburse the board of education of the city of New York the reasonable
costs of services performed by the board for the fund pursuant to
section four hundred fifty-five of this article, (c) to pay all costs,
expenses and charges of financing, including fees and expenses of
trustees and paying agents, (d) for transfers to the capital reserve
fund, (e) for the payment of principal of and interest on bonds or notes
issued by the fund when the same shall become due, whether at maturity
or on call for redemption, and for the payment of any redemption premium
required to be paid where such bonds or notes are redeemed prior to
their stated maturities, and to purchase bonds or notes issued by the
fund, (f) for such other corporate purposes as the fund in its
discretion shall determine and provide, or (g) for payment to the board
of education for school purposes.
 3. (a) The fund may create and establish one or more special funds
(herein referred to as debt service reserve funds), and, to secure bonds
of the fund issued on or after the twenty-fourth day of July, nineteen
hundred seventy-six, shall pay into each such debt service reserve fund
(1) any monies appropriated and made available by the state or city of
New York for the purposes of such fund, (2) any proceeds of sale of
notes or bonds to the extent provided in the resolution of the fund
authorizing the issuance thereof, and (3) any other monies which may be
made available to the fund for the purposes of any such debt service
reserve fund from any other source or sources. All moneys held in a debt
service reserve fund, except as hereinafter provided, shall be used
solely for the payment of the principal of bonds of the fund as the same
mature, required payments to any sinking fund established for the
amortization of term bonds (hereinafter referred to as "sinking fund
payments"), so secured, the purchase or redemption of bonds of the fund
so secured, the payment of interest on such bonds of the fund so secured
or the payment of any redemption premium required to be paid when such
bonds secured by a debt service reserve fund are redeemed prior to
maturity; provided, however, that moneys in a debt service reserve fund
shall not be withdrawn therefrom at any time in such amount as would
reduce the amount of such fund to less than the debt service reserve
fund requirement established pursuant to the agreement with the holders
of the bonds of the fund secured by such debt service reserve fund,
except for the purpose of paying principal of, interest and sinking fund
payments becoming due on such bonds of the fund maturing and becoming
due and for the payment of which other monies of the fund are not
available. Any income or interest earned by, or increment to, a debt
service reserve fund due to the investment thereof may be transferred to
other funds or accounts to the extent it does not reduce the amount of a
debt service reserve fund below the debt service reserve fund
requirement.
 (b) The fund shall not issue bonds secured by a debt service reserve
fund at any time if the amount in such debt service reserve fund is less
than the debt service reserve fund requirement at the time of issuance
unless the fund, at the time of issuance of such bonds, shall deposit in
the debt service reserve fund from the proceeds of the bonds so to be
issued, or otherwise, an amount which, together with the amount then in
such fund, will be not less than the debt service reserve fund
requirement established by the agreement with the holders of the bonds
of the fund secured thereby.
 (c) To assure the continued operation and solvency of the fund for the
carrying out of the public purposes of this article, provision is made
in paragraph (a) of this subdivision for the accumulation in a debt
service reserve fund of an amount equal to the debt service reserve fund
requirement on all bonds of the fund then outstanding secured by a debt
service or debt service reserve fund. In order further to assure such
maintenance of a debt service reserve fund, the board of education shall
annually request from the city of New York and pay over to the fund
after making the payment required by paragraph (c) of subdivision one of
this section for deposit in a debt service reserve fund, such sum, if
any, as shall be certified by the chairman of the fund to the board, the
mayor and the director of the budget of the city of New York as
necessary to restore such debt service reserve fund to an amount equal
to the debt service reserve fund requirement for the bonds of the fund
secured by such debt service reserve fund; provided, however, that such
sum shall have been first appropriated by the city to the board or shall
otherwise have been made lawfully available to the board for such
purpose. The chairman of the fund shall annually, not later than the
fifteenth day of February in each year, make and deliver to the board,
the mayor and the director of the budget his certificate stating the
amount, if any, required to restore a debt service reserve fund to the
amount aforesaid and the amount so stated after making the payment
required by paragraph (c) of subdivision one of this section if any,
shall be paid to the fund by the board during the then current fiscal
year of the fund. In the event of the failure or inability of the board
to pay over the stated amount to the fund on or before August first of
the same year, the chairman of the fund shall forthwith make and deliver
to the comptroller of the state of New York a further certificate
restating the amount so required and, after the comptroller of the state
of New York shall have given written notice to the commissioner, the
mayor and director of the budget, such amount after making the payment
required by paragraph (c) of subdivision one of this section shall be
paid over to the fund by the comptroller of the state of New York out of
the next payment of state aid apportioned to the city of New York on
behalf of the city school district of the city of New York for the
support of common schools or such other aid or assistance payable in
support of common schools as shall supersede or supplement such state
aid for the support of common schools, including federal moneys
apportioned by the state to the city of New York on behalf of the city
school district for the support of common schools. Any amount so paid
over to the fund under paragraph (c) of subdivision one of this section
shall be deducted from the corresponding apportionment of state
education aid or other aid or assistance for education otherwise
credited to the board of education for its purposes and shall not
obligate the state to make or entitle the city or the board of education
to receive any additional or increased apportionment or payment of state
aid for school purposes.
 (d) In computing the amount of any debt service reserve fund for the
purposes of this section, securities in which all or a portion of such
fund shall be invested shall be valued at par, or if purchased at less
than par, at their cost to the fund.
 (e) The maximum debt service reserve fund requirement for any debt
service reserve fund created pursuant to this subdivision shall not
exceed the amount of principal and interest maturing and becoming due
and sinking fund payments required to be made in any year on all bonds
of the fund secured by such debt service reserve fund. For purposes of
this subdivision, in computing the maximum amount of principal maturing
in any year, the principal amount of any term bonds which are to be
amortized by sinking fund payments shall not be included in the
computation.
 4. In addition to the funds permitted to be established pursuant to
subdivision two hereof, the fund may create and establish with the
comptroller or with a trustee one or more additional funds or accounts
and, subject to agreements with bondholders and noteholders, may pay
into such funds or accounts (i) fees and charges collected by the fund,
(ii) monies which shall be transferred from a debt service or reserve
fund pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (a) of subdivision one of
this section, and (iii) any other monies which may be made available to
the fund from any other source or sources. The monies held in or
credited to any such fund may, in the discretion of the fund but subject
to agreements with bondholders and noteholders, be used by the fund (a)
for the repayment of advances from the city of New York, (b) to
reimburse the board of education of the city of New York the reasonable
costs of services performed by the board for the fund pursuant to
section four hundred fifty-five of this article, (c) to pay all costs,
expenses and charges of financing, including fees and expenses of
trustees and paying agents, (d) for transfers to a debt service or a
debt service reserve fund, (e) for the payment of principal, interest
and sinking fund payments for any bonds or notes issued by the fund when
the same shall become due, whether at maturity or on call for
redemption, and for the payment of any redemption premium required to be
paid where such bonds or notes are redeemed prior to their stated
maturities, and to purchase bonds or notes issued by the fund, (f) for
such other corporate purposes as the fund in its discretion shall
determine and provide, or (g) for payment to the board of education for
school purposes.
 § 463. Agreement with the state. The state does hereby pledge to and
agree with the holders of any notes or bonds issued under this article,
that the state will not limit or alter the rights hereby vested in the
fund to fulfill the terms of any agreements made with the holders
thereof, or in any way impair the rights and remedies of such holders
until such notes or bonds, together with the interest thereon, with
interest on any unpaid installments of interest, and all costs and
expenses in connection with any action or proceeding by or on behalf of
such holders, are fully met and discharged. The fund is authorized to
include this pledge and agreement of the state in any agreement with the
holders of such notes or bonds.
 § 464. State and city's right to require redemption of bonds.
Notwithstanding and in addition to any provisions for the redemption of
bonds which may be contained in any contract with the holders of the
bonds, either the state or the city of New York may, upon furnishing
sufficient funds therefor, require the fund to redeem, prior to
maturity, as a whole, any issue of bonds on any interest payment date
not less than twenty years after the date of the bonds of such issue at
one hundred five per centum of their face value and accrued interest or
at such lower redemption price as may be provided in the bonds in case
of the redemption thereof as a whole on the redemption date. Notice of
such redemption shall be published in at least two newspapers published
and circulating in the city of New York at least twice, the first
publication to be at least thirty days before the date of redemption.
 § 465. Remedies of noteholders and bondholders. 1. In the event that
the fund shall default in the payment of principal of or interest on any
issue of notes or bonds after the same shall become due, whether at
maturity or upon call for redemption, and such default shall continue
for a period of thirty days, or in the event that the fund shall fail or
refuse to comply with the provisions of this article, or shall default
in any agreement made with the holders of any issue of notes or bonds,
the holders of twenty-five per centum in aggregate principal amount of
the notes or bonds of such issue then outstanding, by instrument or
instruments filed in the office of the city clerk of the city of New
York and approved or acknowledged in the same manner as a deed to be
recorded, may appoint a trustee to represent the holders of such notes
or bonds for the purposes herein provided.
 2. Such trustee may, and upon written request of the holders of
twenty-five per centum in principal amount of such notes or bonds then
outstanding shall, in his or its own name:
 (a) by suit, action or proceeding in accordance with the civil
practice law and rules, enforce all rights of the noteholders or
bondholders and require the fund to carry out agreements with such
noteholders or bondholders and to perform its duties under this article;
 (b) bring suit upon such notes or bonds;
 (c) by action or suit, require the fund to account as if it were the
trustee of an express trust for the holders of such notes or bonds;
 (d) by action or suit, enjoin any acts or things which may be unlawful
or in violation of the rights of the holders of such notes or bonds;
 (e) declare all such notes or bonds due and payable, and if all
defaults shall be made good, then, with the consent of the holders of
twenty-five per centum of the principal amount of such notes or bonds
then outstanding, annul such declaration and its consequences.
 3. Such trustee shall in addition to the foregoing have and possess
all of the powers necessary or appropriate for the exercise of any
functions specifically set forth herein or incident to the general
representation of bondholders or noteholders in the enforcement and
protection of their rights.
 4. The supreme court shall have jurisdiction of any suit, action or
proceeding by the trustee on behalf of such noteholders or bondholders.
The venue of any such suit, action or proceeding shall be laid in the
county of New York.
 5. Before declaring the principal of notes or bonds due and payable,
the trustee shall first give thirty days' notice in writing to the mayor
of the city of New York, to the fund, to the board of education of the
city of New York and to the attorney general of the state.
 § 466. Notes and bonds as legal investments. The notes and bonds of
the fund are hereby made securities in which all public officers and
bodies of this state and all municipalities and municipal subdivisions,
all insurance companies and associations, and other persons carrying on
an insurance business, all banks, bankers, trust companies, savings
banks and savings associations, including savings and loan associations,
building and loan associations, investment companies and other persons
carrying on a banking business, all administrators, guardians,
executors, trustees and other fiduciaries, and all other persons
whatsoever who are now or may hereafter be authorized to invest in bonds
or other obligations of the state, may properly and legally invest
funds, including capital, in their control or belonging to them.
 § 467. Actions by and against fund. 1. The state supreme court shall
have exclusive jurisdiction of any action, suit or special proceeding
brought by or against or involving the fund. The venue of any action,
suit or special proceeding brought against the fund shall be laid in the
city and county of New York.
 2. In every action against the fund for damages, for injuries to real
or personal property, or for the destruction thereof, or for personal
injuries or death, the complaint shall contain an allegation that at
least thirty days have elapsed since the demand, claim or claims upon
which such action is founded were presented to a trustee or officer of
the fund and that the fund has neglected or refused to make an
adjustment or payment thereof for thirty days after such presentment.
 3. Except in an action for wrongful death, an action against the fund
for damages for injuries to real or personal property, or for the
destruction thereof, or for personal injuries, alleged to have been
sustained, shall not be commenced more than one year and ninety days
after the cause of action therefor shall have accrued, nor unless a
notice of claim shall have been served on the fund within the time limit
established by, and in compliance with all requirements of section
fifty-e of the general municipal law. An action against the fund for
wrongful death shall be commenced in accordance with the notice of claim
and time limitation provisions of title eleven of article nine of the
public authorities law.
 § 468. Exemptions from taxation. 1. It is hereby declared that the
creation of the fund and the carrying out of its corporate purposes is
in all respects for the benefit of the people of the city and state of
New York and for the improvement of their health, safety, welfare and
security and is a public purpose and the fund shall be regarded as
performing a governmental function in the exercise of the powers
conferred upon it by this article.
 2. The monies and properties of the fund, including all properties
constructed, acquired, reconstructed, rehabilitated or improved by it or
on its behalf and all properties under its jurisdiction, control or
supervision, and all of its operations and activities shall be exempt
from taxation.
 3. The notes and bonds of the fund issued pursuant to this article,
and the income therefrom, and all fees, charges, rents, gifts, grants,
revenues, receipts and other monies received or to be received by the
fund shall at all times be free from taxation, except for estate and
gift taxes and taxes on transfers.
 § 469. Annual report of trustees. The trustees of the fund shall
submit to the mayor, the board of education and the city council of the
city of New York annually on or before February first, a full report of
its activities and operations through the thirtieth day of the preceding
June, including: (1) details as to projects in planning, projects in
the process of construction, acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation
or improvement, and projects completed; (2) the performance record of
the trustees in completing construction in accordance with the desired
completion dates and within the estimated costs; (3) the architects,
engineers and other private consultants engaged by the trustees of the
fund on a contract basis and a statement of the total amount paid and
yet to be paid, or estimated yet to be paid, under each such contract;
(4) the moneys made available for the purposes of the fund; (5) details
as to any lease, sublease or agreement executed by the trustees of the
fund and the annual rentals to be paid or received on account thereof;
(6) its assets and liabilities at the end of the fiscal year, including
the status of reserve funds and other funds and accounts; (7) a schedule
of its bonds and notes outstanding at the end of its fiscal year,
together with the amounts redeemed and incurred during such fiscal year,
and such other information related to the activities and operation of
the fund as the trustees may consider pertinent.
 § 470. Article not affected if in part unconstitutional or
ineffective. If any section, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause
or provision of this article shall be unconstitutional or be ineffective
in whole or in part, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional or
ineffective, it shall be valid or effective and no other section,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or provision shall on account
thereof be deemed invalid or ineffective.
 § 471. Inconsistent provisions of other laws superseded. Insofar as
the provisions of this article are inconsistent with the provisions of
any other general, special or local law, or with the provisions of any
charter or ordinance, the provisions of this article shall be
controlling. The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to
prevent the city of New York from financing the cost of acquiring,
constructing, reconstructing, rehabilitating or improving one or more
school buildings by the issuance of bonds or capital notes pursuant to
the local finance law.
 ARTICLE 10-B
 CITY OF YONKERS EDUCATIONAL CONSTRUCTION FUND
Section 475. Short title.
 476. Definitions.
 477. City of Yonkers educational construction fund.
 478. General powers and duties of fund.
 479. Relationship with the board of education of the city of
 Yonkers.
 480. Special provisions relating to acquisition and transfer of
 real property.
 481. Plans and specifications.
 482. Letting of construction contracts.
 483. Resources of the fund.
 484. Lease and other agreements.
 485. Notes and bonds of the fund.
 486. Reserve funds, appropriations and other funds and accounts.
 487. Agreement with the state.
 488. State and city's right to require redemption of bonds.
 489. Remedies of noteholders and bondholders.
 490. Notes and bonds as legal investments.
 491. Actions by and against fund.
 492. Exemptions from taxation.
 493. Annual report of trustees.
 494. Article not affected if in part unconstitutional or
 ineffective.
 495. Inconsistent provisions of other laws superseded.
 § 475. Short title. This article may be cited as the "City of Yonkers
Educational Construction Fund Act".
 § 476. Definitions. As used or referred to in this article, unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context:
 1. "Board" or "board of education" shall mean the board of education
of the city of Yonkers.
 2. "Bonds" and "notes" shall mean bonds and notes respectively, issued
by the fund pursuant to this article.
 3. "City" shall mean the city of Yonkers.
 4. "City agency" shall mean any officer, administration, department,
board, commission, bureau, division, agency or instrumentality of the
city of Yonkers.
 5. "Combined occupancy structure" shall mean any improvement on real
property or any interests therein or thereto, including fee interests,
easements, space rights or air rights, containing school accommodations
or other facilities of the board of education of the city of Yonkers in
combination with other compatible and lawful non-school uses designed
and intended to increase, from both a planning and an economic
viewpoint, the efficient utilization of available land areas. A combined
occupancy structure shall also include a structure in a project or
development under the auspices of the fund wherein non-school portions
of structures placed upon the overall site are not built in space rights
over the school portion, so long as some part of the non-school portion
is constructed over the school.
 6. "Commissioner of education" shall mean the commissioner of
education of the state of New York.
 7. "Corporation counsel" shall mean the corporation counsel of the
city of Yonkers.
 8. "Developer" shall mean and include any private individual,
partnership, trust or private or public corporation approved by the
board of education as being qualified and eligible to enter into one or
more leases, subleases or other agreements with the fund providing for
the construction, acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or
improvement of one or more combined occupancy structures; which
agreements shall be subject to approval by the board of education.
 9. "Commissioner of finance" shall mean the commissioner of finance of
the city of Yonkers.
 10. "Fund" shall mean the corporate governmental agency created by
section four hundred seventy-seven of this article.
 11. "Governor" shall mean the governor of the state of New York.
 12. "Letting agency" shall mean and include the board of education or
any other city agency which by agreement with the fund is to award the
contracts for a particular construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation
or improvement; or the fund itself, if it is to award such contracts.
 13. "Mayor" shall mean the mayor of the city of Yonkers.
 14. "Owner" shall mean and include any private individual,
partnership, trust or private or public corporation, taking possession
of the non-school portion of a combined occupancy structure pursuant to
a lease, sub-lease, conveyance or other agreement, or acquiring fee
title to or a leasehold or other interest in such non-school portion.
 15. "Planning commission" shall mean the planning commission of the
city of Yonkers.
 16. "Real property" shall mean lands, waters, rights in lands or
waters, structures, franchises and interests in land, including air or
space rights, and any and all other things and rights usually included
within the same term and includes also any and all interests in such
property less than full title, such as easements permanent or temporary,
rights-of-way, uses, leases, licenses and all other incorporeal
hereditaments in every estate, interest or right, legal or equitable.
 17. "School building" shall mean a separate structure entirely devoted
to use and occupancy for public school purposes; including incidental
and appurtenant recreational and other facilities.
 18. "School portion" or "school portion of combined occupancy
structure" shall mean that portion of a combined occupancy structure
designed, constructed, reconstructed, rehabilitated or improved for use
and occupancy for public school purposes; including incidental and
appurtenant recreational and other facilities.
 19. "State" shall mean the state of New York.
 § 477. City of Yonkers educational construction fund. 1. There is
hereby created the "city of Yonkers educational construction fund." The
fund shall be a corporate governmental agency constituting a public
benefit corporation. It shall be administered by a board of trustees
consisting of the chairman of the board of education of the city of
Yonkers, four members of such board appointed by the president thereof
and four members appointed by the mayor of the city of Yonkers. The
chairman of the board of education shall be the chairman of the fund.
The chairman and the trustees who are members of the board of education
shall serve during their terms of office as chairman and members,
respectively, of the board of education. The members first appointed by
the mayor shall serve for terms ending two, three, four and five years,
respectively, from the date of their appointment. Their successors shall
serve for terms of five years each.
 2. The trustees of the fund shall serve without salary, but each
trustee shall be entitled to reimbursement for his actual and necessary
expenses incurred in the performance of his official duties.
 3. The trustees of the fund may engage in private employment, or in a
profession or business, subject to the limitations contained in article
eighteen of the general municipal law. The fund shall, for the purposes
of such article, be a "municipal agency", and the trustees thereof shall
be "officers" of the agency.
 4. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of law, general,
special or local, no officer or employee of the state, or of any civil
division thereof, shall be deemed to have forfeited or shall forfeit his
office or employment by reason of his acceptance of appointment as a
trustee, officer or agent of the fund; provided, however, that a
trustee, officer or agent who holds such other public office or
employment shall receive no additional compensation, fee or allowance
for services rendered pursuant to this article, but shall be entitled to
reimbursement for his actual and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of such services.
 5. Any trustee may be removed by the commissioner of education for
cause shown after having been given notice of the charge and an
opportunity of defense, in the manner provided in this chapter for the
removal of members of boards of education of city school districts.
 6. The chairman of the fund shall preside over all meetings of the
trustees and shall have such other duties as the trustees may direct. A
vice-chairman who shall preside over all meetings of the fund in the
absence of the chairman and who shall have such other duties as the
trustees may direct may be designated from time to time by the trustees
from among the other trustees.
 7. The powers of the fund shall be vested in and exercised by no less
than six of the trustees then in office. The fund may delegate to one or
more of its trustees, or officers, agents or employees, such powers and
duties as the trustees may deem proper, provided, however, that all
contracts involving an estimated expense of ten thousand dollars or more
and all leases, subleases or other agreements to be entered into
pursuant to this article shall be approved prior to execution by no less
than five trustees of the fund.
 8. The fund may appoint such officers, employees and agents as it may
deem advisable and may prescribe their duties and fix their
compensation.
 § 478. General powers and duties of fund. The fund shall have the
following powers in addition to those specifically conferred elsewhere
in this article:
 1. To sue and be sued;
 2. To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure;
 3. To make and alter by-laws for its organization and internal
management;
 4. With the approval of the commissioner of finance of the city of
Yonkers to prescribe a system of accounts;
 5. To make rules and regulations governing the exercise of its
corporate powers and the fulfillment of its corporate purposes under
this article, which rules and regulations shall be filed with the
secretary of state in the manner provided by section one hundred two of
the executive law;
 6. With the approval of the board of education, to purchase, receive,
lease or otherwise acquire real and personal property necessary or
convenient for its corporate purposes;
 7. Subject to the terms and conditions of any lease, sublease or other
agreement with the board of education, to possess, hold, use and improve
real and personal property acquired by or on behalf of the fund so long
as its corporate existence shall continue;
 8. Upon a two-thirds vote of the trustees of the fund, and subject to
the approval of the board of education, to design, construct, acquire,
reconstruct, rehabilitate and improve combined occupancy structures and
incidental or appurtenant facilities thereto, or cause such structures
and facilities to be designed, constructed, acquired, reconstructed,
rehabilitated and improved in accordance with the provisions of this
article;
 9. In connection with such design, construction, acquisition,
reconstruction, rehabilitation and improvement, to install or cause to
be installed water, sewer, gas, electrical, telephone, heating, air
conditioning and other utility services, including appropriate
connections;
 10. Subject to the terms and conditions of any lease, sublease or
other agreement with the board of education, to maintain, repair and
keep up the real property held by it and all combined occupancy
structures and facilities constructed, acquired, reconstructed,
rehabilitated or improved pursuant to this article;
 11. Subject to the terms and conditions of any lease, sublease or
other agreement with third parties and to the determination of the board
of education that such real property is unnecessary for the present or
foreseeable future school building needs of the city of Yonkers, to
surrender to the appropriate city official, for other public use or for
sale, lease or other disposition in accordance with law, real property
held by the fund for its corporate purposes;
 12. Subject to the approval of the corporation counsel as to form, to
make and execute contracts, leases, subleases, and all other instruments
or agreements necessary or convenient for the exercise of its corporate
powers and the fulfillment of its corporate purposes under this article;
the term of any such lease or sublease or renewal thereof shall not be
limited by any provision of any general, special or local law or charter
applicable to the city of Yonkers or to the board of education of the
city of Yonkers;
 13. To procure insurance against any loss in connection with its
property and other assets in such amounts and from such insurers as it
deems desirable;
 14. With the consent of the board of education to use the agents,
employees and facilities of the board;
 15. To engage the services of construction, engineering,
architectural, legal and financial consultants, surveyors and
appraisers, on a contract basis or as employees, for professional
service and technical assistance and advice;
 16. To assist generally, the public works department of the city of
Yonkers in making land surveys, topographical surveys and valuation
appraisals of real property sought to be acquired by the board of
education of the city of Yonkers;
 17. To borrow money and issue negotiable notes, bonds or other
obligations and to provide for the rights of the holders thereof;
 18. To invest any funds held in reserves or sinking funds, or any
funds not required for immediate use or disbursement, at the discretion
of the fund, in obligations of the city, the state or the United States
government or obligations the principal and interest of which are
guaranteed by the city, the state or the United States government;
 19. To accept any gifts or grants or loans of funds and property or
financial or other aid in any form from the federal government or any
agency or instrumentality thereof or from the state or from any other
source and to comply, subject to the provisions of this article, with
the terms and conditions thereof;
 20. At the request or with the approval of the board of education, to
grant, sell, lease or otherwise transfer without public auction or
bidding any real property or any rights or interests therein or thereto,
including fee interests, easements, space rights or air rights, held by
it and occupied or reserved for school purposes and needed therefor, to
a private individual or private or public corporation solely and
exclusively for the purpose of developing and constructing therein or
thereon a combined occupancy structure, or a part or portion thereof,
within the meaning of this article subject to a prior and enforceable
agreement approved by the board of education for the reconveyance,
retransfer or lease back of the school portion thereof, upon completion,
for use and occupancy by the said board of education; provided, however,
that no such sale, lease or transfer of lands or rights therein or
thereto is authorized where the development of a combined occupancy
structure contemplates the erection of nonschool facilities or
improvements over an existing school or playground unless such combined
occupancy structure to be constructed over such playground shall provide
playground area at least equal in size to the then existing playground
area;
 21. At the request or with the approval of the board of education, to
contract with the owner or other developer of a combined occupancy
structure for the purchase or lease of the school portion thereof upon
completion for use and occupancy by the board of education of the city
of Yonkers;
 22. To grant, sell, lease, sublease or otherwise convey the school
portion of combined occupancy structures to the city of Yonkers for use
and occupancy by the board of education of the city of Yonkers; and
 23. To do any and all things necessary or convenient to carry out its
corporate purposes and exercise the powers given and granted to it in
this article.
 § 479. Relationship with the board of education of the city of
Yonkers. In order most effectively to carry out its corporate
purposes, the fund shall cooperate with the commissioner of finance and
the board of education of the city of Yonkers in matters relating to
land acquisition and capital planning for school buildings and
facilities. During the course of construction, reconstruction,
rehabilitation and improvement of combined occupancy structures the fund
shall consult with personnel of such board as the work progresses in
matters relating to space requirements, site plans, architectural
concept, and substantial changes in the plans and specifications therefor, and in matters relating to the original furnishings, equipment,
machinery and apparatus needed to furnish and equip the school portion
of such buildings and structures, upon the completion of work. The
board, on its part, shall perform such functions and services for the
fund as may be requested and the fund shall pay to the board, from any
monies of the fund available for such purpose, the reasonable cost of
such functions and services.
 § 480. Special provisions relating to acquisition and transfer of real
property. Notwithstanding any contrary provisions of any general,
special or local law, charter or ordinance: 1. Provided that the
trustees of the fund shall have formally approved by a two-thirds vote
the acquisition of such real property for the development of one or more
combined occupancy structures, any public corporation or officer
responsible for the acquisition of real property for school purposes in
the city of Yonkers is hereby authorized for and on behalf and in the
name of the city of Yonkers, to execute and deliver to the fund, on such
terms and for such consideration, if any, as may be determined by such
public corporation or officer and the fund, but not to exceed the cost
of acquisition thereof and the cost of improvements thereon, a lease for
a term not exceeding ninety-nine years, or a quitclaim deed conveying to
the fund all right, title and interest of such public corporation and of
the city of Yonkers in and to any of the lands acquired by such public
corporation or officer for school purposes, and in and to any of the
improvements thereon, for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing,
rehabilitating or improving thereon one or more combined occupancy
structures pursuant to this article for subsequent lease or sublease of
the school portion of such combined occupancy structures to such public
corporation or officer, in accordance with the terms of an agreement
entered into among them pursuant to this article. The fund is hereby
authorized to accept such lease or conveyance; to lease, sublease or
otherwise transfer or convey, such lands and improvements and all or any
part of the buildings or structures constructed, reconstructed,
rehabilitated or improved thereon, to third parties and to such public
corporation or officer in accordance with the provisions of this
article, and to hold the same subject to the terms of any such lease,
conveyance, sublease or other agreement; and such public corporation or
officer is hereby authorized to lease or sublease from the fund any such
lands or improvements or the school portion of any combined occupancy
structure, constructed, reconstructed, rehabilitated or improved thereon
pursuant to this article or other provisions of law, and to hold such
lands, improvements, buildings and school portions of combined occupancy
structures subject to the terms of any such lease, sublease or other
agreement.
 2. In the event that the fund shall fail, within five years from the
date of a lease or conveyance authorized pursuant to subdivision one of
this section, to construct, reconstruct, rehabilitate or improve the
buildings or structures thereon for which the conveyance was made, as
provided for in a lease, sublease or other agreement entered into with
such public corporation or officer, or in the event that such buildings
or structures shall cease to be used for the purposes intended, then and
in either event but subject to the terms of any lease, sublease or other
agreement undertaken by the fund, such lands, and the improvements and
buildings or structures thereon, shall revert to the city of Yonkers
with right of re-entry thereupon, and such lease or deed shall be made
subject to such conditions; provided, however, that as a condition
precedent to the exercise of such right of re-entry the city of Yonkers,
or such public corporation or officer, shall pay to the fund an amount
equal to the purchase price of such lands and improvements, the
depreciated cost of any buildings or structures constructed,
reconstructed, rehabilitated or improved thereon, and all other costs of
the fund incident to the acquisition of such lands and the financing of
construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement relating to
such buildings or structures, all as provided in the aforesaid lease,
sublease or other agreement entered into with such public corporation or
officer.
 § 481. Plans and specifications. 1. (a) No combined occupancy
structure shall be acquired, leased, erected, repaired, enlarged or
remodeled by the fund until the detailed plans and specifications and
cost estimates for the school portion thereof have been submitted to the
board of education and its approval has been endorsed thereon.
 (b) The board of education shall also review and approve the
architectural concept, including an outline of the plans and
specifications therefor, of the non-school portion of any combined
occupancy structure to be erected, repaired, enlarged or remodeled in
accordance with the provisions of any lease or other agreement between
the fund and any developer.
 2. Notwithstanding any other provision of law applicable to the city
school district of the city of Yonkers or the board of education of the
city of Yonkers, such district and such board shall only be required to
submit an outline of the plans and specifications for a combined
occupancy structure, and for the school portion thereof, to the
commissioner of education for his information.
 3. Every contract, lease or other agreement executed by or on behalf
of the fund which makes provision for the construction, acquisition,
reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the school portion of
any combined occupancy structure shall include a provision that the
architect who designed the facility, or an architect or engineer
retained specifically for the purpose of supervision, shall supervise
the work to be performed through to completion and shall see to it that
the materials furnished are in accordance with the drawings, plans,
specifications and contractual provisions therefor.
 § 482. Letting of construction contracts. 1. Any contract let by the
fund or by any letting agency on behalf of the fund for the
construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of a
combined occupancy structure or of the school portion thereof, shall be
in conformity with the provisions of section one hundred one of the
general municipal law.
 2. Except as otherwise provided in section two hundred twenty-two of
the labor law, every contract, lease or other agreement entered into by
or on behalf of the fund for the acquisition, lease, construction,
reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of any combined occupancy
structure shall contain a provision that, when the entire cost of any
such contemplated construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation or
improvement shall exceed three million dollars in the counties of the
Bronx, Kings, New York, Queens, and Richmond; one million five hundred
thousand dollars in the counties of Nassau, Suffolk and Westchester; and
five hundred thousand dollars in all other counties within the state,
separate specifications shall be prepared for the following three
subdivisions of the work to be performed:
 a. Plumbing and gas fitting;
 b. Steam heating, hot water heating, ventilating and air conditioning
apparatus; and
 c. Electric wiring and standard illuminating fixtures.
 Such specifications shall be drawn so as to permit the letting of
separate and independent contracts for each of the above three
subdivisions of work. Except as otherwise provided by the public housing
law, the provisions of which shall apply when the developer is the
Yonkers city housing authority, every developer or general contractor
undertaking the construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation or
improvement of any such combined occupancy structure pursuant to or in
furtherance of the provisions of this article shall let separate
contracts to the lowest responsible bidder for the three subdivisions of
the above specified work to persons, firms or corporations approved by
the chairman of the fund as being qualified, responsible and reliable
bidders engaged in these classes of work. All such qualified bidders
engaged in the above specified work shall be entitled to bid and to
receive, upon request, a copy of the plans and specifications. All such
bids shall be submitted to the fund and shall be opened publicly at a
stated time and place.
 2-a. Each bidder on a public work contract, where the preparation of
separate specifications is not required, shall submit with its bid a
separate sealed list that names each subcontractor that the bidder will
use to perform work on the contract, and the agreed-upon amount to be
paid to each, for: a. plumbing and gas fitting, b. steam heating, hot
water heating, ventilating and air conditioning apparatus and c.
electric wiring and standard illuminating fixtures. After the low bid is
announced, the sealed list of subcontractors submitted with such low bid
shall be opened and the names of such subcontractors shall be announced,
and thereafter any change of subcontractor or agreed-upon amount to be
paid to each shall require the approval of the public owner, upon a
showing presented to the public owner of legitimate construction need
for such change, which shall be open to public inspection. Legitimate
construction need shall include, but not be limited to, a change in
project specifications, a change in construction material costs, a
change to subcontractor status as determined pursuant to paragraph (e)
of subdivision two of section two hundred twenty-two of the labor law,
or the subcontractor has become otherwise unwilling, unable or
unavailable to perform the subcontract. The sealed lists of
subcontractors submitted by all other bidders shall be returned to them
unopened after the contract award.
 3. a. In addition to other bond or bonds, if any, required by law for
the completion of the school portion of a combined occupancy structure,
or in the absence of any such requirement, the fund shall nevertheless
require, prior to the approval of any lease or other agreement providing
for the construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of
any combined occupancy structure, that the developer, if other than the
Yonkers city housing authority, or general contractor, furnish a bond
guaranteeing prompt payment of moneys due to all persons furnishing
labor or materials to or for the person furnishing said bond or to his
or her subcontractors in the prosecution of the entire work provided for
in such lease or other agreement. Whenever the developer is the Yonkers
city housing authority, it shall require each of its contractors to
furnish such bond to said authority and fund with respect to the work to
be performed and materials supplied by such contractor, and no separate
or other payment bond shall be required to be furnished to the fund.
 b. A copy of such payment bond shall be kept in the office of the
chairman of the fund and a copy shall also be kept in the office of the
board of education; such copies shall be open to public inspection.
 c. Every person who has furnished labor or material, to or for the
developer or general contractor or contractor furnishing such payment
bond or to his or her subcontractors in the prosecution of the work
provided for in the lease or other agreement for which the bond is
furnished and who has not been paid in full therefor before the
expiration of a period of ninety days after the day on which the last of
the labor was performed or material was furnished by him or her for
which the claim is made, shall have the right to sue on such payment
bond in his or her own name for the amount, or the balance thereof,
unpaid at the time of commencement of the action; provided, however,
that a person having a direct contractual relationship with a
subcontractor of the developer or contractor furnishing the payment bond
but no contractual relationship express or implied with such developer
or contractor shall not have a right of action upon the bond unless he
or she shall have given written notice to such developer or contractor
furnishing the bond within ninety days from the date on which the last
of the labor was performed or the last of the material was furnished,
for which his or her claim is made, stating with substantial accuracy
the amount claimed and the name of the party to whom the material was
furnished or for whom the labor was performed. The notice shall be
served by delivering the same personally to the developer or contractor
furnishing said bond or by mailing the same by registered mail, postage
prepaid, in an envelope addressed to such developer or contractor at any
place where he or she maintains an office or conducts his or her
business or at his or her residence.
 § 483. Resources of the fund. 1. The fund may receive, accept,
invest, administer, expend and disburse for its corporate purposes
appropriations or advances from the city of Yonkers, and other revenues
and moneys made available or to be made available to the fund from any
or all sources, including gifts, grants, loans and payments from the
federal government, any state agency, any private foundation,
organization or individual, or any other source, for the construction,
acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation and improvement of combined
occupancy structures, for the maintenance and repair of such structures,
or for the costs of personal service and maintenance and operation of
the fund.
 2. All moneys of the fund, except as otherwise authorized or provided
in this article, shall be paid to the comptroller of the city of Yonkers
as agent of the fund, who shall not commingle such moneys with any other
moneys. Such moneys shall be deposited in two or more separate bank
accounts. The moneys in any account shall be paid out of checks signed
by the commissioner of finance on requisition of the chairman of the
fund or of such other officer or employee or officers or employees as
the fund shall authorize to make such requisition. All deposits of such
money shall, if required by the comptroller or the trustees of the fund,
be secured by obligations of the United States or of the city or the
state of a market value equal at all times to the amount of the deposit
and all banks and trust companies are authorized to give such security
for such deposits.
 3. Subject to the terms of any lease, sublease or other agreement
undertaken by the fund, any such moneys of the fund not required for
immediate use may, at the discretion of the fund, be invested by the
commissioner of finance in obligations of the United States, the state
or the city or in obligations the principal and interest of which are
guaranteed by the United States, the state or the city.
 4. The chairman of the fund shall annually, on or before January
first, prepare and submit to the mayor of the city of Yonkers, on behalf
of the trustees of the fund, an itemized budget for the administration
of the fund during the city's next succeeding fiscal year and
information as to the payment or provision for payment of obligations of
the fund expected to be required during such year.
 5. The commissioner of finance, or his legally authorized
representative, is hereby authorized and empowered from time to time to
examine the books and accounts of the fund including its receipts,
disbursements, contracts, reserves, investments, and any other matters
relating to its financial standing. Such an examination shall be
conducted by the commissioner of finance at least once in every five
years; the commissioner of finance is authorized, however, to accept
from the fund, in lieu of such an examination, an external examination
of its books and accounts made at the request of the trustees of the
fund.
 § 484. Lease and other agreements. 1. Any agreement entered into
between the fund and the owner or developer of a proposed combined
occupancy structure pursuant to section four hundred seventy-eight of
this chapter shall provide for (i) the construction, acquisition,
reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of one or more combined
occupancy structures, and the purchase or acquisition of the original
furnishings, equipment, machinery and apparatus to be used in the school
portion of a combined occupancy structure upon completion of the work,
(ii) the reconveyance, retransfer or leasing of all or any portion
thereof and of the real property or interest therein related thereto,
including real property originally acquired by the board of education in
the name of the city of Yonkers, upon the completion of construction,
acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement upon such
terms and conditions as may be agreed upon, (iii) the leasing or
subleasing of such combined occupancy structures and property, or
separately of the school and non-school portions thereof, by the fund
upon completion for a term not exceeding ninety-nine years and upon such
terms and conditions including annual rental as may be agreed upon, and
(iv) the conveyance to the board of education in the name of the city of
Yonkers of title to the school portion of any such combined occupancy
structure at the expiration of the term of the lease, or any renewal or
extension thereof, or upon earlier payment in full of the total amount
specified therein, without additional charge therefor. The board of
education shall approve any such agreement and shall be a party thereto.
 2. a. Any lease, sublease or other agreement entered into between the
fund and the owner or developer of a proposed combined occupancy
structure shall provide for payment to the fund of the fair market value
of such easements, space rights, air rights or other fee or leasehold
interests as are to be held or retained by such owner or developer or
his successor in interest under the terms of such agreement.
 b. Whenever the easements, space rights, air rights or other fee or
leasehold interests held or retained by such owner or developer, if
other than the Yonkers city housing authority, and/or the non-school
improvements constructed or erected therein or thereon, shall be exempt
from real property taxes pursuant to the provisions of section four
hundred ninety-two of this article, such lease, sublease or other
agreement shall also provide for the payment to the fund of annual or
other periodic amounts equal to the amount of real property taxes that
would otherwise have been paid or payable with respect to such
easements, space rights, air rights or other fee or leasehold interests,
and with respect to the non-school improvements constructed or erected
therein or thereon, over the term of such lease, sublease or other
agreement.
 c. (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of section fifty-two of the
public housing law, whenever the Yonkers city housing authority is such
owner or developer, such lease, sublease or other agreement shall also
provide for the payment by such authority to the fund or the city of
such amount, for any year or years, as payment in lieu of real property
taxes on the non-school portion constituting a project, as defined by
the public housing law, as may be agreed upon among the fund, the city
and the authority, and as may be approved by the commissioner of the
state division of housing and community renewal if such project is a
state project as defined in the public housing law, and by the federal
government if such project is a federal project as defined in the public
housing law.
 (2) For any of the purposes of the public housing law, including,
specifically, section seventy-three thereof, and notwithstanding any
other provision in the public housing law for establishing the amount of
taxes paid or payable with respect to a project for such year and the
resulting amount of tax exemption, in computing the amount of tax
exemption granted to such non-school portion constituting a project, as
defined by the public housing law, the amount of such payment in lieu of
taxes paid or payable with respect thereto for any year shall be deemed
to be the amount of taxes paid or payable for such year.
 3. Any lease, sublease or other agreement entered into between the
fund and city of Yonkers or the board of education pursuant to section
four hundred fifty-four of this chapter shall provide for (i) the
construction, acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement
of one or more combined occupancy structures and (ii) the leasing or
subleasing of the school portion of such structures to the city or the
board at an annual cost or rental not in excess of the average annual
cost or rental of comparable new public school facilities in the city of
Yonkers and for a term not exceeding ninety-nine years, and upon such
other terms and conditions as may be agreed upon.
 4. Every lease, sublease or other agreement executed pursuant to this
article shall be subject to the approval of the commissioner of finance
with respect to all rentals or other payments to be made thereunder by
the city of Yonkers, the board of education or by the owner or developer
of a combined occupancy structure and shall contain a clause that any
agreement of the city of Yonkers thereunder shall be deemed executory to
the extent of the moneys available to the city therefor and no liability
on account thereof shall be incurred by the city beyond the moneys
available for the purpose thereof.
 § 485. Notes and bonds of the fund. 1. (a) Subject to the provisions
of section four hundred eighty-six of this chapter, the fund shall have
the power and is hereby authorized from time to time to issue its
negotiable bonds and notes in such principal amount as, in the opinion
of the fund, shall be necessary, after taking into account other monies
which may be available for the purpose, to provide sufficient funds for
achieving its corporate purposes, including the construction,
acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the school
portion of combined occupancy structures pursuant to this article, the
payment of interest on bonds and notes of the fund, establishment of
reserves to secure such bonds and notes, and all other expenditures of
the fund incident to and necessary or convenient to carry out its
corporate purposes and powers;
 (b) The fund shall have power, from time to time, to issue renewal
notes, to issue bonds to pay notes and, whenever it deem refunding
expedient, to refund any bonds by the issuance of new bonds, whether the
bonds to be refunded have or have not matured, and to issue bonds partly
to refund bonds then outstanding and partly for any other purpose. The
refunding bonds shall be sold and the proceeds applied to the purchase,
redemption or payment of the bonds to be refunded;
 (c) Except as may otherwise be expressly provided by the fund, every
issue of its notes or bonds shall be general obligations of the fund
payable out of any revenues or monies of the fund, subject only to any
agreements with the holders of particular notes or bonds pledging any
particular receipts or revenues;
 (d) Whether or not the notes or bonds are of such form and character
as to be negotiable instruments under the provisions of article eight of
the uniform commercial code, the notes or bonds shall be and hereby are
made negotiable instruments within the meaning of and for all the
purposes of the uniform commercial code, subject only to the provisions
of the notes or bonds for registration.
 2. The notes and bonds of the fund shall be authorized by resolution
of the trustees, shall bear such date or dates, and shall mature at such
time or times, in the case of any such note, or any renewals thereof,
not exceeding five years, from the date of issue of such original note,
and in the case of any such bond not exceeding forty years from the date
of issue, as such resolution or resolutions may provide. The notes and
bonds shall bear interest at such rate or rates, be in such
denominations, be in such form, either coupon or registered, carry such
registration privileges, be executed in such manner, be payable in such
medium of payment, at such place or places and be subject to such terms
of redemption as such resolution or resolutions may provide. The notes
and bonds of the fund may be sold by the fund, at public or private
sale, at such price or prices as the fund shall determine. No notes or
bonds of the fund may be sold by the fund at private sale, however,
unless such sale and the terms thereof have been approved in writing by
the city comptroller.
 3. Any resolution or resolutions authorizing any notes or bonds or any
issue thereof may contain provisions, which shall be a part of the
contract with the holders thereof, as to:
 (a) pledging all or any part of the fees and charges made or received
by the fund, and all or any part of (i) the rentals or other payments to
be received by the fund with respect to the school portion of combined
occupancy structures financed with the proceeds of such bonds and notes,
and (ii) the rentals or other payments to be received by the fund with
respect to the non-school portion of combined occupancy structures and
(iii) any other monies, assets or accounts received or to be received by
the fund or pledged or assigned to the fund to secure the payment of
such notes or bonds or of any issue thereof, subject to such agreements
with bondholders or noteholders as may then exist;
 (b) pledging all or any part of the assets of the fund to secure the
payment of such notes or bonds or of any issue of notes or bonds,
subject to such agreements with noteholders or bondholders as may then
exist;
 (c) the use and disposition of the gross income of the fund in
connection with combined occupancy structures financed or constructed,
acquired, reconstructed, rehabilitated or improved by it or on its
behalf;
 (d) the setting aside of reserves or sinking funds and the regulation and disposition thereof;
 (e) limitations on the purpose to which the proceeds of sale of notes
or bonds may be applied and pledging such proceeds to secure the payment
of the notes or bonds or of any issue thereof;
 (f) limitations on the issuance of additional notes or bonds; the
terms upon which additional notes or bonds may be issued and secured;
the refunding of outstanding or other notes or bonds;
 (g) the procedure, if any, by which the terms of any contract with
noteholders or bondholders may be amended or abrogated, the amount of
notes or bonds the holders of which must consent thereto, and the manner
in which such consent may be given;
 (h) limitations on the amount of monies to be expended by the fund for
operating, administrative or other expenses of the fund;
 (i) vesting in a trustee or trustees such property, rights, powers and
duties in trust as the fund may determine, which may include any or all
of the rights, powers and duties of the trustee appointed by the
bondholders pursuant to this article, and limiting or abrogating the
right of the bondholders to appoint a trustee under this article or
limiting the rights, powers and duties of such trustee;
 (j) any other matters, of like or different character, which in any
way affect the security or protection of the notes or bonds.
 4. It is the intention hereof that any pledge made by the fund shall
be valid and binding from the time when the pledge is made; that the
monies or property so pledged and thereafter received by the fund shall
immediately be subject to the lien of such pledge without any physical
delivery thereof or further act; and that the lien of any such pledge
shall be valid and binding as against all parties having claims of any
kind in tort, contract or otherwise against the fund, irrespective of
whether such parties have notice thereof. Neither the resolution nor any
other instrument by which a pledge is created need be recorded.
 5. Neither the trustees of the fund nor any person executing the notes
or bonds shall be liable personally on the notes or bonds or be subject
to any personal liability or accountability by reason of the issuance
thereof.
 6. The fund, subject to such agreements with noteholders or
bondholders as may then exist, shall have power out of any funds
available therefor to purchase notes or bonds of the fund, which shall
thereupon be cancelled, at a price not exceeding (a) if the notes or
bonds are then redeemable, the redemption price then applicable plus
accrued interest to the next interest payment date thereon, or (b) if
the notes or bonds are not then redeemable, the redemption price
applicable on the first date after such purchase upon which the notes or
bonds become subject to redemption plus accrued interest to such date.
 7. Neither the state nor the city of Yonkers shall be liable on the
notes or bonds of the fund and such notes and bonds shall not be a debt
of the city or the state, and such notes and bonds shall contain on the
face thereof a statement to such effect.
 § 486. Reserve funds, appropriations and other funds and accounts. 1.
(a) The fund shall create and establish a special fund (herein referred
to as capital reserve fund), and shall pay into such capital reserve
fund (1) any monies appropriated and made available by the state or the
city of Yonkers for the purposes of such fund, (2) any proceeds of sale
of notes or bonds to the extent provided in the resolution of the fund
authorizing the issuance thereof, and (3) any other monies which may be
made available to the fund for the purpose of such capital reserve fund
from any other source or sources. All monies held in the capital reserve
fund, except as hereinafter provided, shall be used solely for the
payment of the principal of bonds of the fund as the same mature, the
purchase of bonds of the fund, the payment of interest on such bonds of
the fund or the payment of any redemption premium required to be paid
when such bonds are redeemed prior to maturity; provided, however, that
moneys in such capital reserve fund shall not be withdrawn therefrom at
any time in such amount as would reduce the amount of such fund to less
than the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing and becoming
due in any succeeding fiscal year on all bonds of the fund then
outstanding, except for the purpose of paying principal of and interest
on such bonds of the fund maturing and becoming due and for the payment
of which other monies of the fund are not available. Any income or
interest earned by, or increment to, the capital reserve fund due to the
investment thereof may be transferred to other funds or accounts to the
extent it does not reduce the amount of the capital reserve fund below
the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing and becoming due
in any succeeding calendar year on all bonds of the fund then
outstanding.
 (b) The fund shall not issue bonds at any time if the maximum amount
of principal and interest maturing and becoming due in a succeeding
fiscal year on such bonds then to be issued and on all other bonds of
the fund then outstanding will exceed the amount of the capital reserve
fund at the time of issuance unless the fund, at the time of issuance of
such bonds, shall deposit in the capital reserve fund from the proceeds
of the bonds so to be issued, or otherwise, an amount which, together
with the amount then in such fund, will be not less than the maximum
amount of principal and interest maturing and becoming due in any
succeeding fiscal year on such bonds then to be issued and on all other
bonds of the fund then outstanding.
 (c) To assure the continued operation and solvency of the fund for the
carrying out of the public purposes of this article, provision is made
in paragraph (a) of this subdivision for the accumulation in the capital
reserve fund of an amount equal to the maximum amount of principal and
interest maturing and becoming due in any succeeding fiscal year on all
bonds of the fund then outstanding. In order further to assure such
maintenance of the capital reserve fund, the board of education shall
annually request from the city of Yonkers and pay over to the fund, for
deposit in the capital reserve fund, such sum, if any, as shall be
certified by the chairman of the fund to the board, the mayor and the
director of the budget of the city of Yonkers as necessary to restore
the capital reserve fund to an amount equal to the maximum amount of
principal and interest maturing and becoming due in the next succeeding
fiscal year on the bonds of the fund then outstanding; provided,
however, that such sum shall have been first appropriated by the city to
the board or shall otherwise have been made lawfully available to the
board for such purpose. The chairman of the fund shall annually, not
later than the fifteenth day of February in each year, make and deliver
to the board and the mayor his certificate stating the amount, if any,
required to restore the capital reserve fund to the amount aforesaid and
the amount so stated, if any, shall be paid to the fund by the board
during the then current fiscal year of the fund. In the event of the
failure or inability of the board to pay over the stated amount to the
fund on or before August first of the same year, the chairman of the
fund shall forthwith make and deliver to the mayor a further certificate
restating the amount so required and such amount shall be paid over to
the fund by the commissioner of finance out of the next payment of state
aid apportioned to the city of Yonkers on behalf of the city school
district of the city of Yonkers for the support of common schools. Any
amount so paid over to the fund shall be deducted from the corresponding
apportionment of state aid otherwise credited to the board of education
for its purposes and shall not obligate the state to make or entitle the
city or the board of education to receive any additional or increased
apportionment or payment of state aid for school purposes.
 (d) In computing the amount of the capital reserve fund for the
purposes of this section, securities in which all or a portion of such
fund shall be invested shall be valued at par, or if purchased at less
than par, at their cost to the fund.
 2. The fund may create and establish with the commissioner of finance
or with a trustee one or more additional funds or accounts and, subject
to agreements with bondholders and noteholders, may pay into such funds
or accounts (i) fees and charges collected by the fund, (ii) monies
which shall be transferred from the capital reserve fund pursuant to the
provisions of paragraph (a) of subdivision one of this section, and
(iii) any other monies which may be made available to the fund from any
other source or sources. The monies held in or credited to any such
reserve fund or account may, in the discretion of the fund but subject
to agreements with bondholders and noteholders, be used by the fund (a)
for the repayment of advances from the city of Yonkers, (b) to reimburse
the board of education of the city of Yonkers the reasonable costs of
services performed by the board for the fund pursuant to section four
hundred seventy-nine of this article, (c) to pay all costs, expenses and
charges of financing, including fees and expenses of trustees and paying
agents, (d) for transfers to the capital reserve fund, (e) for the
payment of principal of and interest on bonds or notes issued by the
fund when the same shall become due, whether at maturity or on call for
redemption, and for the payment of any redemption premium required to be
paid where such bonds or notes are redeemed prior to their stated
maturities, and to purchase bonds or notes issued by the fund, (f) for
such other corporate purposes as the fund in its discretion shall
determine and provide, or (g) for payment to the board of education for
school purposes.
 § 487. Agreement with the state. The state does hereby pledge to and
agree with the holders of any notes or bonds issued under this article,
that the state will not limit or alter the rights hereby vested in the
fund to fulfill the terms of any agreements made with the holders
thereof, or in any way impair the rights and remedies of such holders
until such notes or bonds, together with the interest thereon, with
interest on any unpaid installments of interest, and all costs and
expenses in connection with any action or proceeding by or on behalf of
such holders, are fully met and discharged. The fund is authorized to
include this pledge and agreement of the state in any agreement with the
holders of such notes or bonds.
 § 488. State and city's right to require redemption of bonds.
Notwithstanding and in addition to any provisions for the redemption of
bonds which may be contained in any contract with the holders of the
bonds, either the state or the city of Yonkers may, upon furnishing
sufficient funds therefor, require the fund to redeem, prior to
maturity, as a whole, any issue of bonds on any interest payment date
not less than twenty years after the date of the bonds of such issue at
one hundred five per centum of their face value and accrued interest or
at such lower redemption price as may be provided in the bonds in case
of the redemption thereof as a whole on the redemption date. Notice of
such redemption shall be published in at least two newspapers published
and circulating in the city of Yonkers at least twice, the first
publication to be at least thirty days before the date of redemption.
 § 489. Remedies of noteholders and bondholders. 1. In the event that
the fund shall default in the payment of principal of or interest on any
issue of notes or bonds after the same shall become due, whether at
maturity or upon call for redemption, and such default shall continue
for a period of thirty days, or in the event that the fund shall fail or
refuse to comply with the provisions of this article, or shall default
in any agreement made with the holders of any issue of notes or bonds,
the holders of twenty-five per centum in aggregate principal amount of
the notes or bonds of such issue then outstanding, by instrument or
instruments filed in the office of the city clerk of the city of Yonkers
and approved or acknowledged in the same manner as a deed to be
recorded, may appoint a trustee to represent the holders of such notes
or bonds for the purposes herein provided.
 2. Such trustee may, and upon written request of the holders of
twenty-five per centum in principal amount of such notes or bonds then
outstanding shall, in his or its own name:
 (a) by suit, action or proceeding in accordance with the civil
practice law and rules, enforce all rights of the noteholders or
bondholders and require the fund to carry out agreements with such
noteholders or bondholders and to perform its duties under this article;
 (b) bring suit upon such notes or bonds;
 (c) by action or suit, require the fund to account as if it were the
trustee of an express trust for the holders of such notes or bonds;
 (d) by action or suit, enjoin any acts or things which may be unlawful
or in violation of the rights of the holders of such notes or bonds;
 (e) declare all such notes or bonds due and payable, and if all
defaults shall be made good, then, with the consent of the holders of
twenty-five per centum of the principal amount of such notes or bonds
then outstanding, annul such declaration and its consequences.
 3. Such trustees shall in addition to the foregoing have and possess
all of the powers necessary or appropriate for the exercise of any
functions specifically set forth herein or incident to the general
representation of bondholders or noteholders in the enforcement and
protection of their rights.
 4. The supreme court shall have jurisdiction of any suit, action or
proceeding by the trustee on behalf of such noteholders or bondholders.
The venue of any such suit, action or proceeding shall be laid in the
county of Westchester.
 5. Before declaring the principal of notes or bonds due and payable,
the trustee shall first give thirty days' notice in writing to the mayor
of the city of Yonkers, to the fund, to the board of education of the
city of Yonkers and to the attorney general of the state.
 § 490. Notes and bonds as legal investments. The notes and bonds of
the fund are hereby made securities in which all public officers and
bodies of this state and all municipalities and municipal subdivisions,
all insurance companies and associations, and other persons carrying on
an insurance business, all banks, bankers, trust companies, savings
banks and savings associations, including savings and loan associations,
building and loan associations, investment companies and other persons
carrying on a banking business, all administrators, guardians,
executors, trustees and other fiduciaries, and all other persons
whatsoever who are now or may hereafter be authorized to invest in bonds
or other obligations of the state, may properly and legally invest
funds, including capital, in their control or belonging to them.
 § 491. Actions by and against fund. 1. The state supreme court shall
have exclusive jurisdiction of any action, suit or special proceeding
brought by or against or involving the fund. The venue of any action,
suit or special proceeding brought against the funds shall be laid in
the city of Yonkers and county of Westchester.
 2. In every action against the fund for damages, for injuries to real
or personal property, or for the destruction thereof, or for personal
injuries or death, the complaint shall contain an allegation that at
least thirty days have elapsed since the demand, claim or claims upon
which such action is founded were presented to a trustee or officer of
the fund and that the fund has neglected or refused to make an
adjustment or payment thereof for thirty days after such presentment.
 3. Except in an action for wrongful death, an action against the fund
for damages for injuries to real or personal property, or for the
destruction thereof, or for personal injuries, alleged to have been
sustained, shall not be commenced more than one year and ninety days
after the cause of action therefor shall have accrued, nor unless a
notice of claim shall have been served on the fund within the time limit
established by, and in compliance with all requirements of section
fifty-e of the general municipal law. An action against the fund for
wrongful death shall be commenced in accordance with the notice of claim
and time limitation provisions of title eleven of article nine of the
public authorities law.
 § 492. Exemptions from taxation. 1. It is hereby declared that the
creation of the fund and the carrying out of its corporate purposes is
in all respects for the benefit of the people of the city of Yonkers and
state of New York and for the improvement of their health, safety,
welfare and security and is a public purpose and the fund shall be
regarded as performing a governmental function in the exercise of the
powers conferred upon it by this article.
 2. The monies and properties of the fund, including all properties
constructed, acquired, reconstructed, rehabilitated or improved by it or
on its behalf and all properties under its jurisdiction, control or
supervision, and all of its operations and activities shall be exempt
from taxation.
 3. The notes and bonds of the fund issued pursuant to this article,
and the income therefrom, and all fees, charges, rents, gifts, grants,
revenues, receipts and other monies received or to be received by the
fund shall at all times be free from taxation, except for estate and
gift taxes and taxes on transfers.
 § 493. Annual report of trustees. The trustees of the fund shall
submit to the mayor, the board of education and the city council of the
city of Yonkers annually on or before February first, a full report of
its activities and operations through the thirtieth day of the preceding
September, including: (1) details as to projects in planning, projects
in the process of construction, acquisition, reconstruction,
rehabilitation or improvement, and projects completed; (2) the
performance record of the trustees in completing construction in
accordance with the desired completion dates and within the estimated
costs; (3) the architects, engineers and other private consultants
engaged by the trustees of the fund on a contract basis and a statement
of the total amount paid and yet to be paid, or estimated yet to be
paid, under each such contract; (4) the monies made available for the
purposes of the fund; (5) details as to any lease, sublease or agreement
executed by the trustees of the fund and the annual rentals to be paid
or received on account thereof; (6) its assets and liabilities at the
end of the fiscal year, including the status of reserve funds and other
funds and accounts; (7) a schedule of its bonds and notes outstanding at
the end of its fiscal year, together with the amounts redeemed and
incurred during such fiscal year, and such other information related to
the activities and operation of the fund as the trustees may consider
pertinent.
 § 494. Article not affected if in part unconstitutional or
ineffective. If any section, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause
or provision of this article shall be unconstitutional or be ineffective
in whole or in part, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional or
ineffective, it shall be valid or effective and no other section,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or provision shall on account
thereof be deemed invalid or ineffective.
 § 495. Inconsistent provisions of other laws superseded. Insofar as
the provisions of this article are inconsistent with the provisions of
any other general, special or local law, or with the provisions of any
charter or ordinance, the provisions of this article shall be
controlling. The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to
prevent the city of Yonkers from financing the cost of acquiring,
constructing, reconstructing, rehabilitating or improving one or more
school buildings by the issuance of bonds or capital notes pursuant to
the local finance law.
 ARTICLE 10-C
 WINTER SPORTS EDUCATION TRUST FUND
Section 495-a. Winter sports education trust fund; appointment of board
 of trustees to administer fund.
 § 495-a. Winter sports education trust fund; appointment of board of
trustees to administer fund. 1. There is hereby created in the custody
of the comptroller the winter sports education trust fund.
 2. Such fund shall consist of the state lottery revenues paid into the
same by the division of the lottery pursuant to the provisions of
subdivision five of section ninety-two-c of the state finance law and
all increments to principal derived from investment gain, interest
accumulation, and other sources of income.
 3. The comptroller shall invest and keep invested all moneys belonging
to the fund in the manner authorized by section ninety-eight of the
state finance law.
 4. a. Commencing on or before August fifteenth, nineteen hundred
eighty-one and on or before the fifteenth day of August of each
succeeding year, the comptroller shall issue a certificate of earnings
and accumulated income upon the principal of such trust fund as of the
end of the preceding state fiscal year. Such certificate shall also
include a statement of accumulated income for the prior fiscal years
remaining unexpended at the close of such year.
 b. The principal and the amount of earnings and accumulated income
upon the principal of the trust fund for the prior fiscal year, as
reported by the comptroller on August fifteenth annually, shall be
available for appropriation to the New York state olympic regional
development authority. Any funds so appropriated shall be used for the
purpose of supporting athletic and recreational education within the
olympic region as defined in subdivision three of section two thousand
six hundred seven of the public authorities law and for retiring
outstanding loan obligations of the olympic regional development
authority in the state fiscal year nineteen hundred
ninety-six--ninety-seven. All expenditures from the fund for the
hereinabove purposes shall be made on the audit and warrant of the
comptroller upon vouchers approved by the chairman of the fund.
 ARTICLE 10-D
 REGIONAL COLLEGE COOPERATIVE SERVICES BOARD
Section 496. Legislative declaration.
 497. Establishment of regional college cooperative services
 board.
 498. Powers and duties.
 499. Additional members of a regional college cooperative
 services board; withdrawal.
 500. Standards for regional college cooperative services board;
 review of plans.
 § 496. Legislative declaration. The legislature hereby finds and
declares that the scarcity of higher educational facilities within the
state poses a serious threat to the future of the state's citizens.
Recognizing this scarcity and the threat posed thereby, it is the sense
of the members of the legislature that the higher educational needs of
our citizens can best be served by the enactment of legislation that
will allow for the wider use of existing educational facilities within
the state.
 § 497. Establishment of regional college cooperative services board.
1. Upon the request of the governing board of at least two or more
non-public institutions of higher education, the commissioner of
education shall call a joint meeting of the members of such governing
boards for the purpose of determining whether a regional college
cooperative services board should be established within the geographic
area in which such institutions are located. In the event that a
regional college center with similar purposes is already in existence in
the state, the commissioner of education shall extend to such center the
opportunity to become a regional college cooperative services board.
 2. If the commissioner determines that such board will strengthen and
best develop the educational resources within the area to be served, he
shall call a meeting to elect a board of trustees of such board. Notice
of such meeting shall be mailed by the commissioner to each member of
the governing board of each institution at his last known address at
least five days prior to such meeting. At such meeting the governing
board of each institution shall have one vote.
 3. Within one month after taking office, the trustees-elect shall
apply to the regents for a charter as a regional college cooperative
services board.
 4. Such board shall elect a president, a secretary and a treasurer.
Before entering upon his duties, such treasurer shall execute and file
with such board an official undertaking in such sum and with such
sureties as directed by the board and approved by the commissioner. The
treasurer need not be a member of such board. The funds of such board
shall be deposited in a bank or banks designated by its board of
trustees and shall be expended only under the direction of such board
upon properly authenticated vouchers.
 5. The term of office of the trustees of such board shall be five
years except that the members of the first board of trustees shall
determine by lot the year in which the term of office of each trustee
shall expire so that as nearly as possible the terms of one-fifth of the
members of such board will expire annually. Thereafter the successors of
such trustees shall be elected annually at a joint meeting of the member
institutions. Such meeting shall be called by the secretary of the board
who shall mail a notice of such meeting to each trustee of each of the
member institutions of the board at his last known address, at least ten
days prior to such joint meeting. At such joint meeting the board of
trustees of each member institution of the board shall have one vote.
The board of trustees of any such member institution may, by resolution,
designate one or more members of such board to attend such joint meeting
and cast the vote of such board.
 § 498. Powers and duties. 1. Each board shall, within sixty days
after the receipt of its charter, formulate a plan to provide for joint
or cooperative programs, services and arrangements and shall include,
but not be limited to, faculty or administrative staff, use of library,
television, research and laboratory facilities and the granting of
credit for courses of study leading to a degree.
 2. Such plan shall provide for the sharing of expenses incurred by
each participating member institution on such basis or division as may
be jointly agreed upon.
 § 499. Additional members of a regional college cooperative services
board; withdrawal. 1. The governing board of any non-public institution
of higher education which is not a member institution in a regional
college cooperative services board may adopt a resolution requesting
that such institution become such a member institution in an existing
board. Duplicate copies of such resolution certified by the clerk of
such governing board shall be filed with the board of trustees of the
regional board. If such board approves such resolution such approval
shall be endorsed thereon and a copy thereof shall be filed with the
commissioner. Upon application, the regents may amend the charter of
such regional board by including such proposed member institution in
such board and thereupon such member institution shall have the same
rights and duties and privileges as other member institutions therein.
 2. The refusal of the board of trustees of such regional board to
approve an application for membership in such board by any higher
educational institution shall be subject to review by the commissioner
upon application of such applying institution and, if so directed by the
commissioner, such board of trustees shall approve such application and
request the regents to amend the charter of the regional board to
include such institution as a member institution thereof.
 3. A board of trustees of a member institution may file with the board
of trustees of a regional board and with the commissioner not less than
ninety days before the first day of July in any year, a resolution
requesting the withdrawal of such member institution from such board.
Thereafter, upon application of such member institution or such board,
the regents may amend the charter of such board so that such institution
shall cease to be a member thereof on such July first or such later date
as shall be fixed by the regents.
 § 500. Standards for regional college cooperative services board;
review of plans. The commissioner shall by regulation provide the
standards for regional boards and the plans of such boards shall be
reviewed by the commissioner at least every three years.
 ARTICLE 11
 STATE TEACHERS' RETIREMENT SYSTEM FOR PUBLIC SCHOOL TEACHERS
Section 501. Definitions.
 502. Retirement system.
 503. Membership of system.
 504. Retirement board; members; terms of office; vacancies.
 505. Election of the active teacher members of the board.
 505-a. Election of retired teacher member of board.
 506. Board meetings; oaths of office; quorum; expenses.
 507. Officers of board; custody of funds.
 508. Investment of funds; interest; accounts; reports.
 508-a. New York state teachers' retirement system MWBE asset
 management and financial institution strategy.
 509. Statements of teachers' service; determination of service
 creditable; service certificates.
 510. Superannuation retirement.
 511. Disability retirement.
 511-a. Special service retirement.
 512. Withdrawal and death benefits.
 512-a. Deferred retirement.
 512-b. Loans.
 513. Optional allowances.
 514. Benefits to participants in old retirement fund.
 515. Funds enumerated.
 516. Annuity savings fund; contributions and payments.
 517. Annuity reserve fund; pension accumulation fund.
 518. Pension reserve fund.
 518-a. Supplemental retirement allowance fund.
 519. Expense fund.
 520. Duties of employer.
 521. Collection of contributions.
 522. Transfer of contributions between retirement systems.
 523. State supervision.
 524. Exemption from taxation and execution.
 525. Protection against fraud.
 526. Merger of local teachers' retirement and pension systems
 with the state system.
 527. (Enacted without section heading)
 528. Pensions-providing-for-increased-take-home-pay.
 529. Pensions providing for increased take home pay for
 certain teachers.
 530. Pensions-providing-for-increased-take-home-pay-for-teachers.
 531. Abandonment of unclaimed contributions or other benefits;
 transfer to the pension accumulation fund.
 532. Supplemental retirement allowance.
 532-a. Cost-of-living adjustment.
 533. Non-contributory retirement plan.
 535. Career retirement plan.
 536. Deductions from benefits of certain retired members.
 537. Lump sum payment of de minimis service retirement
 benefit.
 538. Excess benefit plan.
 539. Certain actions by retiring members.
 § 501. Definitions. The following words and phrases used in this
article shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning is
plainly required by the context: 1. "Retirement system" shall mean the
New York state teachers' retirement system provided for in section five
hundred two of this article.
 2. "Retirement board" shall mean the retirement board provided by
section five hundred four of this article.
 3. "Employer" shall mean the state of New York, the city, the village,
school district board or trustee, or other agency of and within the
state by which a teacher is paid.
 4. "Teacher" shall mean any regular teacher, special teacher,
including any school librarian or physical training teacher, principal,
vice-principal, supervisor, supervisory principal, director,
superintendent, city superintendent, assistant city superintendent,
district superintendent and other member of the teaching or professional
staff of any class, public school, vocational school, truant reformatory
school or parental school, and of any or all classes of schools within
the state of New York, including schools on the Indian reservation,
conducted under the order and superintendence of and wholly or partly at
the expense of the New York state education department or of a duly
elected board of education, board of school directors or board of
trustees of the state or of any city or school district thereof,
provided that no person shall be deemed a teacher within the meaning of
this article who is not so employed for full time outside vacation
periods. The word, "teacher," shall also include any person employed in
the state education department who at the time he entered such
employment, or within one year prior thereto, was a teacher within the
foregoing definition, or who was engaged in such department in the
performance of duties pertaining to instructional services prior to
September first, nineteen hundred eighty-six or who provides
instructional services at the New York state school for the blind or the
New York state school for the deaf, but shall not include a person who
is a teacher within the foregoing definition, and who elects to become a
member of the New York state employees' retirement system pursuant to
paragraph five of subdivision c of section forty of the retirement and
social security law upon his entry, on or after April first, nineteen
hundred fifty, into his employment as such a teacher in a state-operated
institution or community college under the jurisdiction of the board of
trustees of the state university, or who is a teacher within the
foregoing definition, and who elects to become a member of the New York
city employees' retirement system, upon his entry, on or after April
first, nineteen hundred fifty-six, into his employment as such a teacher
in a community college operated by the city of New York, or who is a
teacher within the foregoing definition, and who elects the optional
retirement program established either by article eight-b or by article
three, part V of this chapter. In all cases of doubt, the retirement
board shall determine whether any person is a teacher as defined in this
article.
 5. "Present teacher" shall mean any teacher who was a teacher on or
before the first day of August, nineteen hundred twenty-one, whose
membership in the retirement system created by this article has been
continuous and
 a. who became a member of the retirement system created by this act on
or before the first day of May, nineteen hundred twenty-four, provided
that any such teacher becoming a member after the establishment of the
system pay to the system on entrance the amount he would have
contributed had he become a member as of the date of establishment; or
 b. who was a member of a local district pension system on or before
the first day of August, nineteen hundred twenty-one, who continued
thereafter to be a member until he, with the membership of such local
district pension system, became a member of the retirement system
created by this article.
 6. "New entrant" shall mean any teacher who is a member of the
retirement system except a present teacher.
 7. "Contributor" shall mean any member of the retirement system who
has an account in the annuity savings fund as provided by this article.
 8. "Beneficiary" shall mean any person in receipt of a retirement
allowance or other benefit as provided by this article.
 9. "Regular Interest" a. For the purpose of crediting interest to
individual accounts in the annuity savings fund, regular interest shall
mean interest at five per centum per annum, compounded annually.
 b. For the purpose of the actuarial valuations specified in
subdivision two of section five hundred seventeen of this article,
regular interest shall mean the valuation rate of interest recommended
by the system's actuary and approved by the retirement board from time
to time.
 c. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the annuity
values, option factors and reserves to be used to determine the amount
of any benefit payable under the provisions of this article, except the
benefit payable under paragraph three of subdivision b of section five
hundred twelve of this article, provided that the right to the initial
payment of the benefit accrues during the period that this subdivision
is in effect, shall be based upon an assumed interest rate of four per
centum per annum compounded annually. In the case of any person retiring
on or after January first, nineteen hundred eighty-six, the assumed
interest rate shall be such rate as recommended by the system's actuary
and approved by the retirement board from time to time not to exceed
seven per centum per annum compounded annually, provided, however, that
the authority to use a rate in excess of four per centum per annum
compounded annually shall only become effective if the courts have
already finally determined, as to all members, beneficiaries and
retirees of the retirement system, the proper application of the
decision of the United States supreme court in the case of Arizona
Governing Committee for Tax Deferred Annuities and Deferred Compensation
Plans v. Norris, 103 S.Ct. 3492 (1983). The exercise of this authority
with respect to any class of annuitants, shall be an authority which is
vested exclusively in the retirement board and nothing herein shall be
construed as requiring a retroactive application of this authority at
the time when such authority becomes available to the retirement board
as set forth above.
 10. "Accumulated contributions" shall mean the sum of all the amounts
deducted from the compensation of a contributor, and credited to his
individual account in the annuity savings fund together with regular
interest thereon. The interest on any contributions made after July
first, nineteen hundred fifty-seven and prior to the date of receipt of
them by the board shall be added to the accumulated contributions of the
member in accordance with regulations of the retirement board.
 11. a. "Final average salary" shall mean the average annual
compensation earnable as a teacher during the five years of service
immediately preceding his date of retirement, or it shall mean the
average annual compensation earnable as a teacher during any five
consecutive years of state service, said five years to be selected by
the applicant prior to date of retirement. In the case of a member with
a membership date prior to the seventeenth day of June, nineteen hundred
seventy-one, a contribution by an employer on behalf of such member to a
defined contribution plan qualified under subsection a of section four
hundred one of the Internal Revenue Code of nineteen hundred eighty-six,
as amended and maintained by such employer may be treated as
compensation for the purposes of this paragraph, provided such
contribution would otherwise have been treated as compensation, had it
been paid directly to the member at the time the contribution was made.
 b. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article,
commencing July first, nineteen hundred sixty-nine, "Final Average
Salary" shall mean the average regular compensation earned as a teacher
during the three years of actual service immediately preceding his date
of retirement, or any other three years of consecutive service upon
application of the member, exclusive of any lump sum payments for sick
leave, annual leave or any other form of termination pay; provided,
however, if the compensation earned in any twelve months exceeds that of
the previous twelve months by more than twenty percentum, the amount in
excess of twenty percentum shall be excluded in the computation of final
average salary. In the case of persons who last became members on or
after July first, nineteen hundred seventy-three, the provisions of this
paragraph b shall apply only to those retiring from service prior to
July first, nineteen hundred seventy-four.
 12. "Annuity" shall mean the annual payments for life derived from
contributions made by contributor as provided in this article. All
annuities shall be paid in equal monthly installments.
 13. "Pension" shall mean the annual payments for life derived from
payments made by an employer as provided in this article. All pensions
shall be paid in equal monthly installments.
 14. "Retirement allowance" shall mean the pension plus the annuity
 15. "Annuity reserve" shall mean the present value of all payments to
be made on account of any annuity, or benefit in lieu of any annuity,
computed upon the basis of such mortality tables as shall be adopted by
the retirement board with regular interest.
 16. "Pension reserve" shall mean the present value of all payments to
be made on account of any pension, or benefit in lieu of any pension,
computed upon the basis of such mortality tables as shall be adopted by
the retirement board with regular interest.
 17. "Retirement fund" shall mean the state teachers' retirement fund
for public school teachers of the state of New York as created by
chapter one hundred forty of the laws of nineteen hundred ten, chapter
four hundred forty-nine of the laws of nineteen hundred eleven, chapter
forty-four of the laws of nineteen hundred fourteen, chapter one hundred
three of the laws of nineteen hundred nineteen and chapter one hundred
sixty-one of the laws of nineteen hundred twenty-three.
 18. "Local district pension system" shall mean any teachers'
retirement system or other arrangement for the payment of pensions or
annuities to teachers exclusive of the retirement fund, created in any
city or school district of this state prior to the first day of August,
nineteen hundred twenty-one.
 19. "Service" shall mean actual teaching or supervision by the teacher
during regular school hours of the day, and shall mean governmental
service in the state of New York in another capacity where the teacher
was a member of the New York state employees retirement system, and
where such service was credited to the teacher in the said New York
state employees retirement system. Leave of absence with pay granted by
the employer may be considered service under regulations prescribed by
the retirement board. In all such leaves of absence the salary actually
received shall be deemed to be the earnable compensation of such teacher
within the meaning of this article, provided, however, that in the case
of a member who dies at any time during the period from July first,
nineteen hundred sixty-four through June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
seventy-four, who is entitled to a death benefit in accordance with
paragraph two of subdivision b of section five hundred twelve and who
was on a leave of absence with pay in the last twelve months of service,
then the compensation earnable by such member during the last twelve
months of service while a member shall be the amount of salary such
member would have earned had such member not been on such leave of
absence.
 § 502. Retirement system. 1. The "New York state teachers' retirement
system" is hereby continued.
 2. Such retirement system shall have the powers and privileges of a
corporation, and under its corporate name, or in the name of its
nominees, all of its business shall be transacted, all funds invested,
all warrants for money drawn and payments made, and all cash and
securities and other property shall be held.
 3. In accordance with paragraph two of subsection a of section four
hundred one of the Internal Revenue Code, it shall be impossible at any
time prior to the satisfaction of the retirement system's liabilities to
its members and their beneficiaries under law, for any part of the
assets of the retirement system, or income thereon, to be (within any
taxable year or thereafter) used for, or diverted to, purposes other
than for the exclusive benefit of the members of the retirement system
or their beneficiaries.
 § 503. Membership of system. 1. The membership of the retirement
system shall consist of the following:
 a. All teachers who were teachers on or before the first day of
August, nineteen hundred twenty-one, who shall file with the retirement
board applications for membership, except those specifically excluded
under subdivision four of this section.
 b. All teachers who were not teachers on or before the first day of
August, nineteen hundred twenty-one, except those specifically excluded
under subdivision four of this section.
 2. The retirement board may, in its discretion, deny the right to
become members to any class of teachers whose compensation is only
partly paid by the employer or who are serving on a temporary or any
other than a per annum basis, and it may also, in its discretion, make
optional with members in any such class their individual entrance into
membership.
 3. The membership of any person in the retirement system shall cease
when seven years have elapsed since the member has performed service as
a teacher which was credited with the system except as provided in
section five hundred twelve-a of this article, or upon the withdrawal by
a contributor of his accumulated contributions as provided in this
article, or upon retirement on a pension, or at death, except that the
membership of a teacher, who has not withdrawn his contributions shall
not be cancelled if he (a) has not had sufficient service to be eligible
for disability retirement, and proves to the satisfaction of the
retirement board that absence from service was caused by personal
illness constituting disability or (b) is eligible to receive a
retirement allowance from the system for other than disability.
 4. Teachers who are members or who become members of a local district
pension system maintained under the laws of the state from
appropriations or contributions made wholly or partly by an employer
shall be excluded from membership in this retirement system.
 5. A retired teacher receiving a retirement allowance for other than
disability may return to active public service. Any such retired teacher
returning to active service shall immediately notify the retirement
board of his intention. Except as otherwise provided in sections two
hundred eleven and two hundred twelve of the retirement and social
security law and section one hundred fifty of the civil service law, his
retirement allowance shall be suspended during the time he is in active
service. If such teacher has not elected an optional benefit, the
payments of his annuity so suspended shall be held in the annuity
reserve fund at regular interest, and upon the resumption of his
retirement allowance after again leaving the active service such
accumulated amounts shall be applied to increase the annuity otherwise
payable to him or in the event of his death while in active service such
accumulated amounts shall be paid to his estate or to such person as
last designated as the beneficiary of his accumulated contributions. If
such teacher has elected an optional benefit and dies while in active
service, the optional benefit in respect of his annuity shall be payable
as if no annuity payments had been suspended, but the optional benefit
in respect of his pension shall not be payable in excess of the
proportion that the cost of such optional pension, when measured by the
difference between his pension without optional modification and the
optional pension, is currently covered by the amount of the annuity
payments suspended while he is in active service, which difference shall
be paid during the period of his active service from the annuity reserve
fund to the fund from which his pension was payable. If, however, such
full cost of the optional pension is greater than the suspended annuity
payments, the teacher may elect upon returning to active service to pay
the amount of such difference directly to the retirement system to be
credited to the fund from which his pension was payable, and subject to
such payments monthly in advance, or at such other intervals as may be
agreed upon with the retirement board, the optional benefit in respect
of the pension shall be payable in the event the teacher dies while in
active service, as if no pension payments had been suspended. If the
suspended annuity payments are greater than such full cost of the
optional pension, the amount of such difference shall be held at regular
interest in the annuity reserve fund, and upon the resumption of his
retirement allowance after again leaving active service such accumulated
amounts shall be applied to increase the annuity otherwise payable to
him, or in the event of his death while in active service such
accumulated amounts shall be paid to his estate or to the beneficiary
nominated under the option.
 6. Credit for service in war after world war I, which shall mean
military service during the period commencing the first day of July,
nineteen hundred forty, and terminating the thirtieth day of June,
nineteen hundred forty-seven, or during the period commencing the
twenty-seventh day of June, nineteen hundred fifty, and terminating the
thirty-first day of January, nineteen hundred fifty-five, or during both
such periods, as a member of the armed forces of the United States, of
any person who (i) has been honorably discharged or released under
honorable circumstances from such service, or (ii) has a qualifying
condition, as defined in section one of the veterans' services law, and
has received a discharge other than bad conduct or dishonorable from
such service, or (iii) is a discharged LGBT veteran, as defined in
section one of the veterans' services law, and has received a discharge
other than bad conduct or dishonorable from such service, or service by
one who was employed by the War Shipping Administration or Office of
Defense Transportation or their agents as a merchant seaman documented
by the United States Coast Guard or Department of Commerce, or as a
civil servant employed by the United States Army Transport Service
(later redesignated as the United States Army Transportation Corps,
Water Division) or the Naval Transportation Service; and who served
satisfactorily as a crew member during the period of armed conflict,
December seventh, nineteen hundred forty-one, to August fifteenth,
nineteen hundred forty-five, aboard merchant vessels in oceangoing,
i.e., foreign, intercoastal, or coastwise service as such terms are
defined under federal law (46 USCA 10301 & 10501) and further to include
"near foreign" voyages between the United States and Canada, Mexico, or
the West Indies via ocean routes, or public vessels in oceangoing
service or foreign waters and who has received a Certificate of Release
or Discharge from Active Duty and a discharge certificate, or an
Honorable Service Certificate/Report of Casualty, from the Department of
Defense or who served as a United States civilian employed by the
American Field Service and served overseas under United States Armies
and United States Army Groups in world war II during the period of armed
conflict, December seventh, nineteen hundred forty-one through May
eighth, nineteen hundred forty-five, and (iv) who was discharged or
released therefrom under honorable conditions, or (v) has a qualifying
condition, as defined in section one of the veterans' services law, and
has received a discharge other than bad conduct or dishonorable from
such service, or (vi) is a discharged LGBT veteran, as defined in
section one of the veterans' services law, and has received a discharge
other than bad conduct or dishonorable from such service, or who served
as a United States civilian Flight Crew and Aviation Ground Support
Employee of Pan American World Airways or one of its subsidiaries or its
affiliates and served overseas as a result of Pan American's contract
with Air Transport Command or Naval Air Transport Service during the
period of armed conflict, December fourteenth, nineteen hundred
forty-one through August fourteenth, nineteen hundred forty-five, and
who (vii) was discharged or released therefrom under honorable
conditions, or (viii) has a qualifying condition, as defined in section
one of the veterans' services law, and has received a discharge other
than bad conduct or dishonorable from such service, or (ix) is a
discharged LGBT veteran, as defined in section one of the veterans'
services law, and has received a discharge other than bad conduct or
dishonorable from such service, and who was a teacher in the public
schools of this state at the time of his or her entrance into the armed
forces of the United States, provided no compensation was received under
the provisions of section two hundred forty-two of the military law, and
who returned to public school teaching following discharge or completion
of advanced education provided under servicemen's readjustment act of
nineteen hundred forty-four, or who following such discharge or release
entered into a service which would qualify him or her pursuant to
section forty-three of the retirement and social security law to
transfer his or her membership in the New York state teachers'
retirement system, shall be provided as follows, any provisions of
section two hundred forty-three of the military law to the contrary
notwithstanding.
 (a) Service in war after world war I as defined in this subdivision
shall be deemed to be service for all purposes of the retirement fund,
provided claim for such service shall be filed by the member with the
retirement board within two years following his return to active
teaching service or the entry of the member into a service which would
qualify him pursuant to section fifty-nine of the civil service law to
transfer his membership to the New York city employees' retirement
system or to the New York state employees' retirement system or the
fifteenth day of April, nineteen hundred sixty-seven, whichever is
later.
 (b) For the purposes of computing final average salary, compensation
during any period of service in war after world war I shall be deemed to
have been at the member's rate of compensation in effect immediately
prior to such period, or based on additional increments due him if he
had continued teaching.
 (c) Contributions paid by any member under the provisions of section
two hundred forty-three of the military law shall be refunded directly
to the member and the corresponding contribution paid by the district
shall also be returned directly to the district.
 (d) On the retirement of a member with credit for service in war after
world war I as defined in this subdivision, there shall be transferred
from the pension accumulation fund to the annuity reserve fund a sum
equivalent to the contributions the member would have made to the
annuity savings fund had he contributed during his period of service in
war after world war I at the rate in effect immediately prior to such
period, or on additional increments due him if he had continued
teaching, with interest to the date of retirement, which amounts shall
be used to provide an annuity for him.
 (e) In addition to the contributions required of employers to the
retirement system as otherwise provided, there shall be paid an
additional contribution to the pension accumulation fund to cover the
cost of the additional benefits covered by this subdivision. The
additional contributions shall be collected by increasing the regular
contributions of the employers in the same proportion as the liabilities
of the pension accumulation fund are increased by the adoption of this
subdivision.
 7. A teacher, who was a member of the New York state teachers
retirement system but who withdrew his or her accumulated contributions
immediately prior to his or her entry into, or during his or her service
in the armed forces of the United States in war after World War I, who
(i) has been honorably discharged or released from service, or (ii) has
a qualifying condition, as defined in section one of the veterans'
services law, and has received a discharge other than bad conduct or
dishonorable from such service, or (iii) is a discharged LGBT veteran,
as defined in section one of the veterans' services law, and has
received a discharge other than bad conduct or dishonorable from such
service, provided no compensation was received under the provisions of
section two hundred forty-two of the military law, and who returned to
public school teaching in the state of New York following such discharge
or release, or following completion of advanced education provided under
servicemen's readjustment act of nineteen hundred forty-four, any
provisions of section two hundred forty-three of the military law to the
contrary notwithstanding, will be entitled to credit for service in war
after World War I, cost free, provided, however, that such credit will
not be allowed until he or she claims and pays for all prior teaching
service credited to him or her at the time of his or her termination of
membership in the New York state teachers retirement system, and
provided further that claim for such service in war after World War I
shall be filed by the member with the retirement board before the first
day of July, nineteen hundred sixty-eight.
 8. A teacher who had been granted credit for service in war after
world war I as provided in this section and whose membership in the New
York state teachers retirement system subsequently ceased by reason of
withdrawal of his accumulated contributions will, upon rejoining the New
York state teachers retirement system, be entitled to the same credit
for service in war after world war I, cost free, that he was credited
with upon termination of his membership in the New York state teachers
retirement system, provided, however, that such credit will not be
allowed until he claims and pays for all prior teaching service credited
to him at the time of his termination of membership in the New York
state teachers retirement system.
 9. Credit for emergency service on or after October first, nineteen
hundred sixty-one, shall mean active duty (other than for training) in
the armed forces of the United States as defined in title ten of the
United States code on or after October first, nineteen hundred sixty-one
and terminating on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred sixty-three or on
the date that no reserve component unit originally ordered into the
active service of the United States from the state on or after October
first, nineteen hundred sixty-one remains on such active service,
whichever sooner occurs, of any person who:
 a. was a teacher in the public schools of this state at the time of
his entrance into such armed forces,
 b. was a member of the New York state teachers' retirement system and
an employee of the state or of an employer at the time he entered such
armed forces,
 c. (i) has been honorably discharged or released under honorable
circumstances from such service, or (ii) has a qualifying condition, as
defined in section one of the veterans' services law, and has received a
discharge other than bad conduct or dishonorable from such service, or
(iii) is a discharged LGBT veteran, as defined in section one of the
veterans' services law, and has received a discharge other than bad
conduct or dishonorable from such service, and
 d. returned to public school teaching within one year following
discharge or release, or completion of advanced education provided by
the United States for education of Korean conflict veterans, or who
following such discharge or release entered into a service which would
qualify him, pursuant to section forty-three of the retirement and
social security law, to transfer his membership in the New York state
teachers retirement system. Such service shall not include any periods
during which compensation was received by the member for accrued
vacation and overtime credit or under the provisions of section two
hundred forty-two of the military law or section six of chapter six
hundred eight of the laws of nineteen hundred fifty-two.
 Emergency service on or after October first, nineteen hundred
sixty-one, shall for the purposes of this article be deemed credit for
service in war after world war I.
 10. Credit for certain World War II service. a. In addition to credit
for military service pursuant to section two hundred forty-three of the
military law and subdivisions six through nine of this section, a member
employed as a full-time teacher by an employer as defined in subdivision
three of section five hundred one of this article and who joined the
retirement system prior to July first, nineteen hundred seventy-three,
may obtain credit for military service not in excess of three years and
not otherwise creditable under section two hundred forty-three of the
military law and subdivisions six through nine of this section, rendered
on active duty in the armed forces of the United States during the
period commencing July first, nineteen hundred forty, and terminating
December thirty-first, nineteen hundred forty-six, or on service by one
who was employed by the War Shipping Administration or Office of Defense
Transportation or their agents as a merchant seaman documented by the
United States Coast Guard or Department of Commerce, or as a civil
servant employed by the United States Army Transport Service (later
redesignated as the United States Army Transportation Corps, Water
Division) or the Naval Transportation Service; and who served
satisfactorily as a crew member during the period of armed conflict,
December seventh, nineteen hundred forty-one, to August fifteenth,
nineteen hundred forty-five, aboard merchant vessels in oceangoing,
i.e., foreign, intercoastal, or coastwise service as such terms are
defined under federal law (46 USCA 10301 & 10501) and further to include
"near foreign" voyages between the United States and Canada, Mexico, or
the West Indies via ocean routes, or public vessels in oceangoing
service or foreign waters and who has received a Certificate of Release
or Discharge from Active Duty and a discharge certificate, or an
Honorable Service Certificate/Report of Casualty, from the Department of
Defense or on service by one who served as a United States civilian
employed by the American Field Service and served overseas under United
States Armies and United States Army Groups in world war II during the
period of armed conflict, December seventh, nineteen hundred forty-one
through May eighth, nineteen hundred forty-five, and who (i) was
discharged or released therefrom under honorable conditions, or (ii) has
a qualifying condition, as defined in section one of the veterans'
services law, and has received a discharge other than bad conduct or
dishonorable from such service, or (iii) is a discharged LGBT veteran,
as defined in section one of the veterans' services law, and has
received a discharge other than bad conduct or dishonorable from such
service, or on service by one who served as a United States civilian
Flight Crew and Aviation Ground Support Employee of Pan American World
Airways or one of its subsidiaries or its affiliates and served overseas
as a result of Pan American's contract with Air Transport Command or
Naval Air Transport Service during the period of armed conflict,
December fourteenth, nineteen hundred forty-one through August
fourteenth, nineteen hundred forty-five, and who (iv) was discharged or
released therefrom under honorable conditions, or (v) has a qualifying
condition, as defined in section one of the veterans' services law, and
has received a discharge other than bad conduct or dishonorable from
such service, or (vi) is a discharged LGBT veteran, as defined in
section one of the veterans' services law, and has received a discharge
other than bad conduct or dishonorable from such service, by a person
who was a resident of New York state at the time of entry into such
service and at the time of being discharged therefrom under honorable
circumstances, and who makes the payments required in accordance with
the provisions of this subdivision.
 However, no military service shall be creditable under this
subdivision in the case of a member who is receiving a military pension
(other than for disability) for military service in the armed forces of
the United States.
 b. To obtain such credit a member shall: (1) deposit in the annuity
savings fund a sum equal to the product of his required contribution
rate at time of entry into full-time New York state teaching service,
his annual full-time rate of compensation at that time, and the period
of military service being claimed, with regular interest, and (2)
deposit in the pension accumulation fund a sum equal to the product of
the employer's contribution rate exclusive of the rate for supplemental
pensions at the time of the member's entry into such teaching service,
his annual full-time rate of compensation at that time, and the period
of military service being claimed, with regular interest. Such deposit
must be made on or before October fourteenth, nineteen hundred
seventy-seven, provided, however, such member may elect to deposit such
amount over a period of time no greater than the period for which credit
is being claimed, in which case such payments must commence no later
than October fourteenth, nineteen hundred seventy-seven. If the full
amount of such payments is not paid to the retirement system at the time
of retirement, the amount of service credited shall be proportional to
the total amount of the payments made.
 c. The credit for military service hereunder shall not be used to
increase a service retirement benefit if, at the time of retirement,
such member (1) is retiring from service with less than ten years of
full-time service credit or (2) is retiring with less than three years
of member service rendered subsequent to the date that he last became a
member of this system. Upon retirement, as specified in (1) or (2),
there shall be refunded to such member the amount of such deposit plus
accrued interest exclusive of the amount deposited to the pension
accumulation fund attributable to death and disability benefits.
 d. (1) In the case of members who have transferred into this system
from another public retirement system within the state of New York,
their rate of contribution shall be computed as though they had been a
member of this system from the date of membership in the retirement
system from which they transferred.
 (2) Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the
rate of contribution to be used in calculating contributions to the
annuity savings fund pursuant to this subdivision shall be at the rate
of four per centum of earnable compensation for members whose date of
membership is on or before June thirtieth, nineteen hundred forty-eight
and at the rate of five per centum of earnable compensation for members
whose date of membership is on or after July first, nineteen hundred
forty-eight.
 e. In no event shall credit be granted pursuant to this subdivision if
credit is granted for the same period of time pursuant to other
provisions of law.
 f. No application for credit pursuant to the provisions of this
subdivision shall be honored if made on or after April fifteenth,
nineteen hundred seventy-seven.
 10-a. Credit for certain World War II service. a. In addition to
credit for military service pursuant to section two hundred forty-three
of the military law and subdivisions six through nine of this section, a
member who joined the retirement system prior to July first, nineteen
hundred seventy-three, and who was not eligible for credit for military
service under subdivision ten of this section as a result of being on a
leave of absence without pay between July twentieth, nineteen hundred
seventy-six and October fifteenth, nineteen hundred seventy-seven or on
leave of absence with less than full pay between July twentieth,
nineteen hundred seventy-six and October fifteenth, nineteen hundred
seventy-seven, may obtain credit for military service not in excess of
three years and not otherwise creditable under section two hundred
forty-three of the military law and subdivisions six through nine of
this section, rendered on active duty in the armed forces of the United
States during the period commencing July first, nineteen hundred forty,
and terminating December thirty-first, nineteen hundred forty-six, or on
service by one who was employed by the War Shipping Administration or
Office of Defense Transportation or their agents as a merchant seaman
documented by the United States Coast Guard or Department of Commerce,
or as a civil servant employed by the United States Army Transport
Service (later redesignated as the United States Army Transportation
Corps, Water Division) or the Naval Transportation Service; and who
served satisfactorily as a crew member during the period of armed
conflict, December seventh, nineteen hundred forty-one, to August
fifteenth, nineteen hundred forty-five, aboard merchant vessels in
oceangoing, i.e., foreign, intercoastal, or coastwise service as such
terms are defined under federal law (46 USCA 10301 & 10501) and further
to include "near foreign" voyages between the United States and Canada,
Mexico, or the West Indies via ocean routes, or public vessels in
oceangoing service or foreign waters and who has received a Certificate
of Release or Discharge from Active Duty and a discharge certificate, or
an Honorable Service Certificate/Report of Casualty, from the Department
of Defense, or on service by one who served as a United States civilian
employed by the American Field Service and served overseas under United
States Armies and United States Army Groups in world war II during the
period of armed conflict, December seventh, nineteen hundred forty-one
through May eighth, nineteen hundred forty-five, and who (i) was
discharged or released therefrom under honorable conditions, or (ii) has
a qualifying condition, as defined in section one of the veterans'
services law, and has received a discharge other than bad conduct or
dishonorable from such service, or (iii) is a discharged LGBT veteran,
as defined in section one of the veterans' services law, and has
received a discharge other than bad conduct or dishonorable from such
service, or on service by one who served as a United States civilian
Flight Crew and Aviation Ground Support Employee of Pan American World
Airways or one of its subsidiaries or its affiliates and served overseas
as a result of Pan American's contract with Air Transport Command or
Naval Air Transport Service during the period of armed conflict,
December fourteenth, nineteen hundred forty-one through August
fourteenth, nineteen hundred forty-five, and who (iv) was discharged or
released therefrom under honorable conditions, or (v) has a qualifying
condition, as defined in section one of the veterans' services law, and
has received a discharge other than bad conduct or dishonorable from
such service, or (vi) is a discharged LGBT veteran, as defined in
section one of the veterans' services law, and has received a discharge
other than bad conduct or dishonorable from such service, by a person
who was a resident of New York state at the time of entry into such
service and at the time of being discharged therefrom under honorable
circumstances, and who makes the payments required in accordance with
the provisions of this subdivision.
 However, no military service shall be creditable under this
subdivision in the case of a member who is receiving a military pension
(other than for disability) for military service in the armed forces of
the United States.
 b. To obtain such credit a member shall: (1) deposit in the annuity
savings fund a sum equal to the product of his required contribution
rate at time of entry into full-time New York state teaching service,
his annual full-time rate of compensation at that time, and the period
of military service being claimed, with regular interest, and (2)
deposit in the pension accumulation fund a sum equal to the product of
the employer's contribution rate exclusive of the rate for supplemental
pensions at the time of the member's entry into such teaching service,
his annual full-time rate of compensation at that time, and the period
of military service being claimed, with regular interest. Such deposit
must be made on or before October fourteenth, nineteen hundred eighty,
provided, however, such member may elect to deposit such amount over a
period of time no greater than the period for which credit is being
claimed, in which case such payments must commence no later than October
fourteenth, nineteen hundred eighty. If the full amount of such payments
is not paid to the retirement system at the time of retirement, the
amount of service credited shall be proportional to the total amount of
the payments made.
 c. The credit for military service hereunder shall not be used to
increase a service retirement benefit if, at the time of retirement,
such member (1) is retiring from service with less than ten years of
full-time service credit or (2) is retiring with less than three years
of member service rendered subsequent to the date that he last became a
member of this system. Upon retirement, as specified in (1) or (2),
there shall be refunded to such member the amount of such deposit plus
accrued interest exclusive of the amount deposited to the pension
accumulation fund attributable to death and disability benefits.
 d. (1) In the case of members who have transferred into this system
from another public retirement system within the state of New York,
their rate of contribution shall be computed as though they had been a
member of this system from the date of membership in the retirement
system from which they transferred.
 (2) Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the
rate of contribution to be used in calculating contributions to the
annuity savings fund pursuant to this subdivision shall be at the rate
of four per centum of earnable compensation for members whose date of
membership is on or before June thirtieth, nineteen hundred forty-eight
and at the rate of five per centum of earnable compensation for members
whose date of membership is on or after July first, nineteen hundred
forty-eight.
 e. In no event shall credit be granted pursuant to this subdivision if
credit is granted for the same period of time pursuant to other
provisions of law.
 f. No application for credit pursuant to the provisions of this
subdivision shall be honored if made on or after October fifteenth,
nineteen hundred eighty.
 11. a. If a retired member, receiving a retirement allowance for other
than disability, returns to active public service, except as otherwise
provided in sections two hundred eleven or two hundred twelve of the
retirement and social security law, and is eligible for membership in
the retirement system, such employee shall become a member and their
retirement allowance shall be suspended in the same manner as provided
in subdivision five of this section. Upon subsequent retirement such
employee shall:
 1. Be credited with all member service earned since they last became a
member of the retirement system, and
 2. Receive a retirement allowance which shall consist of the pension
which such employee was receiving immediately prior to the last
restoration to membership as provided in subdivision five of this
section, plus a pension based upon the service credit earned since such
employee last became a member. Such latter pension shall be computed as
if they were a new member when they rejoined the system pursuant to the
provisions of this subdivision.
 b. Where such member shall have earned at least two years of service
credit after restoration to active service, the total service credit to
which such member was entitled at the time of the earlier retirement
may, at their option, again be credited to them and upon subsequent
retirement such member shall be credited in addition for purposes of
computation of the pension portion of the retirement allowance with all
service credit earned subsequent to the last restoration to membership.
Such total service credit to which such member was entitled at the time
of the earlier retirement shall be so credited only in the event that
such member returns to the retirement system with regular interest the
actuarial equivalent of the amount of the pension received, or in the
event that such amount is not so repaid the actuarial equivalent thereof
shall be deducted from such member's subsequent retirement allowance.
 c. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subdivision, a
retired member who is receiving a retirement allowance for other than
physical disability, and who returns to active public service, may elect
not to be restored to membership in the retirement system until such
retired member has rendered one year of service following their return
to public service. In such event the retirement allowance shall be
suspended during such year of service in the same manner as provided in
subdivision five of this section. Upon restoration to membership
following completion of such year of service, service in such year shall
be deemed to be service while a member for purposes of subdivision b of
section five hundred twelve of this article. Such retired member may
purchase service credit for such year, which shall be deemed earned
service credit. If a retired member receiving a retirement benefit
allowance for other than physical disability, returns to active public
service, and is then ineligible for membership in the retirement system,
the retirement allowance shall be suspended in the same manner as
provided in this section.
 d. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a retired
member who rejoins the system under the provisions of this subdivision
shall only be entitled to a death benefit according to the provisions of
paragraph two of subdivision b of section five hundred twelve of this
article and of no other subdivision thereof and for the purposes of such
paragraph two of subdivision b of section five hundred twelve the
credited service as a teacher shall be service as a teacher credited
since last joining the system.
 § 504. Retirement board; members; terms of office; vacancies. 1. The
general administration and responsibility for the proper operation of
the retirement system and for making effective the provisions of this
article shall continue to be vested in a retirement board. The
retirement board shall from time to time establish rules and regulations
for the administration and transaction of its business and for the
control of the funds created herein and shall perform such other
functions as are required for the execution of the provisions of this
article.
 2. The retirement board shall consist of ten members as follows.
 a. One member, who is not an employee of the state, who shall be or
shall have been an executive officer of a bank authorized to do business
in this state, elected by the board of regents of The University of the
State of New York to serve for a term of three years.
 b. Two members who are not employees of the state, each of whom shall
be or shall have been a trustee or member of the board of education of a
school district in this state, and at least one of whom shall be or
shall have been an executive officer of an insurance company, elected by
the board of regents of The University of the State of New York to serve
for a term of three years, from a list of five or more persons having
broad experience and ability in the fields of finance and investment to
be presented to the regents by the board of directors of the New York
State School Boards Association, Inc.
 c. Two administrative officers of the New York state school system,
appointed by the commissioner of education, each to serve for a term of
three years. Members of the present state teachers' retirement fund
board shall be deemed to be administrative officers of the New York
state school system within the meaning of this provision.
 d. The comptroller of the state of New York or one member appointed by
him who shall serve until his successor is appointed.
 e. Three members elected from among the members of the retirement
system, each to serve for a term of three years.
 f. One member, who must be a retired teacher, who shall be elected in
accordance with the provisions of section five hundred five-a of this
article to serve for a term of three years.
 3. A vacancy occurring during the term of a member elected by the
board of regents or appointed by the commissioner of education shall be
filled for the unexpired term by the election or appointment of a
successor in the same manner as his predecessor. A vacancy occurring
during a term in the case of a member elected from among the active
members of the retirement system shall be filled, until the next annual
convention of delegates, by the commissioner of education and shall be
filled for the unexpired term by the delegates at the next annual
convention in addition to the regular election. A vacancy occurring
during the term of a retired teacher member shall be filled in
accordance with the provisions of section five hundred five-a of this
article.
 § 505. Election of the active teacher members of the board. 1. An
annual convention of the members of the retirement system shall be held
within the state of New York during the month of October or November, at
an hour and place set by the retirement board on or before May first of
each year, for the purpose of electing members of the retirement board.
 2. Said convention shall be composed of delegates selected as
hereinafter provided from each territory constituting the jurisdiction
of, unless otherwise provided for herein, a district superintendent, of
a village or a city superintendent, or from a school district within a
supervisory district and having at least seventy-five members of the
retirement system, or from the department, or from a unit of the state
university, which territory, school district, department or unit shall
constitute a territorial unit of representation in the assembly of
delegates. Each territorial unit shall be entitled to be represented in
such convention by one delegate for each two hundred members of the
retirement system employed on a per annum basis in said unit. The total
entitlement to delegates for each territorial unit shall be the number
of such members divided by two hundred, rounded off to the nearest whole
number; provided, that each unit shall be entitled to at least one
delegate.
 3. Delegates from each territorial unit shall be elected, for a
two-year term to commence on August first of the year of election, by
the vote of a plurality of the members of the retirement system within
such territorial unit voting by secret ballot. If there is more than one
delegate entitled to be elected to represent a territorial unit, the
voters shall be instructed to cast a vote for sufficient persons in the
number needed to represent the territorial unit and those candidates
receiving the most votes shall be declared elected.
 4. The election of delegates shall be held in odd numbered years, no
earlier than March first and no later than June first, in accordance
with rules adopted by the chief administrative officer of each
territorial unit or his designee. The chief administrative officer of
each territorial unit or his designee shall, no later than July first,
file with the retirement system a certificate of election containing the
names and addresses of the delegates elected to the annual convention
and such other information as may be required by the retirement board
and shall furnish the delegates elected with a copy of said certificate
of their election. The certificate of election shall be in a form
prescribed by the retirement board.
 5. An alternate shall be elected, in the same manner as prescribed for
delegates, for each delegate to serve if the delegate is absent or
unable to serve.
 6. Each delegate and alternate must be a member of the retirement
system and employed as a teacher in the territorial unit which he or she
represents. A person may be elected to only one position, and each
delegate shall be entitled to only one vote.
 7. If both a delegate position and its corresponding alternate
position become vacant, a special election shall be held, no later than
October first, in the same manner as the regular election to fill the
remaining portion of the term, and the chief administrative officer or
his designee shall no later than October sixth file with the retirement
system a certificate of election and shall furnish the delegate so
elected with a copy of said certificate of election.
 8. Said convention shall be called to order by a member of the
retirement board designated by said board, and shall organize the
election of a chairman and a secretary. A majority of all delegates
entitled to seats in said convention shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
 9. Members of the retirement board shall be elected by a majority of
those present and voting at the convention held pursuant to this section
for a term commencing on the first day of February following the
election. In order to be eligible to be elected to the retirement board
pursuant to this section, a person must be a member of the retirement
system.
 10. The provisions of this section shall be deemed mandatory and not
directory.
 § 505-a. Election of retired teacher member of board. 1. Election of
retired teacher member. An election shall be held during the month of
October, nineteen hundred ninety-three, and thereafter during the month
of October immediately preceding the expiration of a term in office as
prescribed in this section, for the purpose of electing the retired
teacher member of the retirement board from among the retired members of
the retirement system. All retired members of the retirement system who
are retired as of October first in the year in which such election is
held shall be eligible to vote. Such election shall be by secret ballot
held in accordance with the provisions of this section and such rules
and regulations as may be adopted by the retirement board. A retired
teacher member elected to the retirement board pursuant to the
provisions of this section shall serve for a term of three years
commencing on the first day of January next following said election.
 2. Nominations. Nominations of candidates for the position of retired
teacher member of the retirement board shall be by petition on forms
provided pursuant to this subdivision. The retirement board shall
prepare printed forms for nominating petitions for candidates for the
office of retired teacher member of the retirement board. Such forms
shall be available to retired members of the retirement system not later
than July first of a year in which an election is to be held. Each
candidate's petition shall be signed by not less than one hundred
retired members of the retirement system and shall be filed with the
retirement board not later than August fifteenth in such year. Each such
petition shall contain the position and term of office, together with
the name and address of the candidate, and shall also contain the name
and address of the retired member of the retirement system who shall be
the alternate candidate in the event of a vacancy caused by the death,
disability, disqualification or withdrawal of the candidate occurring
prior to the election. Each petition shall be accompanied by a notarized
written acceptance of the nomination by the candidate named in the
petition and by a notarized written statement of the retired member
named as alternate candidate that, in the event of the death,
disability, disqualification or withdrawal of the candidate prior to the
election or in the event of the death, disability, disqualification or
resignation of the candidate from the position of retired teacher member
of the retirement board following election, he or she will accept the
nomination or serve on the retirement board in such a contingency. The
retirement board shall implement one mailing for each qualified
candidate that so requests and makes payment therefor prior to the time
of mailing by bank or certified check. The board shall establish
procedures to merge mailings for more than one qualified candidate in
order to reduce postage costs and for administrative convenience if each
affected candidate approves. Nothing in this subdivision or in this
section shall be construed to impair existing law preserving the
confidentiality of the home addresses of retirees of the retirement
system.
 3. Election procedures. Such election shall be in the form of a mail
referendum with appropriate provisions, such as the use of double
envelopes, made to insure that the identity of the individual retired
members will not be disclosed as their marked ballots are submitted and
counted. The retirement board shall prepare and mail a ballot and
instructions for voting to each eligible retired member by first class
mail not earlier than October first and not later than October
fifteenth. The names of candidates and alternate candidates listed on
the ballot shall be in the order in which the petitions are filed with
the retirement board. The ballots shall be such that they may be machine
counted. Such ballots shall be returned to the address within the state
of New York designated by the retirement board and shall be postmarked
not later than October thirty-first. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
retirement board may by resolution establish an alternative procedure
for the conduct of an election pursuant to this section by electronic,
telephonic or other means which provide comparable security and
convenience for voting by retired teacher members.
 4. Board of elections. At the time of filing a petition or not later
than September fifteenth, each candidate shall appoint two active or
retired members of the retirement system to a board of elections. Such
board of elections shall consist of such appointees of the candidates
and one member of the retirement system named by the president of the
retirement board, who shall act as its chairman. Members of the board of
elections shall not themselves be candidates or alternate candidates.
Such board of elections shall supervise the election. Such board of
elections shall meet at the location within the state designated by the
retirement board at one o'clock in the afternoon on the second Monday in
November to certify the election of the candidate receiving the largest
number of valid votes cast. The retired member so elected shall be
notified of such election by the chairman of the board of elections
within five days of such certification. The ballots shall be kept in
the custody of the retirement board for at least ninety days after such
certification. Members of the board of elections shall be reimbursed by
the retirement board for reasonable expenses actually incurred, in
accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the retirement board.
 5. Special election. In the event that no candidate can be certified
as having won the election as the result of a tie vote, then the board
of elections shall order a special election with the ballot containing
only the names of such candidates with a tie vote. Such special election
shall be conducted in the same general manner as the regular election.
Ballots shall be mailed during the month of November as soon as
reasonably practical after the tie vote has been determined and shall be
returned to a location within the state designated by the retirement
board, postmarked no later than the fourteenth day of December. The
board of elections shall meet at the location within the state
designated by the retirement board on a mutually selected date prior to
January first to certify the election of the candidate receiving the
largest number of valid votes cast.
 6. Suspension of election. In the event that only one candidate is
nominated, then no election shall be held and such candidate shall be
deemed to be elected effective at the same time as if an election had
been held.
 7. Vacancies. A vacancy occurring during the term of a retired teacher
member of the retirement board shall be filled by the retired member who
was the alternate candidate at the time such retired teacher member was
last elected to the board. In the event that such alternate candidate
has died, become disqualified, or is unwilling or unable to serve or in
the event that the alternate candidate dies, is disqualified, becomes
disabled, or resigns after entering upon the position of retired teacher
member of the retirement board, then the vacancy shall be filled by the
concurrent appointment of a successor from among the retired members of
the system by the members of the retirement board who were elected from
among the active members of the retirement system. Such alternate
candidate or such appointee, as applicable, shall serve out the
unexpired term of the retired teacher member.
 8. Certain expenses of alternate candidate. The retired member who was
the alternate candidate at the time a retired teacher member was last
elected to the position of the retired teacher member of the retirement
board shall be entitled to be reimbursed from the expense fund for
actual and necessary expenses incurred in connection with attendance at
the annual meeting and stated meetings of the retirement board pursuant
to subdivision one of section five hundred six of this article.
 § 506. Board meetings; oaths of office; quorum; expenses. 1. The
retirement board shall meet annually at Albany on a business day in the
month of January to be fixed by the board and shall have stated meetings
at the same place at least once in each three months as determined by
the regulations of the board.
 2. Each member of the retirement board shall, within ten days after
his appointment or election, take the constitutional oath of office and
cause the same to be filed in the office of the department of state.
 3. A majority of the members of the retirement board shall constitute
a quorum for the transaction of any business.
 4. The members of the retirement board shall serve without
compensation, but they shall be reimbursed from the expense fund for all
actual necessary expenses and for any loss of salary or wages they may
suffer through serving on the retirement board.
 5. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the affirmative vote of
a majority of the board and the concurrence of one member of the board
elected from among the active members of the retirement system shall be
required to adopt, amend or repeal any rule or regulation relating to
member benefits.
 6. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, a
member of the retirement board who is elected from among the members of
the retirement system shall, upon his request, be granted a leave of
absence without pay by his employer for the period of time he serves as
a member of the retirement board. During the period of said leave of
absence, such member of the retirement board shall receive full credit
in the retirement system for the period of such leave of absence. The
provisions of this subdivision shall not be construed as prohibiting an
employer at its discretion from granting a leave of absence with pay.
The retirement board is authorized to adopt such rules and regulations
as it finds necessary in administering the provisions of this
subdivision.
 § 507. Officers of board; custody of funds. 1. The retirement board
shall elect from its membership a president and vice-president, and
shall have power to employ a secretary and to secure the services of
such technical and administrative employees as may be necessary for the
transaction of the business of the retirement system. The compensation
of all persons engaged by the retirement board and all other expenses of
the board necessary for the proper operation of the retirement system
shall be paid at such rates and in such amounts as the retirement board
shall approve.
 2. The retirement board shall appoint a counsel to serve as its legal
adviser.
 3. The head of the division of the treasury in the department of
taxation and finance shall be the custodian of the funds of the
retirement system, except any asset consisting of evidence of a loan to
a member of the retirement system pursuant to section five hundred
twelve-b which such asset shall be in the custody of the retirement
board. Disbursements from the funds of the retirement system shall be
made by the custodian or such person as may be authorized by him only
upon warrants signed by a member of the retirement board, or an official
thereof, authorized to do so by resolution of the board duly adopted at
a meeting of the board by a majority of its members. The commissioner of
taxation and finance shall authorize a person who in the absence or
disability of the head of the division of the treasury in the department
of taxation and finance shall exercise and perform the functions, powers
and duties conferred or imposed on the head of the division of the
treasury in the department of taxation and finance as the custodian of
the funds of the retirement system, and such person so authorized shall
continue to exercise and perform such functions, powers and duties
during any period that the office of the head of the division of the
treasury in the department of taxation and finance is vacant.
 4. The custodian shall furnish annually to the retirement board a
sworn statement of the amount of the funds in his custody belonging to
the retirement system.
 6. The retirement board shall appoint a medical board of three
physicians who shall hold office at the pleasure of the retirement
board. Such medical board shall meet at regular intervals and shall
perform such duties as are assigned to it by the retirement board,
including, but not limited to, a review of applications for disability
retirement and a review of the continued disablement of pensioners
retired for disability. The medical board shall report to the retirement
board its recommendation approving or disapproving each disability
retirement application. The medical board may designate other physicians
to make such medical examinations of a disability applicant as it may
require and shall review the findings of such physicians prior to making
its own recommendation to the retirement board.
 7. a. The system shall save harmless and indemnify all members of the
retirement board, officers and employees of the system from financial
loss arising out of any claim, demand, suit or judgment by reason of
alleged negligence or other act by such board member, officer or
employee provided that such board member, officer or employee at the
time of such alleged negligence or act was acting in the discharge of
his duties and within the scope of his employment and that such damages
did not result from the willful and wrongful act or gross negligence of
such board member, officer or employee and provided further that such
board member, officer or employee shall, within five days of the time he
is served with any summons, complaint, process, notice, demand or
pleading, deliver the original or a copy thereof to the system's legal
advisor.
 b. Upon such delivery the system's legal advisor may assume control of
the representation of such board member, officer or employee. Such board
member, officer or employee shall cooperate fully with the system's
legal advisor's defense.
 c. This section shall not in any way impair, limit or modify the
rights and obligations of any insurer under any policy of insurance.
 d. The benefits of this section shall inure only to board members,
officers and employees of the system and shall not enlarge or diminish
the rights of any other party.
 8. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision seven of this section
and in lieu thereof, the retirement board may, by adoption of a board
regulation, provide for the indemnification and defense by the system of
members of the retirement board and employees of the system in
accordance with section eighteen of the public officers law.
 § 508. Investment of funds; interest; accounts; reports. 1. The
members of the retirement board shall be the trustees of the several
funds created by this article, and shall determine from time to time
what part of the moneys belonging to the retirement system shall be
invested. When such board shall determine upon the investment of any
moneys or upon the conversion or sale of any securities, it shall, by
resolution duly adopted by a majority vote of the members of the board,
direct the custodian to so invest the moneys or convert or sell the
securities. Investments shall be made only in securities in which the
trustees of a savings bank may invest the moneys deposited therein as
provided by law except that the retirement system shall have the
authority to own any of its nominee corporations organized pursuant to
subdivision seventeen of this section. It shall be the duty of the
custodian to collect the interest thereon as the same becomes due and
payable and also the principal thereof and place the same when so
collected to the credit of the retirement system.
 2. The retirement board shall annually allow regular interest on the
mean amount for the preceding year in each of the funds created by this
article, excepting the expense fund. The amount so allowed shall be
payable to said funds and shall be annually credited thereto by the
retirement board. All interest earned upon the entire amount of the
funds belonging to the retirement system shall be used for this purpose,
unless the amount so earned is in excess of the requirements, in which
case the excess amount shall be credited to the pension accumulation
fund. Any deficiency in the amount required to cover the interest
requirements of the funds, exclusive of the pension accumulation fund,
shall be paid from the pension accumulation fund.
 3. Except as herein provided, no member nor employee of the retirement
board shall have any interest direct or indirect in the gains or profits
of any investment made by the board nor as such directly or indirectly
receive any pay or emolument for his services. And no member nor
employee of the said board directly or indirectly, for himself or as an
agent or partner of others, nor a corporation of which he is an officer,
stockholder or member, shall borrow any of its funds or deposits or in
any manner use the same except to make such current and necessary
payments as are authorized by the board; nor shall any member or
employee of said board become an endorser or surety or become in any
manner an obligor for moneys loaned by or borrowed of the board. Nothing
herein contained shall be construed to prevent a member or an employee
of the retirement board, who is also a member of the retirement system,
from borrowing from his accumulated contributions in the retirement
system in accordance with section five hundred twelve-b of this article.
 4. The retirement board shall provide for maintenance of an individual
account with each member showing the amount of the member's
contributions and the interest accumulations thereon. It shall report
annually to each member who has furnished the board with a mailing
address the accumulated contributions credited to such account together
with the amount of service then credited to the member. It shall collect
and keep in convenient form such data as shall be necessary for the
preparation of the required mortality and service tables, and for the
compilation of such other information as shall be required for the
actuarial valuation of the assets and liabilities of the various funds
created by this article. Upon the basis of the mortality and service
experience of the members and beneficiaries of the system, the
retirement board from time to time shall adopt the tables to be used for
valuation purposes and for determining the amount of annuities to be
allowed on the basis of the contributions of members.
 5. At such time as the retirement board may deem it necessary and at
least once each quinquennial period, the retirement board shall have its
actuary prepare a report showing a complete valuation of the present and
prospective assets and liabilities of the various funds created by this
article with the exception of the expense fund. The actuary shall make
an investigation of the mortality and service experience of the members
of the retirement system and shall report fully upon its conditions as
well as estimated future investment earnings with such recommendations
as he shall deem advisable for the information of the retirement board
in the proper operation of the retirement system.
 6. The records of the retirement board shall be open to public
inspection.
 7. The retirement board shall publish annually a report showing the
condition of the various funds created by this article, certifying to
the accumulated cash and securities of the funds and giving an account
of the operation of the system.
 8. The retirement system may use a part of its funds, not exceeding
ten per centum of its net assets, (1) for purchasing or leasing of land
within the county of Albany and the construction thereon of a suitable
office building or buildings for the transaction of the business of the
retirement system and (2) for purchasing or leasing of land in the
cities of Albany, Binghamton, New York, Rochester and Utica and the
construction thereon of a suitable office building or buildings for
purposes of lease or sale to the state and (3) for purchasing or leasing
of land in locations approved by the state university trustees and the
construction, acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement
of suitable buildings or facilities thereon for purposes of lease or
sale to the state university construction fund, such buildings or
facilities to be used by the state university or by state-operated
institutions or statutory or contract colleges under the jurisdiction of
the state university or by the students, faculty and staff of the state
university or of any such state-operated institution or statutory or
contract college, and their families.
 The retirement system from time to time may lease to any public agency
any portion of a building constructed for the transaction of its
business which may not be required for such purpose, upon such terms and
conditions as shall be deemed to be for the best interest of the
retirement system.
 Real property of the retirement system acquired or constructed
pursuant to this subdivision shall be exempt from taxation as provided
in the real property tax law.
 10. The retirement system may invest, within the limitations
authorized for investments in conventional mortgages, a part of its
funds in first mortgages on real property located anywhere within the
boundaries of the United States and leased to the government of the
United States, provided however, that no such investment shall be made
unless the terms of the mortgage shall provide for amortization payments
in an amount sufficient to completely amortize the loan within the
period of the lease.
 11. The funds of the retirement system may be invested in the purchase
of promissory notes or bonds from the farmers home administration issued
in connection with the purchase or improvement of real property and
which are insured by the farmers home administration.
 13. Where any benefit accruing under the provisions of this article is
payable to a minor, incompetent, or any other person under a legal
disability and no guardian of the property, committee or other such
legal representative is duly appointed within six months of the date the
benefit accrues to such person, the retirement board shall be authorized
to adopt rules and regulations providing for a savings account to be
established for each such person to which shall be paid the amounts of
such benefits due and owing to such persons. Interest shall be credited
to each savings account established pursuant to this subdivision in the
same manner and amount as is credited to the accumulated contributions
of members in their individual accounts in the annuity savings fund
pursuant to this article. The funds in such accounts shall be payable,
within a reasonable time after proper notification to the system, to a
guardian of the property, committee or other such legal representative
after such person is duly appointed or to the beneficiary once the legal
disability is removed. A payment made pursuant to the provisions of this
subdivision shall release the system from any liability whatsoever.
 14. The retirement board is hereby authorized to buy securities under
an agreement providing for the repurchase thereof. The retirement board
is also authorized to assign commitments to invest system funds pursuant
to an agreement providing for the subsequent purchase of such
investments. The securities purchased pursuant to this subdivision
shall meet the eligibility standards prescribed for such class of
investments.
 15. During the period ending June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
seventy-seven, the retirement board is authorized, in order to obtain
the funds necessary to make investments without the conversion or sale
of securities it holds, to borrow an amount not exceeding the amount to
be invested, upon such terms and conditions as the board, by resolution,
shall approve, which terms may include the pledge of any assets of such
system as may be necessary to secure the repayment of the amount
borrowed, provided that the total amount of such borrowing at no time
shall exceed five per centum of the system's assets.
 16. (a) The retirement system is authorized to photograph,
microphotograph, film, record, copy, image or otherwise reproduce all or
any part of its records by any process which accurately reproduces or
forms a durable medium for reproducing any original document or record.
Whenever the retirement system shall have so reproduced such records and
whenever such reproductions or media have been placed in conveniently
accessible files and provision has been made for preserving, examining
and using the same, the retirement system may cause the original record
which has been so reproduced to be disposed of or destroyed.
 (b) Any reproduction or reproduction from any media authorized
pursuant to this subdivision shall have the same force and effect as the
originals thereof would have had and shall be deemed to be an original
record for all purposes, including introduction in evidence in all
courts or administrative agencies. Duly certified or authenticated
copies of such reproductions shall be admitted in evidence equally with
the original reproductions.
 (c) A duly authorized representative of the retirement system is
hereby authorized to certify to the authenticity of any reproduction
herein authorized and the retirement system shall make such charges
therefor as may be authorized by law.
 17. Any real estate interests acquired by the retirement system
pursuant to this section, or pursuant to any other provision of law,
shall be conveyed to it directly by name, or may be taken in the name of
a duly authorized nominee. The retirement system shall have the
authority to organize corporations for the purpose of carrying out the
intent of this subdivision, and may make loans to said corporations for
the purpose of operating, preserving, or otherwise servicing any
property being held by said corporations.
 18. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the
retirement board shall have the power to delegate to one or more
investment managers its authority to invest moneys belonging to the
retirement system. The term "investment managers" as used in this
subdivision shall include but not be limited to independent contractors
selected by the retirement board.
 19. Whenever a statute requires that a document must be filed or
moneys deposited with the system within a prescribed period of time or
by a specified date in order for a member to be eligible for service
credit or a benefit from the system the document shall be deemed filed
or the moneys deposited with the system on the date mailed if mailed to
the system either through (1) the United States postal service by
registered or certified mail or (2) such other equivalent postal mail
service as the retirement board may specifically permit by rule or
regulation with a tracking service confirming a date of mailing.
Notwithstanding the provisions hereof, no such document shall be deemed
filed or moneys deposited with the system on the mailing date unless
actually received by the retirement system as the result of such
mailing.
 § 508-a. New York state teachers' retirement system MWBE asset
management and financial institution strategy. 1. Within the discretion
of the retirement board and in accordance with and subject to its
fiduciary duties and obligations as trustees of the teachers retirement
system and to the members, retirees and beneficiaries of such system and
such other investment limitations as may be prescribed by this chapter,
the retirement board is authorized to establish on MWBE asset management
and financial institution strategy pursuant to section four hundred
twenty-three-c of the retirement and social security law including
reasonable goals for utilization of MWBE asset managers, MWBE financial
institutions and MWBE financial and professional services firms, as such
terms are defined in section one hundred seventy-six of the retirement
and social security law which strategy shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following objectives:
 a. investing assets of the teachers' retirement system with MWBE asset
managers;
 b. subject to best execution, (1) conducting trades of public equity
securities with MWBE financial institutions and (2) conducting trades of
fixed-income securities through MWBE financial institutions;
 c. allocating investments of assets of the teacher's retirement system
either through (1) direct investments in the equities and debt
securities of MWBEs or (2) indirectly through special programs involving
MWBE asset managers; and
 d. awarding contracts for accounting, banking, financial advisory,
insurance, legal, research, valuation and other financial and
professional services to MWBE financial institutions and other MWBE
professional services firms.
 As used in this section, the terms "MWBE asset manager", "MWBE
financial institutions", "MWBE", "fidiuciary-controlled entities", and
"best execution" shall have the meanings specified in section one
hundred seventy-six of the retirement and social security law, and shall
be certified in a manner consistent with the provisions of subdivision
three of section four hundred twenty-three-c of the retirement and
social security law.
 2. The retirement board is also authorized to:
 a. periodically advertise the existence of such strategy so that MWBE
asset managers, MWBE financial institutions and other MWBE professional
service firms are made aware of the opportunities made available
pursuant to such strategy;
 b. within sixty days of the end of each fiscal year following the
effective date of this section, the retirement board shall report to the
governor, legislature and the chief diversity officer of the state of
New York on the participation of MWBE asset managers, MWBE financial
institutions and MWBE professional service providers in investment and
brokerage transactions with or as providers of services for the
teachers' retirement system, including a comparative analysis of such
activity relative to such activity with all asset managers, financial
institutions and professional service providers for the relevant period
and on the progress and success of the efforts undertaken during such
period to achieve the goals of such strategy. Each report shall be
simultaneously published on the website of the teachers' retirement
system for not less than sixty days following its release to the
governor and the other recipients named above;
 c. work with the other fiduciary-controlled entities to create a
database of such MWBE entities; and
 d. periodically, but not less than annually, hold a conference to
promote such strategy in conjunction with the other fiduciary-controlled
entities.
 § 509. Statements of teachers' service; determination of service
creditable; service certificates. 1. Under such rules and regulations as
the retirement board shall adopt, each present teacher shall file a
detailed statement of all service as a teacher and service in a similar
capacity in other states rendered by him prior to the first day of
August, nineteen hundred twenty-one, for which he claims credit, and of
such other facts as the retirement board may require for the proper
operation of the retirement system.
 2. a. Each new entrant shall file a detailed statement of (1) service
as a teacher; (2) service in other states, territories, possessions and
commonwealths of the United States, which would constitute service as a
teacher within the meaning of subdivision four of section five hundred
one of this article had it been performed within New York state rendered
by him prior to so becoming a member; (3) governmental service in the
state of New York where he was a member of the New York state and local
employees' retirement system, and where such service was credited to him
in the said New York state and local employees' retirement system; (4)
service with the New York city corrections department prior to nineteen
hundred fifty-six which would constitute service as a teacher within the
meaning of subdivision four of section five hundred one of this article
had it been performed in the employ of a public school in New York
state; (5) such service that would have been creditable in one of the
public retirement systems of the state, as defined in subdivision
twenty-three of section five hundred one of the retirement and social
security law, at the time the service was rendered, had the individual
been a member of such retirement system; (6) a statement as to the
number of years on account of which he desires to contribute; and (7)
such other facts as the retirement board may require for the proper
operation of the system.
 b. No credit shall be allowed for service which has been credited in
any retirement system if the member on or after the effective date of
this paragraph withdraws his contributions to such retirement system and
terminates his membership therein during the period in which his
membership in such other system would have been valid and because of
such withdrawal or termination transfer of such credit from such other
retirement system cannot be made to the New York state teachers
retirement system pursuant to section five hundred twenty-two of this
article.
 c. No prior service claim will be allowed for any service for which
the person is receiving a benefit or will be entitled to receive a
benefit at any future time from some other public retirement system, in
this state, in any other state or from the federal government.
 3. The retirement board shall fix and determine by appropriate rules
and regulations how much service in any year is the equivalent of a year
of service, but in computing such service or in computing average
compensation, it shall credit no period of more than a month's duration,
during which a member was absent without pay, nor shall more than one
year of service be credited for all service in any calendar year.
 4. Subject to the above restrictions and to such other rules and
regulations as the retirement board shall adopt, said board shall verify
as soon as practicable the statement of service submitted.
 5. After the member has rendered at least two full years of service
since he last became a member, upon verification of the statement of
service submitted and receipt of any contribution required to be paid by
the member pursuant to paragraph a of subdivision eight of this section,
the retirement board shall credit the member with the length of such
prior service as set forth in (1), (3), (4) and (5) of paragraph a of
subdivision two of this section and the aggregate length of such prior
service not to exceed ten years as set forth in (2) of paragraph a of
subdivision two of this section provided that in no case shall the
number of years of credited service outside the state of New York be
more than the number of years of credited service within the state of
New York.
 6. So long as membership continues, a prior service certificate shall
be final and conclusive for retirement purposes as to such service
unless thereafter modified by the retirement board upon application made
by the member within one year after the date of issuance or modification
of a prior service certificate or upon the discovery by the retirement
board of an error or fraud. When membership ceases, such certificate
shall be void. Should membership be resumed by the teacher, such teacher
shall enter the system as a new entrant, except as provided by
subdivisions five and six of section five hundred eleven of this
article.
 7. The total state service credited a member shall consist of the
service as a teacher rendered by him since he last became a member, and
any prior service as set forth in (1), (3), (4) and (5) of paragraph a
of subdivision two of this section. The total service credited a member
shall consist of the service rendered by him as a teacher since he last
became a member and all credited prior service.
 8. a. Any member of the retirement system who is credited with at
least two full years of teaching service rendered in the state since he
last became a member may claim such uncredited prior service as set
forth in (2), (3), (4) and (5) of paragraph a of subdivision two of this
section, pursuant to subdivision five of this section by paying to the
retirement board four per centum of the salaries earned for the years
claimed and such uncredited prior service as set forth in (1) of
paragraph a of subdivision two of this section by paying to the
retirement board the amount he would have been required to contribute at
the time such service was rendered, not to exceed four per centum of the
salaries earned for the years claimed. The amount due, if any, for such
service shall be deposited with the retirement board prior to retirement
in accordance with the requirements of this article and the regulations
of the retirement board. The retirement board, upon verification of the
claim and payment made, shall credit such member with such service.
 Notwithstanding any other provision of this paragraph, any member who
last joined the retirement system prior to July twenty-seventh, nineteen
hundred seventy-six and who did not receive credit with the retirement
system prior to July first, nineteen hundred eighty-eight for prior
service, may obtain credit for prior service pursuant to the provisions
of this section or pursuant to the provisions of subdivision b of
section four hundred forty-six of the retirement and social security
law, whichever is applicable, without making the payments required by
this paragraph.
 b. Any member who applies for superannuation retirement and who on
joining the system claimed and paid for all his uncredited service,
shall be reclassified as a "present teacher" and shall be credited with
all state teaching service rendered before the first day of August,
nineteen hundred twenty-one, provided he was a teacher on or before the
first day of August, nineteen hundred twenty-one, and provided that he
is credited with at least fifteen years of teaching service rendered in
the state and has not ceased teaching for a period in excess of five
years in any period of ten consecutive years since the first day of
August, nineteen hundred twenty-one, and provided that his membership
has been continuous since first joining the system and that he would
have been entitled to the status of "present teacher" and to the credit
for service rendered prior to the first day of August, nineteen hundred
twenty-one, had he applied for membership and claimed such credit at the
time he was given the privilege so to do. Any such member who claimed
and paid for service rendered prior to the first day of August, nineteen
hundred twenty-one, shall, upon being reclassified as a "present
teacher", have the amount so paid applied on the payment for uncredited
service rendered on and after the first day of August, nineteen hundred
twenty-one, and the balance if any, shall be refunded to the member.
 c. After the member retires, the next ensuing contribution of the
employers, collected in the manner provided in subdivision two of
section five hundred twenty-one, shall be increased by the lump sum
actuarial cost to the employers attributable to such prior service
credit as is granted to members who retire under the provisions of this
subdivision, computed on the basis of the mortality tables and interest
rate applicable to members at the time of retirement. The proper funds
shall be credited with the amount of such contributions, and such amount
of pension shall be charged to the amount so collected.
 9. No final determination made by the system with respect to benefits
provided by the system, or matters related thereto, shall be subject to
review in any court of the state of New York, except as provided in
article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules.
 10. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, any
law insofar as and to the extent it shall establish or affect a benefit
provided by the system shall be deemed to have been in full force and
effect on the earlier of the effective date provided for in such law or
the thirtieth day of June of the calendar year of enactment by the
legislature, unless such law expressly provides that it shall not be
subject to this subdivision.
 11. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, a
member of the retirement system subject to this article or article
fourteen or fifteen of the retirement and social security law who,
subsequent to such member's date of membership in the retirement system,
rendered service which was credited in another public retirement system
of the state but thereafter failed to make timely transfer of such
membership to the retirement system prior to the time the membership in
such other public retirement system ceased by reason of: a. insufficient
service; b. withdrawal of accumulated contributions; or c. withdrawal of
membership, may obtain credit for such service on the same basis and in
the same manner as if such service had been rendered prior to such
member's date of membership in the retirement system.
 * 12. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any member eligible
to purchase credit for previous service with a public employer pursuant
to this section or to purchase credit for military service pursuant to
article twenty of the retirement and social security law, may elect to
purchase any or all of such service by executing a periodic payroll
deduction agreement where and to the extent such elections are permitted
by the retirement system by rule or regulation. Such agreement shall set
forth the amount of previous service or military service being
purchased, the estimated total cost of such service credit, and the
number of payroll periods in which such periodic payments shall be made.
Such agreement shall be irrevocable, shall not be subject to amendment
or modification in any manner, and shall expire only upon completion of
payroll deductions required therein. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any
member who has entered into such a payroll deduction agreement and who
terminates employment prior to the completion of the payments required
therein shall be credited with any service as to which such member shall
have paid the contributions required under the terms of the agreement.
 * NB Takes effect upon notice of ruling by Internal Revenue Service --
expires per ch. 627/2007 §22
 § 510. Superannuation retirement. 1. Retirement upon a superannuation
allowance shall be made under the following conditions:
 a. A member who has completed twenty-five years of total credited
service and who has attained the age of sixty years or over while in
service, or any member who has completed thirty-five years of total
credited service shall be retired, if he files with the retirement board
a statement duly attested setting forth at what time not less than
thirty days nor more than ninety days subsequent to the execution and
filing thereof he desires such retirement.
 b. Any member who has attained age seventy may be retired at his own
request or at the request of his employer if he or his employer files
with the retirement board a statement duly attested setting forth at
what time subsequent to the execution and filing thereof retirement is
desired, and if throughout the year immediately preceding the filing of
such statement he shall have been in service as a teacher in this state.
The retirement board shall retire said member as of the date so
specified or as of such other time within thirty days thereafter as the
retirement board may find advisable.
 2. Upon superannuation retirement a member shall receive a
superannuation retirement allowance which shall consist of:
 a. An annuity which shall be the actuarial equivalent of his
accumulated contributions at the time of his retirement, and
 b. A pension of one quarter (1/4) of his final average salary or if
his total service is less than twenty-five years, a pension of one
one-hundredth (1/100) of his final average salary multiplied by the
number of years of total service, and
 c. A further pension of one one-hundred fortieth (1/140) of his final
average salary multiplied by the number of years of total state service
in excess of thirty-five years, and
 d. If the member be a present teacher, a further pension of one
one-hundred fortieth (1/140) of his final average salary multiplied by
the number of years of total service certified on his prior service
certificate, and
 e. If the member has contributed pursuant to paragraph c of
subdivision three of section five hundred sixteen, a further pension of
one one-hundred twentieth (1/120) of his final average salary for each
year of total service in excess of twenty-five years but not in excess
of thirty-five years, nor in excess of the number of years for which
credit is allowed under paragraph d of subdivision three of section five
hundred sixteen, and
 f. A further pension, of such amount as shall be required to bring the
total retirement allowance of members with twenty-five or more years of
state service up to four hundred dollars per annum, and
 g. The provision of paragraph (c) of subdivision two of this section
shall apply only to members retiring on and after the date on which
paragraph (c) of subdivision two of this section becomes operative.
 § 511. Disability retirement. 1. Retirement on account of disability
shall be made under the following conditions: A member who has completed
at least fifteen years of total state service or a member who is a
present teacher and who has completed twenty years of service, the last
ten of which were state service, may be retired on account of disability
either upon the application of his employer or upon his own application
or that of a person acting in his behalf, if the retirement board, after
a medical examination of said member by a physician or physicians
designated by said board shall determine upon the basis of a report
submitted by said physician or physicians that the said member is
physically or mentally incapacitated for the performance of duty, that
he was incapacitated at the time he ceased teaching and that said member
ought to be retired.
 2. On retirement for disability, a member shall receive a
superannuation retirement allowance if his state service is twenty-five
or more years and he has attained age sixty or if his total service is
thirty-five or more years; otherwise, he shall receive a disability
retirement allowance which shall consist of:
 a. An annuity which shall be the actuarial equivalent of his
accumulated contributions at the time of his retirement; and
 b. A pension of one-fifth (1/5) of his final average salary, with the
exception that in no case shall the rate of such pension exceed
four-fifths (4/5) of the rate of pension to which he might have been
entitled had retirement been deferred until the age of seventy as
provided under paragraph b of subdivision one of section five hundred
ten; and
 c. If he be a present teacher, a further pension of one one-hundred
fortieth (1/140) of his final average salary multiplied by the number of
years of total service certified on his prior service certificate, and
 d. If the member has contributed pursuant to paragraph c of
subdivision three of section five hundred sixteen, a pension, in lieu of
the pension provided under paragraph b of subdivision two of this
section, of nine-tenths (9/10) of one one-hundredth (1/100) of his final
average salary multiplied by the number of years of total service not in
excess of twenty-five years, but not less than twenty (20) per centum of
his final average salary, plus nine-tenths (9/10) of one one-hundred
twentieth (1/120) of his final average salary multiplied by the number
of years of total service in excess of twenty-five years but not in
excess of thirty-five years, nor in excess of the number of years for
which credit is allowed under paragraph d of subdivision three of
section five hundred sixteen.
 3. On and after July first, nineteen hundred seventy, a member who has
credit for ten years of full time state service, including at least two
years of such service rendered subsequent to June thirtieth, nineteen
hundred sixty-seven and subsequent to the date upon which he last joined
the retirement system and who is under age fifty-five, and otherwise
meets the requirements of subdivision one of this section, may be
retired on account of disability by the filing of an application with
the retirement board as required by subdivision one of this section.
Upon such retirement, he shall receive, in lieu of the retirement
allowance specified in subdivision two of this section and the pension
for increased-take-home-pay otherwise authorized in this article, a
disability retirement pension consisting of:
 a. a pension of one-sixtieth of his final average salary multiplied by
the number of his years of credited state service rendered after June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred fifty-nine and
 b. a pension of one-seventieth of his final average salary multiplied
by the number of his years of credited state service rendered before
July first, nineteen hundred fifty-nine and
 c. a pension of one one-hundred twentieth of his final average salary
multiplied by the number of his years of credited out-of-state service.
 In no event shall the disability pension be less than one-sixtieth of
the member's final average salary multiplied by the number of years of
total service, not to exceed twenty, which would have been credited to
the member had he remained in service until age sixty; provided,
however, that for members who are credited with service prior to July
first, nineteen hundred fifty-nine, the minimum pension as so determined
shall be reduced by one quarter of one per cent of final average salary
multiplied by the number of his years of service prior to July first,
nineteen hundred fifty-nine.
 On retirement for disability, in addition to the pension hereinabove
provided, a member shall receive an annuity which shall be the actuarial
equivalent of his accumulated contributions at the time of his
retirement.
 On and after July first, nineteen hundred seventy-seven, a member who
is age fifty-five or over and who otherwise meets the requirements of
this subdivision, shall receive on retirement for disability the
retirement allowance he would have received had he filed for a service
retirement.
 On or after October sixteenth, nineteen hundred ninety-two, the
disability pension shall in no event be less than:
 a. in the case of a member under age sixty, the greater of (i)
one-sixtieth of the member's final average salary multiplied by the
number of years of total service, which formula is to be used if the
pension so computed exceeds one-third of the member's final average
salary, or (ii) one-sixtieth of the member's final average salary
multiplied by the number of years of total service, not to exceed
twenty, which would have been credited to the member had he remained in
service until age sixty; or
 b. in the case of a member age sixty or over, one-sixtieth of the
member's final average salary multiplied by the number of years of total
service.
 Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, any member
who shall receive a disability retirement allowance pursuant to this
subdivision shall be required once each year or at such other interval
as the retirement board may determine to undergo a medical examination
by a physician or physicians designated by the retirement board. Should
any disability beneficiary refuse to submit to a medical examination,
his retirement allowance shall be discontinued until his withdrawal of
such refusal, and should refusal continue for one year all rights in and
to his pension shall be forfeited.
 In the case of persons who last became members on or after July first,
nineteen hundred seventy-three, the provisions of this subdivision shall
apply only until July first, nineteen hundred seventy-four.
 4. Once each year or at such other interval as the retirement board
may determine, following the retirement of a teacher who joined the New
York state teachers retirement system on or after July first, nineteen
hundred sixty-one, on a disability allowance, or once each year during
the first five years following the retirement of the teacher who joined
the New York state teachers retirement system prior to July first,
nineteen hundred sixty-one, on a disability allowance the retirement
board may, and upon his application shall, require any disability
beneficiary to undergo medical examination by a physician or physicians
designated by the retirement board. Should any disability beneficiary
refuse to submit to a medical examination, his retirement allowance
shall be discontinued until his withdrawal of such refusal, and should
such refusal continue for one year, all his rights in and to his pension
shall be forfeited.
 5. Should the physician or physicians designated by the retirement
board report and certify to the retirement board that such disability
beneficiary is engaged in or is able to engage in a gainful occupation
paying more than the difference between his retirement allowance and his
final average salary, and should the retirement board concur in such
report, then the amount of his pension shall be reduced to an amount
which, when added to the amount earnable by him, together with his
annuity shall equal the amount of his final average salary. Should his
earning capacity be later changed, then the amount of his pension may be
further altered; provided, that the new pension shall not exceed the
amount of the pension originally granted nor an amount which when added
to the amount earned by the beneficiary, together with his annuity
equals the amount of his final average salary. A beneficiary restored to
active service at a salary less than the final average salary or upon
the basis of which he was retired shall not become a member of the
retirement system while receiving a reduced pension. Notwithstanding any
other provision of this article, the term "final average salary" as used
in this subdivision four, shall mean either "final average salary" as
defined by subdivision eleven of section five hundred one, or the
maximum salary or compensation which the retired member currently would
be receiving in the position from which he was last retired for
disability, if he had not been so retired, whichever is greater,
provided, however, that if the position from which he was so retired has
been abolished, the retirement board, upon the basis of salary or
compensation currently paid by the retired member's last employer to
persons in similar or comparable position, shall determine, for the
purposes of this subdivision four, the maximum amount of salary or
compensation which such retired member currently would be receiving in
such position.
 6. Should a disability beneficiary be restored to active service at a
salary as great as his final average salary, his retirement allowance
shall cease, and he shall again become a member of the retirement
system, and his annuity reserve shall be transferred from the annuity
reserve fund to the annuity savings fund and credited to his individual
account as a part of his accumulated contributions in the latter fund,
and he shall contribute to the said fund thereafter in the same manner
and at the same rate as he paid prior to his disability. His prior
service certificate on the basis of which his service was computed at
the time of his retirement shall be renewed and shall again be in full
force and effect, and in addition, upon his subsequent retirement, he
shall be credited with all his service as a member subsequent to the
period covered by his prior service certificate.
 7. The retirement board shall adopt appropriate rules and regulations
providing for the reimbursement of reasonable expenses actually incurred
by a member in attending medical examinations by physicians designated
by the retirement board pursuant to this section. After determining the
reasonableness thereof, the retirement board shall approve payment of
such expenses from the expense fund.
 8. a. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, a
member who has applied for disability retirement pursuant to this
section, or, in the case of a member subject to article fifteen of the
retirement and social security law, pursuant to section six hundred five
of such law and has validly elected the applicable optional allowance
specified in paragraph e of this subdivision and is otherwise eligible
to retire for disability pursuant to the provisions of this section
shall be entitled to the benefits of this subdivision in lieu of any
pre-retirement death benefit which otherwise would have been payable,
but for the operation of this subdivision. Such member shall be deemed
to have elected the benefits of this subdivision unless the member shall
have indicated in a manner prescribed by the retirement board that the
member does not wish to avail himself of such benefits.
 b. In the event such member dies, and such application for disability
retirement has not become effective and has not been rejected, and it is
determined by the retirement board, upon recommendation of the medical
board, that the physical or mental incapacitation specified in such
application was directly related to the cause of the member's death,
such application shall be deemed approved by the retirement board,
effective one day prior to the date of the member's death. In such
event, the optional allowance elected by such member shall be effective
and no pre-retirement death benefit shall be payable.
 c. In the event no optional allowance specified in paragraph e of this
subdivision was elected by the member, or it is determined by the
retirement board, upon recommendation of the medical board, that the
physical or mental incapacitation specified in such application was not
directly related to the cause of the member's death, this subdivision
shall not apply and the applicable pre-retirement death benefit, if any,
shall be payable.
 d. If a member satisfying the provisions of paragraph a of this
subdivision is, at the time the member files an application for
disability retirement, eligible to retire for service under this
article, the member may simultaneously apply for service retirement,
provided the member indicates the application for disability retirement
is without prejudice to the member's application for service retirement.
Upon retirement for service, the member's application for disability
retirement shall be deemed cancelled.
 e. An eligible optional allowance for the purposes of this subdivision
shall only include Option one and Option four pursuant to section five
hundred thirteen of this article in the case of a member who has applied
for disability retirement pursuant to this section, and the Alternative
Option pursuant to subdivision a-one of section six hundred ten of the
retirement and social security law in the case of a member who has
applied for disability retirement pursuant to section six hundred five
of such law, provided that in the case of Option four and the
Alternative Option, the optional allowance elected by the member must
provide only for the payment upon the member's death of a lump sum and
such lump sum must be greater in amount than the amount of the death
benefit, if any, which would have been paid but for the operation of
this subdivision.
 f. The retirement board is authorized to adopt such rules and
regulations as it deems necessary to implement the provisions of this
section.
 9. a. Any law to the contrary notwithstanding, a member who satisfies
the requirements of paragraph b of this subdivision and is otherwise
eligible (disregarding any service requirement) to retire for disability
pursuant to this section or section five hundred six or six hundred five
of the retirement and social security law, as applicable, may elect to
receive a benefit equal to the death benefit which would have been paid,
had such member died on the member's last day on the payroll in full pay
status, pursuant to section five hundred twelve of this article or
section four hundred forty-eight, five hundred eight or six hundred six
of the retirement and social security law, as applicable.
 b. To be eligible for the benefit provided in paragraph a of this
subdivision, a member must have been determined by the system to have
(i) a terminal illness resulting in a life expectancy of no more than
twelve months, or (ii) a medical condition of a long continued and
indefinite duration requiring extraordinary care or treatment regardless
of life expectancy.
 c. The benefit provided in paragraph a of this subdivision shall be in
lieu of any disability benefit to which the member may otherwise be
entitled. A member who is otherwise eligible to retire for disability
must elect the benefit provided in paragraph a of this subdivision no
later than the thirtieth day following the day on which (i) the system
notifies the member that the member has been retired for disability, or
(ii) the member is first eligible to commence receiving a disability
retirement benefit, whichever is later. Such election, when made, shall
be irrevocable.
 d. Except as provided in this paragraph, a member electing the benefit
provided in paragraph a of this subdivision shall for all purposes be
deemed to have been retired for disability. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, should a member who has elected the benefit provided in
paragraph a of this subdivision thereafter be restored to active service
and again become a member of the system,
 (i) no death benefit shall be payable pursuant to section five hundred
twelve of this article or section four hundred forty-eight, five hundred
eight or six hundred six of the retirement and social security law, as
applicable in the event of the member's subsequent death, and
 (ii) unless such member shall have rendered five years of credited
service since last becoming a member of the system, any retirement
benefit to which such member may thereafter become entitled shall be
reduced by the actuarial value of the benefit paid pursuant to paragraph
a of this subdivision (less the actuarial value of any applicable
post-retirement death benefit which would have been available, but for
this paragraph).
 e. The retirement board is authorized to adopt such rules and
regulations as it may deem necessary to implement the provisions of this
subdivision.
 § 511-a. Special service retirement. 1. Retirement upon a special
service retirement allowance shall be made under the following
conditions: Any member, by written notice duly acknowledged and filed
with the retirement board before the first day of July, nineteen hundred
sixty-seven, or within two years after he last became a member,
whichever is later, may elect to contribute pursuant to this section on
the basis of retirement at an age within five years of the age when he
would be eligible for superannuation retirement as provided under
subdivision one of section five hundred ten, but not before age
fifty-five. After such election the rate of deduction from the earnable
compensation of the contributor shall be six and one-half per centum if
his normal rate as provided under section five hundred sixteen is four
per centum, and shall be eight per centum if such normal rate is five
per centum. Where a member elects to contribute pursuant to this
section, contributions at such higher rate shall be made from the first
day of July, nineteen hundred sixty-seven, or from the first of the
month following the expiration of thirty days subsequent to the filing
of his election, whichever is later. If, at the time of retirement, the
member's accumulated contributions are insufficient to provide an
annuity equal to the pension provided under paragraph b of subdivision
four of this section, he shall have the privilege of paying into the
retirement system by a single payment the amount required in addition to
his accumulated contributions to provide an annuity equal to said
pension.
 2. One year or more after the filing thereof, a member may withdraw
his election to contribute pursuant to this section on the basis of
special service retirement. Such withdrawal shall be by written notice
duly acknowledged and filed with the retirement board. Such member
thereafter shall contribute on the basis of his rate of normal
contribution. Such member, upon application at any time prior to
retirement and with the approval of the retirement board, shall be
entitled to a refund of the amount of his contributions and regular
interest thereon, which is in excess of the amount of the accumulated
contributions which he would then have to his credit had he been
contributing on the basis of his rate of normal contribution.
 3. Any member electing to contribute towards a special service
retirement allowance under the provisions of this section, who has
attained age fifty-five or over while in service, shall be eligible to
retire at any time within five years before the date he would be
eligible for superannuation retirement as provided under subdivision one
of section five hundred ten, if he files with the retirement board a
statement duly attested setting forth at what time not less than thirty
days nor more than ninety days subsequent to the execution and filing
thereof he desires such retirement.
 4. Upon special service retirement, a member shall receive a special
service retirement allowance which shall consist of:
 a. An annuity which shall be the actuarial equivalent of his
accumulated contributions at the time of his retirement, and
 b. A pension of one quarter of his final average salary or if his
total service is less than twenty-five years, a pension of one
one-hundredth of his final average salary multiplied by the number of
years of total service, and
 c. If the member be a present teacher, a further pension of one
one-hundred fortieth of his final average salary multiplied by the
number of years of total service certified on his prior service
certificate, and
 d. If the member has contributed pursuant to paragraph c of
subdivision three of section five hundred sixteen, a further pension of
one one-hundred twentieth (1/120) of his final average salary multiplied
by the number of years of total service in excess of twenty-five years
but not in excess of thirty-five years, nor in excess of the number of
years for which credit is allowed under paragraph d of subdivision three
of section five hundred sixteen.
 § 512. Withdrawal and death benefits. Benefits upon withdrawal and
death shall be payable as follows:
 a. A member who withdraws from service or ceases to be a teacher for
any cause other than death or retirement shall be paid on demand the
accumulated contributions standing to the credit of his individual
account in the annuity savings fund. A member who has no accumulated
contributions credited to his individual account in the annuity savings
fund and who ceases to be a teacher for any cause other than death or
retirement may withdraw from membership in the system by filing a notice
of withdrawal with the system pursuant to rules and regulations adopted
by the retirement board.
 b. 1. Should a contributor die before retirement, his accumulated
contributions shall be paid to his estate or to such person as he shall
have nominated to receive such benefit. In the event such designated
beneficiary does not survive him, or if he shall not have so designated
a beneficiary, such benefit shall be payable to the deceased member's
estate or as provided in section one hundred three-a of the decedent
estate law. Such nomination must be by written designation duly executed
and filed with the retirement board.
 2. In addition to the return of accumulated contributions, a death
benefit also shall be payable upon the death of a member who dies before
the effective date of his retirement, and was in service upon which his
membership was based when he died or was on the payroll in such service
and paid within a period of twelve months prior to his death and had not
been otherwise gainfully employed since he ceased to be on such payroll
or if, during the period that membership is valid, the retirement board
shall determine to its satisfaction that said member was physically or
mentally incapacitated for the performance of duty at the time he ceased
to be on the payroll in such service and that he had been so
incapacitated and had not been otherwise gainfully employed since he
ceased to be on such payroll; provided he had credit for one or more
years of service while actually a member. The amount of death benefit
shall be computed by multiplying one twelfth of the compensation
earnable by such member during his last twelve months of service while a
member by the number of years, not to exceed twelve, of his total credit
for service as a teacher in this state. Where the member has more than
twelve years of credited service as a teacher in this state and when his
death occurs on or after July first, nineteen hundred sixty-one, and
before July first, nineteen hundred seventy-four, there shall be added
to such benefit one twenty-fourth of such compensation multiplied by the
number of years in excess of twelve, but not to exceed twenty-four such
years, of his total credit for service as a teacher in the state. The
death benefit shall be paid to such person as he shall have nominated to
receive such benefit. In the event such designated beneficiary does not
survive him, or if he shall not have so designated a beneficiary, such
benefit shall be payable to the deceased member's estate or as provided
in section one hundred three-a of the decedent estate law. Such
nomination must be by written designation duly executed and filed with
the retirement board. The provisions of this paragraph two of
subdivision b of this section shall apply only to deaths occurring on
and after July first, nineteen hundred fifty-nine.
 3. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article or any rules
or regulations adopted thereunder by the retirement board, the death
benefit payable pursuant to paragraph two of this subdivision, in the
case of a member who dies after having become eligible to apply and be
retired for special service or superannuation pursuant to the provisions
of this article, shall be increased by the amount, if any, that the
actuarial equivalent of the pension portion of his retirement allowance,
computed as if he had been retired on the day immediately preceding his
death, and computed in accordance with the provisions of subdivision two
of section five hundred ten and subdivision four of section five hundred
eleven-a of this article, exceeds the amount of the death benefit
otherwise payable pursuant to paragraph two of this subdivision. The
provisions of this paragraph three of subdivision b of this section
shall apply only to deaths occurring after the date on which said
paragraph three becomes operative and prior to July first, nineteen
hundred seventy-four.
 4. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the
requirement of one or more years of credited service, as set forth in
paragraph two of this subdivision, shall be deemed to have been
satisfied by any member who has credit for three or more months of
service rendered since last becoming a member. The provisions of this
paragraph shall apply only to deaths occurring after June thirtieth,
nineteen hundred seventy and before July first, nineteen hundred
seventy-five.
 5. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the death
benefit payable pursuant to paragraph two of this subdivision shall be
increased by the excess, if any, of the greater of a or b over the sum
of c and d, where a, b, c and d are as set forth hereunder:
 a. One-twelfth of the member's compensation multiplied by the number
of years, not to exceed thirty-six, of his total credited state service.
 b. The lesser of three times the member's compensation or twenty
thousand dollars.
 c. The death benefit which, in accordance with the provisions of
paragraph two of this subdivision, is payable in addition to the return
of accumulated contributions.
 d. The reserve for increased-take-home-pay.
 The term "compensation", as used in this subparagraph, shall mean (1)
in the case of a member who has credit for one or more years of service
rendered since last becoming a member, the compensation earned by such
member during his last twelve months of service, and (2) in the case of
a member who has credit for less than one year of service rendered since
last becoming a member, it shall mean his annual rate of compensation at
the time of his death. The provisions of this paragraph shall apply only
to deaths occurring after June thirtieth, nineteen hundred seventy and
before July first, nineteen hundred seventy-five. The additional death
benefits payable hereunder shall be construed as being payable under
paragraph two of this subdivision for the purpose of computing benefits
payable under paragraph three of this subdivision.
 c. The member or, within ninety days after his death, the person
nominated by him to receive any benefit payable on his account, may file
with the retirement board a written designation, duly executed,
providing that such benefit shall be paid in the form of an annuity to
the person so nominated. Such annuity shall be determined as the
actuarial equivalent of the benefit otherwise payable, on the basis of
the interest rate and the mortality tables adopted by the retirement
board for use in the calculations of such annuities. Such annuity shall
be payable throughout the life of the person so nominated, with no
payments at his death unless the member or, within ninety days after his
death, the person nominated by him to receive his benefit, shall elect
to have the actuarial equivalent of such annuity paid in the form of a
reduced annuity payable for life with the provision that if the person
so nominated should die before the annuity payments received by him are
equal to such actuarial equivalent, the balance thereof shall be paid in
a lump sum to such beneficiary's estate or to such person as such member
or his nominee shall have designated. Such designation of a beneficiary
to receive such benefit may be made or changed at any time by the person
who made it. Such election or change shall be made by written
designation duly executed and filed with the retirement board.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the retirement board reserves
the right to pay any benefit in the form of a lump sum payment if the
annuity determined as the actuarial equivalent of the benefit otherwise
payable is less than one hundred dollars per month.
 d. 1. The retirement board may adopt rules and regulations providing
that a trustee of an inter vivos or testamentary trust shall be eligible
to be nominated to receive a lump sum benefit pursuant to subdivision b
of this section.
 2. Any proceeds received by a trustee under this section shall not be
subject to the debts of the member or to transfer or estate taxes to any
greater extent than if such proceeds were payable to the beneficiaries
named in the trust and not to the estate of the member.
 3. A payment made in good faith under this section to either a
designated trustee of an inter vivos trust, a successor trustee of an
inter vivos trust who provides a copy of his appointment or a trustee of
successor trustee of a testamentary trust who provides a copy of the
letters of trusteeship shall be a complete discharge to the system to
the extent of the payment.
 4. If no qualified trustee claims the proceeds within eighteen months
after the death of the member, or if satisfactory evidence is furnished
within such period showing that there is or will be no trustee to
receive the proceeds, payment shall be made to the deceased member's
estate.
 e. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a member with ten or
more years of credited service in such system who dies before a
retirement benefit becomes payable and who is otherwise not entitled to
a death benefit from the retirement system shall be deemed to have died
on the last day that he or she was in service upon which his or her
membership was based for purposes of eligibility for the payment of a
death benefit pursuant to the provisions of this section. The death
benefit payable in such case shall be one-half of that which would have
been payable had such member died on the last day that service was
rendered.
 f. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law to the contrary and
solely for the purpose of determining eligibility for the death benefit
payable pursuant to this section, a person subject to this section shall
be considered to have died while in teaching service provided such
person was in such service at the time he or she was ordered to active
duty pursuant to Title 10 of the United States Code, with the armed
forces of the United States or to service in the uniformed services
pursuant to Chapter 43 of Title 38 of the United States Code and died
while on such active duty or service in the uniformed services on or
after June fourteenth, two thousand five. Provided, further, that any
such person ordered to active duty pursuant to Title 10 of the United
States Code, with the armed forces of the United States or to service in
the uniformed servicers pursuant to Chapter 43 of Title 38 of the United
States Code who died prior to rendering the minimum amount of service
necessary to be eligible for this benefit shall be considered to have
satisfied the minimum service requirement.
 g. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, any
member of the retirement system subject to article fourteen or fifteen
of the retirement and social security law who has permanently ceased
teaching shall have the right to elect the return of his or her
accumulated contributions and thereby terminate his or her membership in
the retirement system without regard to the amount of service to his or
her credit, provided a public employee retirement system in another
state has certified in a manner satisfactory to the system that such
member is a member of such other retirement system, has at least five
years of retirement credit in such other system, and is eligible, upon
the termination of his or her membership in the system, to obtain
retirement credit in such other retirement system for the service which
has been credited to his or her membership in the system. Upon refund of
such accumulated contributions, any and all obligations of the
retirement system to such member shall be totally discharged. The
retirement board is authorized to adopt such rules and regulations as
may be necessary to implement this subdivision.
 § 512-a. Deferred retirement. 1. Any member, who discontinues service
other than by death or retirement, and who is credited with at least
fifteen years of teaching service rendered in the state, by written
notice duly acknowledged and filed with the retirement board at any time
before his membership would otherwise terminate pursuant to section five
hundred three of this article, may elect, in lieu of the return of his
accumulated contributions pursuant to section five hundred twelve of
this article, to continue membership with the privilege of applying for
retirement pursuant to this section on or after the date he would first
be eligible for retirement had he remained in service but in no case
prior to the date he attains age sixty. Any member, who discontinues
service other than by death or retirement on or after June thirtieth,
nineteen hundred sixty-five and who is credited with at least ten years
of teaching service rendered in the state, by written notice duly
acknowledged and filed with the retirement board at any time before his
membership would otherwise terminate pursuant to section five hundred
three of this article, may elect, in lieu of the return of his
accumulated contributions pursuant to section five hundred twelve of
this article, to continue membership with the privilege of applying for
retirement pursuant to this section on or after the date he would first
be eligible for retirement had he remained in service but in no case
prior to the date he attains age fifty-five; provided, that in the case
of persons who last became members on or after July first, nineteen
hundred seventy-three, the provisions of this paragraph shall apply only
until July first, nineteen hundred seventy-four.
 2. The retirement allowance for a member who has made the election
pursuant to subdivision one of this section shall consist of (a) an
annuity which shall be the actuarial equivalent of such member's
accumulated contributions at the time of retirement and (b) a pension of
one-one hundred fortieth (1/140) of final average salary multiplied by
the total number of years of credited service as of the date of
discontinuing service.
 3. Any member who discontinues service other than by death or
retirement on or after June thirtieth, nineteen hundred seventy and who
is credited with at least ten years of full time teaching service
rendered in the state, at least two of which were rendered since the
date he last joined the retirement system and subsequent to June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred sixty-seven, by written notice duly
acknowledged and filed with the retirement board at any time before his
membership would otherwise terminate pursuant to section five hundred
three of this article, may elect, in lieu of the return of his
accumulated contributions pursuant to section five hundred twelve of
this article, to continue membership with the privilege of applying for
retirement pursuant to this subdivision on or after the date he attains
age fifty-five. The pension for a member who has made the election
pursuant to this subdivision shall be computed in accordance with the
procedures set forth in subdivision four of section five hundred
thirty-five of this article, unless the member has been credited with at
least twenty years of full time New York state service, in which event
his pension shall be computed in accordance with subdivisions two and
three of the aforementioned section. In no event, however, shall the
pension so computed exceed seventy-five per cent of the member's final
average salary. In addition to the pension provided by this subdivision,
the member shall receive an annuity which shall be the actuarial
equivalent of his accumulated contributions at the time of his
retirement. In the case of persons who last became members on or after
July first, nineteen hundred seventy-three, the provisions of this
subdivision shall apply only to those who discontinue service other than
by death or retirement prior to July first, nineteen hundred
seventy-four.
 4. Any person who is a member on or after June thirtieth, nineteen
hundred ninety-eight and who discontinues service other than by death or
retirement and who is credited with five years or more of full-time
teaching service rendered in the state, at least two of which were
rendered since the date he or she last joined the retirement system, by
written notice duly acknowledged and filed with the retirement board at
any time before his or her membership would otherwise terminate pursuant
to section five hundred three of this article, may elect, in lieu of the
return of his or her accumulated contributions pursuant to section five
hundred twelve of this article, to continue membership with the
privilege of applying for retirement pursuant to this subdivision on or
after the date he or she attains age fifty-five. The pension for a
member who has made the election pursuant to this subdivision shall be
computed in accordance with the procedures set forth in paragraph b of
subdivision five of section five hundred thirty-five of this article,
unless the member has been credited with at least twenty years of
full-time New York state service, in which event his or her pension
shall be computed in accordance with paragraph a of subdivision five of
the aforementioned section. In no event, however, shall the pension so
computed exceed three-quarters of the member's final average salary. In
addition to the pension provided by this subdivision, the member shall
receive an annuity which shall be the actuarial equivalent of his or her
accumulated contributions at the time of his or her retirement.
 5. Such member, when applying for retirement, may exercise the options
pursuant to section five hundred thirteen of this article.
 6. Interest on the contributions of such member after his membership
otherwise would have been terminated pursuant to section five hundred
three of this article shall be credited at the rate fixed for
contributions by new entrants at the time of discontinuation of service.
 7. If such member should die before the effective date of retirement,
his accumulated contributions shall be paid to his estate or beneficiary
in accordance with the provisions of paragraph one of subdivision b of
section five hundred twelve of this article.
 8. In the event that such member returns to service, such election
shall be considered to be withdrawn as of the date upon which he returns
to service and membership in the retirement system will continue
pursuant to subdivision three of section five hundred three of this
article.
 9. Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, any
member who fails to file the election pursuant to subdivisions one or
three of this section and whose membership would otherwise cease
pursuant to subdivision three of section five hundred three of this
article, shall be deemed to have filed such election the day before his
membership shall have ceased.
 10. Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, a
person who has elected to continue membership pursuant to the provisions
of this section, and who is qualified to transfer pursuant to the
provisions of section five hundred twenty-two of this chapter or section
forty-three of the retirement and social security law, shall be deemed
eligible to transfer, pursuant to such sections of law.
 11. Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, any
former member who met all the eligibility requirements of subdivision
one or three of this section, but failed to file the election required
by such subdivisions, as a result of which his membership in the system
was terminated because his service amounted to less than five years in a
period of ten consecutive years, shall be deemed to have filed such
election the day before membership ceased, provided such former member
files an application with the system requesting that his membership be
reinstated pursuant to this subdivision and deposits the accumulated
contributions withdrawn from the system with regular interest; provided
however that no such application shall be valid if (i) the service which
would be credited thereunder is credited in any public retirement system
in the United States, or (ii) a benefit is being received from any
public retirement system based upon such credit.
 12. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section a person who
has elected to continue membership pursuant to the provisions of this
section may withdraw from membership in the system in accordance with
the provisions of this article.
 § 512-b. Loans. 1. Any member in active service or on leave of absence
who has credit for at least one year of member service may borrow from
his accumulated contributions in the retirement system once during each
six month period an amount of not less than three hundred dollars
providing the retirement board shall approve such loan. The total of any
such loans shall not exceed seventy-five per centum of his accumulated
contributions.
 2. Repayment. An amount so borrowed, together with interest on any
unpaid balance thereof, shall be repaid in equal installments which
shall be made by the borrower directly to the retirement board or, with
the consent of the employer, through regular payroll deduction. The
state comptroller is authorized to provide through regular payroll
deduction for such repayment of loans made by employees of the state of
New York. Such installments shall be in such amount as the retirement
board shall approve; however, they shall be at least (a) two percent of
the member's contract salary, and (b) sufficient to pay the interest on
the unpaid balances thereof. In the event that a member is on leave of
absence without pay or is not regularly employed by an employer subject
to the provisions of this article, any such outstanding loan shall be
repaid in such installments of principal and interest as the retirement
board shall determine. In the event of default the retirement board
shall be authorized to collect such payments due from the employer of
such member through payroll deduction and such member shall forfeit all
future entitlement to borrow from the retirement system until the unpaid
balance of the loan outstanding at the time of default is fully paid.
The retirement board, at any time, may accept payments on account of any
loan in addition to the installments fixed for repayment thereof. All
payments of principal and interest at the minimum rate permitted
pursuant to subdivision three of this section made by the member shall
be credited to his accumulated contributions. Any additional interest
paid by the member shall be credited to the pension accumulation fund.
 3. Interest. The rate of interest payable upon loans made pursuant to
this section shall be set by the retirement board. The retirement board
shall have power, from time to time and at any time, to decrease such
rate to not less than that currently being credited on the member's
accumulated contributions or to increase the same to not more than six
per centum per annum. Any such decrease or increase shall apply, from
the effective date thereof, to unpaid balances of loans outstanding on
such date and to new loans made thereafter.
 4. Service Charge. A uniform service charge payable upon loans made
pursuant to this section shall be set by the retirement board in an
amount sufficient to cover the cost to the retirement system of
administering the loans. Such charge shall be deducted from the member's
accumulated contributions when the loan is made or in equal annual
installments over the period the loan is outstanding.
 5. Insurance. Each loan made pursuant to this section shall be insured
against the death of the member in an amount equal to the amount of the
loan outstanding at any given time; with the exception that until thirty
days have elapsed after the making thereof no part of the loans shall be
insured. Such insurance shall be provided by the retirement board
through the retirement system. Upon the death of the member the amount
of insurance so payable shall be credited to his accumulated
contributions. The premium payable by the member for such insurance
shall be set by the retirement board at a rate of not to exceed one per
centum of the amount loaned.
 A premium of one per centum per annum of the amount loaned, prorated
to July first next, shall be deducted from the accumulated contributions
of the member when the loan is made. Thereafter, a premium of one per
centum per annum of the present value of the outstanding loan as of July
first shall be deducted from the accumulated contributions of the member
each succeeding year until such loan is repaid or the member is retired.
 The retirement board in its discretion on any July first may increase
or reduce the premium, modify the terms or conditions of coverage, or
discontinue the insurance of loans. In no event shall this subdivision
impose any obligation upon the retirement board to continue to insure
loans of members upon the terms and conditions herein provided or upon
any other terms or conditions.
 6. Special Funds. The retirement board is authorized to establish such
funds as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of subdivisions
four and five of this section.
 7. Withdrawals and retirements when loan is outstanding. Whenever a
member becomes entitled to the return of his accumulated contributions
because of withdrawal from the system or because of having become
eligible for a death benefit or a retirement allowance or because of an
election to withdraw his accumulated contributions pursuant to
subdivision six of section five hundred sixteen of this article the
amount of any loan outstanding on such date shall be construed to have
been already returned to such member and the accumulated contributions
to which he shall then be entitled shall be the net amount of such
contributions together with interest thereon standing to his credit in
the annuity savings fund on such date.
 8. Rules and Regulations. The retirement board is authorized to adopt
such rules and regulations as it finds to be necessary in administering
the provisions of this section. Anything in this section
notwithstanding, the retirement board is authorized to adopt rules and
regulations permitting a loan at any time prior to retirement to a
teacher who is not in active service or on leave of absence, provided
such loan would otherwise be permitted under this section and under
applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code relating to loans
from pension plans.
 9. The retirement board shall have the power to discharge any evidence
of a loan to a member pursuant to this section upon the satisfaction of
the obligation of the member thereunder.
 § 513. Optional allowances. 1. With the exception that no election of
an optional benefit shall become effective in case a member dies within
thirty days after the filing of an application for a retirement
allowance, until the first payment on account of any benefit becomes
normally due, any member, at the time of his retirement, may elect to
receive his benefits in a retirement allowance payable throughout life
or he may on retirement elect to receive the actuarial equivalent at
that time of his retirement allowance in a lesser retirement allowance,
payable throughout life with the provision that:
 Option 1. If he die before he has received in payments the present
value of his retirement allowance as it was at the time of his
retirement, the balance shall be paid to his legal representatives or to
such person as he shall nominate by written designation duly
acknowledged and filed with the retirement board.
 Option 2. Upon his death, his retirement allowance shall be continued
through the life of and paid to such person as he shall nominate by
written designation duly acknowledged and filed with the retirement
board at the time of his retirement.
 Option 3. Upon his death, one-half of his retirement allowance shall
be continued throughout the life of and paid to such person as he shall
nominate by written designation duly acknowledged and filed with the
retirement board at the time of his retirement.
 Option 4. Some other benefit or benefits shall be paid either to the
member or to such person or persons as he shall nominate, provided such
other benefit or benefits, together with the lesser retirement
allowance, shall be certified by the actuary to be of equivalent
actuarial value to his retirement allowance and shall be approved by the
retirement board.
 2. If any retired member who has not elected an optional benefit, or
who has elected a benefit under Option 4 providing for the payment at
death of the amount, if any, by which his accumulated contributions at
the time of his retirement exceed the aggregate amount of his annuity
payments, dies within thirty days after the date his retirement becomes
effective, notwithstanding any other provisions of this law to the
contrary, benefits shall be paid in accordance with subdivision (b) or
(c) of section five hundred twelve, except that the amount of his
accumulated contributions payable under paragraph (1) of said
subdivision (b) shall be reduced by any annuity payments received by him
prior to his death and the benefit payable under paragraph (2) of said
subdivision (b) shall be reduced by any pension payments received by him
prior to his death. The amounts payable shall be paid to the beneficiary
or beneficiaries entitled thereto as provided under section five hundred
twelve, except that if the member has elected Option 4, as provided
above, the beneficiary nominated under such Option 4 shall be
substituted for any beneficiary previously nominated and all amounts
payable shall be paid to the beneficiary nominated under such Option 4.
 3. In the case of persons who last became members on or after July
first, nineteen hundred seventy-three, the provisions of subdivision two
of this section shall apply only to deaths occurring after the date on
which said subdivision two becomes operative and prior to July first,
nineteen hundred seventy-four.
 4. a. The retirement board may adopt rules and regulations providing
that a trustee of an inter vivos or testamentary trust shall be (1)
eligible to be nominated to receive a lump sum benefit under option one
and (2) eligible to be nominated to receive any benefit under option
four which the retirement board shall deem appropriate.
 b. Any proceeds received by a trustee under this section shall not be
subject to the debts of the member or to transfer or estate taxes to any
greater extent than if such proceeds were payable to the beneficiaries
named in the trust and not to the estate of the member.
 c. A payment made in good faith under this section to either a
designated trustee of an inter vivos trust, a successor trustee of an
inter vivos trust who provides a copy of his appointment or a trustee or
successor trustee of a testamentary trust who provides a copy of the
letters of trusteeship shall be a complete discharge to the system to
the extent of the payment.
 d. If no qualified trustee claims the proceeds within eighteen months
after the death of the retired member, or if satisfactory evidence is
furnished within such period showing that there is or will be no trustee
to receive the proceeds, payment shall be made to the deceased retired
member's estate.
 § 514. Benefits to participants in old retirement fund. All annuities
of annuitants on the rolls of the retirement fund on the thirty-first
day of July, nineteen hundred twenty-one, shall be paid thereafter from
the pension accumulation fund created by this article. The amount of
the annuity of any annuitant on the rolls of such retirement fund, at
such time, who retired on a full annuity shall be not less than one-half
of his final average salary, and not less than four hundred dollars per
annum; nor shall the allowance of any annuitant on such roll retired
from disability be less than a proportionate amount of such minima based
on the annuitant's years of service.
 § 515. Funds enumerated. The funds created are:
 a. The annuity savings fund.
 b. The annuity reserve fund.
 c. The pension accumulation fund.
 d. The pension reserve fund.
 e. The supplemental retirement allowance fund.
 f. The expense fund.
 § 516. Annuity savings fund; contributions and payments. The annuity
savings fund shall be the fund in which shall be accumulated the
deductions made from the compensation of contributors. Contributions to
and payments from the annuity savings fund shall be made in the
following manner:
 1. Each employer shall deduct from the compensation of each
contributor on each and every payroll of such contributor for each and
every payroll period subsequent to the date upon which such contributor
became a member an amount equal to four per centum of such contributor's
earnable compensation in the cases of teachers who last became members
on or before the thirtieth day of June, nineteen hundred forty-eight and
five per centum of earnable compensation in the cases of teachers who
last became members on or after the first day of July, nineteen hundred
forty-eight except if membership is renewed upon restoration to active
service after retirement for disability, regular interest shall be
credited at the rate allowed to the member at the time his retirement
for disability last became effective. But no employer shall make any
deduction for annuity purposes from the compensation of a member who has
completed at least thirty-five years of total service, or who has
attained the age of sixty and completed at least twenty-five years of
total state service, if such member elects not to contribute.
 2. In determining the amount earnable by a contributor in a payroll
period, the retirement board may consider the rate of compensation
payable to such member on the first day of the payroll period as
continuing throughout such payroll period, and it may omit deductions
from compensation for any period less than a full payroll period if a
teacher was not a contributor on the first day of the payroll period,
and to facilitate the making of deductions, it may modify the deduction
required of any contributor by such an amount as shall not exceed
one-tenth of one per centum of the compensation upon the basis of which
said deduction is to be made.
 3. a. In addition to the deductions from compensation hereinbefore
required, any contributor may redeposit in the annuity savings fund by a
single payment an amount equal to the total amount which he withdrew
therefrom as provided in this article, or he may deposit therein by a
single payment an amount computed to be sufficient, together with the
retirement allowance otherwise provided to provide for him a total
retirement allowance of one-half of his final average salary upon
superannuation retirement, or any member or annuitant may deposit
therein by a single payment an amount permitted so to be deposited by
the retirement board for the purpose of purchasing additional annuity,
provided that no such member or annuitant shall be permitted to purchase
a total additional annuity thereby in excess of one-half his final
average salary; such additional annuity shall afford the usual optional
privileges. Such additional amounts so deposited shall become a part of
his accumulated contributions.
 b. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, in
addition to the deposits hereinbefore permitted by this subdivision, any
contributor to this system, who is actually on the payroll of a school
district or the state, may, for the purpose of purchasing additional
annuity, deposit in the annuity savings fund once in any school year by
a single payment an amount not in excess of four per centum of his
earnable rate of compensation for the school year immediately preceding
the date when such payment is made. Any such amount so deposited shall
be credited with regular interest and, on the basis of said rate of
interest, shall become a part of the contributor's accumulated
contributions in all respects including computation of benefits upon
retirement.
 c. Any member by written notice duly acknowledged and filed with the
retirement board before the first day of July, nineteen hundred
sixty-seven or within two years after he last became a member, whichever
is later, may elect to contribute pursuant to this paragraph c of
subdivision three of this section in order to qualify for an increased
pension for total service in excess of twenty-five years. After such
election the rate of deduction from earnable compensation shall be
increased by two and one-half per centum in the cases of teachers who
last became members on or before the thirtieth day of June, nineteen
hundred forty-eight and by three per centum in the cases of teachers who
last became members on or after the first day of July, nineteen hundred
forty-eight and such deductions shall be added to the accumulated
contributions of each member. Where a member elects to contribute
pursuant to this paragraph c of subdivision three of this section, such
additional contributions shall be made from the first day of July,
nineteen hundred fifty-seven or from the first day of the month
following the expiration of thirty days subsequent to the filing of his
election, whichever is later, except that if the member is contributing
pursuant to subdivision one of section five hundred eleven-a, such
additional contributions pursuant to this paragraph c of subdivision
three of this section shall be made from the first day of July following
the completion of twenty-five years of total service. If such a member,
upon the completion of twenty-five years of total service, wishes to
forfeit his right to special service retirement under the provisions of
section five hundred eleven-a, he may cease making contributions
pursuant to subdivision one of such section, leave such contributions in
the retirement system and commence making contributions pursuant to this
paragraph c of subdivision three of this section in order to receive
credit for service rendered after the completion of twenty-five years of
total service. If such a member, upon the completion of twenty-five
years of total service wishes to maintain his right to special service
retirement, he shall continue to make contributions pursuant to
subdivision one of section five hundred eleven-a and commence making
contributions pursuant to this paragraph c. Contributions made pursuant
to this paragraph c shall cease on the first day of July following the
completion of thirty-five years of total service, except that, any
member who has completed more than twenty-five years of service on the
first day of July, nineteen hundred sixty-seven may deposit in a lump
sum an amount equivalent to the sum of the contributions he would have
made prior to the first day of July, nineteen hundred sixty-seven, had
this paragraph c become effective as of the date when twenty-five years
of service was completed or as of any date thereafter which the member
may elect for the purpose of determining the amount to be so deposited.
 d. Members of the retirement system who elect to contribute pursuant
to paragraph c of subdivision three of this section, shall receive
credit for each year, not in excess of ten, of service in excess of
twenty-five years for which contributions were made pursuant to
paragraph c of subdivision three of this section.
 4. The accumulated contributions of a contributor returned to him upon
his withdrawal or paid to his estate or designated beneficiary in the
event of his death as provided in this article shall be paid from the
annuity savings fund.
 5. Upon the retirement of a contributor his accumulated contributions
shall be transferred from the annuity savings fund to the annuity
reserve fund.
 6. The retirement board may adopt rules and regulations providing for
the withdrawal at retirement by members of the accumulated contributions
credited to their individual accounts in the annuity savings fund. Such
rules and regulations shall provide that the application for withdrawal
of contributions be filed no earlier than the date the member files the
application for retirement and no later than the day preceding the
effective date of retirement. Provided, however, this section has no
application to members subject to article fourteen or article fifteen of
the retirement and social security law.
 § 517. Annuity reserve fund; pension accumulation fund. 1. The annuity
reserve fund shall be the fund from which shall be paid all annuities
and all benefits in lieu of annuities.
 2. The pension accumulation fund shall be the fund in which shall be
accumulated all reserves for the payment of all benefits with the
exception of the annuities provided by the accumulated contributions of
members, and with the exception of supplemental retirement allowances
payable in accordance with section five hundred thirty-two of this
chapter. Contributions to and payments from the pension accumulation
fund shall be made as follows:
 a. On account of each teacher who is a member of the retirement system
there shall be paid annually into the pension accumulation fund by
employers, a certain percentage of the earnable compensation of each of
such members of the retirement system to be known as the "normal
contribution" and a further percentage known as the "deficiency
contribution." The rates per centum of such contributions shall be fixed
on the basis of the liabilities of the retirement system as shown by
actuarial valuations.
 b. On the basis of regular interest and of such mortality and other
tables as shall be adopted by the retirement board, the actuary engaged
by the retirement board to make each valuation required by this article
during the period over which the deficiency contribution is payable,
immediately after making such valuation, shall determine the uniform and
constant percentage of the earnable compensation of the average new
entrant, who is a contributor, which if contributed on the basis of the
compensation of such contributor throughout his entire period of active
service, would be sufficient to provide for the payment of a death
benefit payable on his account and to provide at the time of his
retirement the total amount of his pension reserve. The rate per centum
so determined shall be known as the "normal contribution" rate. After
the deficiency contribution has ceased to be payable, the normal
contribution shall be the rate per centum of the earnable salary of all
contributors obtained by deducting from the total liabilities of the
pension fund the amount of the funds in hand to the credit of that fund
and dividing the remainder by one per centum of the present value of the
prospective future salaries of all contributors as computed on the basis
of the mortality and service tables adopted by the retirement board and
on the basis of regular interest. The normal rate of contribution shall
be determined by the actuary after each valuation and shall continue in
force until a new valuation and certification.
 c. The actuary engaged by the retirement board shall compute the rate
per centum of the total compensation of all contributors during the
preceding school year which is equivalent to four per centum of the
amount of the total pension liability on account of all contributors and
beneficiaries not dischargeable by the aforesaid normal contribution
made on account of such contributors during the remainder of their
active service. The contribution derived by deductions at the rate per
centum, so determined or at a rate increased therefrom as hereinafter
provided shall be known as the "deficiency contribution." On the basis
of the actuarial valuation as of the thirtieth day of June, nineteen
hundred fifty-seven, the actuary shall determine the amount of the
pension liability which is not dischargeable by the funds in hand and
the present value of the normal and deficiency contributions otherwise
payable. Such pension liability shall be known as the special
deficiency. The actuary shall determine the annual payment which if made
in each fiscal year commencing with the year beginning the first day of
July, nineteen hundred fifty-eight, for a period of thirty years will
provide for such special deficiency and the per centum of the total
compensation of all contributors during the preceding school year which
is equivalent to such annual payment shall be known as the special
deficiency contribution rate. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
in this chapter, the special deficiency contribution rate for use in
determining the annual payments to be made in each fiscal year
commencing with the year beginning with the first day of July, nineteen
hundred sixty, shall be increased to liquidate the total unfunded
special deficiency adjusted to include the prospective deficit in the
annuity reserve fund as shown by the valuation as of the thirtieth day
of June, nineteen hundred fifty-nine in the period originally set, and
until the special deficiency so increased has been liquidated an annual
contribution at the increased special deficiency rate but not less than
the annual payment determined on the basis of the valuation as of the
thirtieth day of June, nineteen hundred fifty-nine, shall be made by
employers in addition to the regular normal and deficiency
contributions.
 d. The total amount payable annually by all employers into the pension
accumulation fund shall be certified by the retirement board to the
commissioner of education and such amount shall equal the sum of the
rates per centum known as the normal contribution rate and the
deficiency contribution rate of the total compensation earnable by all
contributors during the preceding school year, provided that the amount
of each annual deficiency contribution shall be at least three per
centum greater than the preceding annual payment. The aggregate of all
such payments by employers shall be sufficient, when combined with the
amounts in the pension accumulation fund, to provide the pensions
payable out of the fund during the year then current, and if not, the
additional amount so required shall be collected by means of an
increased contribution which shall continue in force for the period of
one year, anything to the contrary notwithstanding.
 e. The deficiency contribution shall be discontinued as soon as the
accumulated reserve in the pension accumulation fund shall equal the
present value, as actuarially computed and approved by the retirement
board, of the total liability of such fund less the present value,
computed on the basis of the normal contribution rate then in force, of
the normal contributions to be received on account of teachers who are
at that time contributors.
 f. Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding,
beginning with the valuation for the fiscal year ending June thirtieth,
nineteen hundred seventy, the actuarial valuation of the liabilities,
required by subdivision five of section five hundred eight of this
article, shall be made on the following basis:
 1. On the basis of the valuation rate of interest and of such
mortality and other tables as have been adopted by the retirement board,
the actuary shall determine, as of June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
seventy, the additional accrued liability which exists as of that date,
on account of service rendered prior to that date, by reason of
legislation enacted during the years nineteen hundred sixty-eight,
nineteen hundred sixty-nine and nineteen hundred seventy, affecting
article eleven of the education law. The actuary shall then determine a
schedule of annual contributions which will amortize such additional
accrued liability and interest thereon over a period of twenty-five
years. Such interest shall be at the rate of four and one-half per cent
during the first ten years beginning July first, nineteen hundred
seventy and at the rate of four per cent thereafter, compounded
annually. Each contribution after the first shall equal one hundred four
per cent of the preceding contribution. Each year, the actuary shall
determine a rate of contribution which is equivalent to the amount of
the contribution next due in accordance with the aforesaid schedule.
However, in no event shall such rate of contribution be less than the
rate of contribution determined in the first year in accordance with the
provisions of this subdivision. The amount of the contribution produced
by such rate which is in excess of the amount required according to the
aforesaid schedule shall be added to the contingency reserve. Such
contingency reserve shall be maintained in the pension accumulation fund
for the purpose of providing for such future strengthening of the
retirement system's reserve basis as the retirement board, upon the
recommendation of its actuary, deems appropriate.
 2. On the basis of the valuation rate of interest and of such
mortality and other tables as have been adopted by the retirement board,
the actuary shall compute the rate of normal contribution in the
following manner. From the total actuarial liabilities as of each
valuation date, there shall be deducted the sum of the funds in hand and
the present value of the remaining contributions still to be paid under
the provisions of sub-paragraph one of this paragraph. The remainder
shall be divided by one per cent of the present value of the prospective
future salaries of all members of the system, to obtain the rate of
normal contribution.
 3. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, for
contributions determined on the basis of the June thirtieth, nineteen
hundred sixty-eight valuation and subsequent annual valuations, the
payment of employer contributions pursuant to section five hundred nine
of this article shall be discontinued and the lump sum actuarial cost
attributable to the purchase of prior service, as authorized therein,
shall be included in the actuarial liabilities used for the
determination of the rate of normal contribution.
 4. The retirement board is hereby empowered to re-establish employer
contribution rates based upon the annual valuation as of June thirtieth,
nineteen hundred sixty-eight.
 g. All pensions with the exception of those payable to new entrants
shall be paid from the pension accumulation fund and benefits provided
under section five hundred twelve, subdivision b, paragraph two and
section five hundred fourteen shall be paid from the pension
accumulation fund.
 h. Upon the retirement of a new entrant, an amount equal to his
pension reserve shall be transferred from the pension accumulation fund
to the pension reserve fund.
 i. The retirement board from time to time shall transfer from the
pension accumulation fund to the annuity reserve fund such amounts as
are necessary under this article.
 § 518. Pension reserve fund. The pension reserve fund shall be the
fund from which shall be paid the pensions to new entrants on account of
which reserves shall be transferred from the pension accumulation fund.
Should any disability pension payable from said fund be canceled, the
pension reserve thereon shall thereupon be transferred from the pension
reserve fund to the pension accumulation fund. Should the pension of a
disability beneficiary be reduced as a result of an increase in his
earning capacity, the amount of the annual reduction in his pension
shall be paid annually into the pension accumulation fund during the
period of such reduction.
 § 518-a. Supplemental retirement allowance fund. The supplemental
retirement allowance fund shall be the fund from which shall be paid the
supplemental retirement allowances provided by section five hundred
thirty-two of this article.
 § 519. Expense fund. The expense fund shall be the fund from which
the expense of the administration of the retirement system shall be paid
exclusive of amounts payable as retirement allowances and as other
benefits provided herein. Contributions shall be made to the expense
fund as follows:
 1. The retirement board shall determine the amount required to defray
the expenses allocated to those functions which directly or indirectly
affect the system's investment operations. This amount so determined
shall be collected from net investment income which shall include but
not be limited to interest, dividends, and realized gains and losses.
 2. The retirement board shall determine annually the amount required
to defray the remaining estimated expenses in the ensuing fiscal year
and shall certify such amount to the commissioner of education who shall
apportion to each employer a proportionate part thereof as provided
under subdivision two of section five hundred twenty-one. Each employer
shall make payment for the amount so apportioned to him in the same way
as he shall make other payments provided for by this article.
 § 520. Duties of employer. 1. Each employer shall keep such records
and from time to time shall furnish such information as the retirement
board in the discharge of its duties may require.
 2. a. Upon the employment of any teacher to whom this article may
apply, he shall be informed by his employer of his duties and
obligations in connection with the retirement system as a condition of
his employment. Every teacher accepting employment shall be deemed to
consent and agree to any deductions from his compensation required
herein and to all other provisions of this article.
 b. Upon the employment of any teacher whose right to membership in the
system has been made optional by the retirement board pursuant to
subdivision two of section five hundred three of this article the
employer shall inform such teacher in writing of the right to join the
system. Each such teacher shall acknowledge the receipt of such notice
by signing a copy thereof and filing it with such employer. Provided,
however, the failure to inform such teacher shall not in any way be
construed to waive the requirement that membership for such a teacher
commences only when an application for membership is filed with the
system nor shall it be construed to waive any of the eligibility
requirements for previous service credit.
 3. Notwithstanding any other law, rule or regulation affecting the
salary, pay, compensation, other prerequisites or tenure of any teacher
to whom this article applies, or shall apply, and notwithstanding that
the minimum salary, pay, compensation or other prerequisites, provided
by law for such teacher shall be reduced thereby, payment less said
deductions shall be a full and complete discharge and acquittance of all
claims and demands whatsoever for service rendered by such member during
the period covered by such payment.
 4. During September of each year, or at such other times as the
retirement board shall approve, each employer shall certify to the
retirement board the names of all teachers to whom this article applies.
 5. Each employer shall on the first day of each calendar month or at
such less frequent intervals as the retirement board may approve, notify
the retirement board of the employment of new teachers, removals,
withdrawals and changes in salary of members that shall have occurred
during the month preceding or the period covered since the last
notification.
 § 521. Collection of contributions. 1. The collection of members'
contributions shall be as follows:
 a. Each employer shall cause to be deducted on each and every payroll
of a contributor for each and every payroll period, the contribution
payable by such contributor as provided in this article. Each employer
shall certify to the treasurer of said employer on each and every
payroll a statement as voucher for the amounts so deducted.
 b. The treasurer of each employer on receipt from the employer of the
voucher for deductions from the salaries of teachers as provided in this
article shall transmit monthly or at such times as the retirement board
shall designate, the amount specified in such voucher to the secretary
of the retirement board. The secretary of the retirement board after
making record of all such receipts shall transmit them to the head of
the division of the treasury in the department of taxation and finance
for use according to the provisions of this article.
 But nothing in this section shall prevent the retirement board from
modifying the method of collecting the contribution of members so that
employers may retain the amounts so deducted and have a corresponding
amount deducted from the appropriation for the support of common schools
otherwise payable to them.
 2. The collection of employers' contributions shall be made as
follows:
 a. Upon the basis of each actuarial determination and appraisal
provided herein, the retirement board shall annually prepare and certify
to the commissioner of education a statement of the total amount
necessary to be paid by all employers for the ensuing fiscal year to the
pension accumulation and expense funds as provided under subdivision two
of section five hundred seventeen and under section five hundred
nineteen of this article. Upon the basis of the rate of contribution for
supplemental retirement allowances, determined in accordance with
section five hundred thirty-two of this article, the retirement board
shall certify to the commissioner of education a statement of the total
amount necessary to be paid by all employers for the ensuing fiscal year
to the supplemental retirement allowance fund. Said certification shall
include interest on amounts necessary to repay advances made to the
supplemental retirement allowance fund pursuant to subdivision f of
section five hundred thirty-two of this article computed from the date
of such advances at the rate determined in accordance with paragraph f
of this subdivision.
 b. The commissioner of education shall include in the certificate
which he files with the state comptroller showing the amount of state
funds apportioned to the school districts within each county for the
support of common schools, a statement showing the amount to be
contributed by each employer in each of such counties as required under
this article.
 The amount to be contributed by each employer except those who operate
local district pension systems, shall be such percentage of the total
compensation or salaries of all teachers in his employ who are members
of the retirement system as the aggregate amount of the normal and
deficiency contributions for the year shall bear to the total
compensation or salaries paid by all employers, except those who operate
local district pension systems, to all teachers who are members of the
retirement system.
 c. The comptroller shall issue his warrant to the custodian of such
fund directing such custodian to credit to the pension accumulation fund
and expense fund respectively, from the appropriation for the support of
common schools the amounts required to be made as contributions to such
funds by the employers as shown by the certificate of the commissioner
of education filed with him as directed in paragraph b of this
subdivision.
 d. The comptroller, in issuing his warrant to the custodian for
payment to each county treasurer of that portion of the moneys
apportioned for the support of common schools, shall deduct therefrom an
amount equal to the amount required to be contributed by employers of
such county, as shown by the certificate of the commissioner of
education of this state filed with the comptroller as required by
paragraph b of this subdivision.
 e. In order to meet the financial requirements of this article,
employers who obtain funds directly by taxation are hereby authorized
and directed to levy annually such additional taxes as are required to
provide the funds deducted from the amounts apportioned to such
employers from the appropriation of the state for the support of the
common schools.
 f. Employers whose payments from the moneys apportioned from the state
for the support of common schools are insufficient to pay the amount due
and owing the system, or who do not receive such payments, shall pay the
system each year the amount of contributions due and owing from the
employer pursuant to this article within thirty days from the date a
bill is mailed by the system. Interest, at a rate equal to the average
yield payable on fifty-two week United States treasury bills on June
thirtieth immediately preceding the day the bill is mailed by the
system, shall accrue on the outstanding amount due and owing commencing
with the thirty-first day after the bill is mailed.
 g. Whenever the system determines the contributions made by an
employer are less than the percentage of total compensation or salaries
of members of the system in the employ of such employer, as required by
this article, such employer shall pay the system such deficiency within
thirty days from the date a bill is mailed by the system. Interest, at a
rate equal to the average yield payable on fifty-two week United States
treasury bills on June thirtieth immediately preceding the day before
the bill is mailed by the system, shall accrue on the outstanding amount
due and owing commencing with the thirty-first day after the bill is
mailed.
 h. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, commencing
with the payments made in the fiscal year beginning July first, nineteen
hundred ninety, and each fiscal year thereafter, the employer
contributions due and payable as determined pursuant to the provisions
of this article and the employee contributions due and payable pursuant
to this article and articles fourteen and fifteen of the retirement and
social security law, on account of compensation paid in the fiscal year
immediately preceding, and those employer contributions due and payable
in each fiscal year pursuant to chapter six hundred sixty-five of the
laws of nineteen hundred eighty-four shall be made to the retirement
system and collected in the manner set forth in this section each fiscal
year in three payments, each equal to thirty-three and one-third percent
of the total amount due for such fiscal year. Such payments shall be
paid on September fifteenth, October fifteenth, and November fifteenth
of each fiscal year. If a participating employer underpaid its
obligation to the retirement system, such underpayment as determined by
the retirement system shall be deducted from the amounts apportioned to
such employer from the appropriation of the state for the support of the
common schools due and payable the next April fifteenth. Employers whose
payments from such appropriation are insufficient to pay the amount due
and owing the system, or who do not receive such payments, shall be
billed by the system for such underpayment and shall pay the system the
amount due within thirty days from the date a bill is mailed by the
system. The amount of any employer overpayment of its obligation to the
retirement system, as determined by such system shall be a credit to the
employer and shall reduce by an equal amount thereof the initial payment
to be made by such employer to such system on the next succeeding
September fifteenth.
 i. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the employer
and employee contributions due and payable in the nineteen hundred
eighty-nine--ninety fiscal year on account of compensation paid in the
nineteen hundred eighty-eight--eighty-nine fiscal year which were paid
prior to April first, nineteen hundred ninety shall be deemed (to the
extent such amount is sufficient) to have consisted of all the employee
contributions due and payable pursuant to this article and articles
fourteen and fifteen of the retirement and social security law in the
nineteen hundred eighty-nine--ninety fiscal year and those employer
contributions due and payable in such fiscal year pursuant to chapter
six hundred sixty-five of the laws of nineteen hundred eighty-four; and
the remaining employer contributions so paid shall be applied evenly to
the payments due and payable on September fifteenth, nineteen hundred
ninety, October fifteenth, nineteen hundred ninety and November
fifteenth, nineteen hundred ninety and the employer contributions
amounting to eight hundred seventy-three million seven hundred eleven
thousand six hundred fifteen dollars ($873,711,615), due and payable
pursuant to the provisions of this section in the nineteen hundred
eighty-nine--ninety fiscal year on account of compensation paid in
nineteen hundred eighty-eight--eighty-nine fiscal year, except those
employer contributions due and payable in such fiscal year pursuant to
chapter six hundred sixty-five of the laws of nineteen hundred
eighty-four, shall be deferred and payment shall be made to the
retirement system in fifteen equal annual payments of ninety-eight
million five hundred thirty-seven thousand five hundred seven dollars
($98,537,507) on October fifteenth, commencing on October fifteenth,
nineteen hundred ninety. Such payments are calculated at an interest
rate of eight percent per annum. Provided, however, the retirement board
is directed to permit the pre-payment of the amounts outstanding under
this paragraph. The retirement board shall: (1) On or before September
first, nineteen hundred ninety, in addition to the amount due for the
current fiscal year billing and for the payment of the amortized annual
installment, furnish the total amount due and be authorized to accept
pre-payment in full of said amount by October fifteenth, nineteen
hundred ninety. (2) On or before each September first thereafter, in
addition to the amount due for the current fiscal year billing and for
the payment of the annual amortized installment, furnish the total
amount still outstanding and be authorized to accept the pre-payment of
any portion of the balance remaining to be paid by October fifteenth of
that year.
 j. Prior to June first, nineteen hundred ninety, the valuation rate of
interest adopted by the retirement board on April twenty-seventh,
nineteen hundred eighty-nine, may be retroactively revised to eight
percent by the retirement board, as recommended by the actuary, as if
adopted at the April twenty-seventh, nineteen hundred eighty-nine board
meeting, and the employer contribution rate, adopted by the retirement
board at the April twenty-seventh, nineteen hundred eighty-nine board
meeting, revised by the retirement board at the July twenty-seventh,
nineteen hundred eighty-nine board meeting, may be retroactively amended
by the retirement board as if adopted at the July twenty-seventh,
nineteen hundred eighty-nine board meeting and applied to contributions
paid in the nineteen hundred ninety--ninety-one fiscal year.
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the actions of the
retirement board pursuant to the provisions of this paragraph shall be
deemed reasonable, prudent and proper. No member of the retirement
board, officer, or employee of the New York state teachers' retirement
system shall incur or suffer any liability whatsoever by reason of any
actions pursuant to this paragraph, and such system shall save harmless
and indemnify all members of the retirement board, its officers and
employees from financial loss arising out of any claim, demand, suit,
action or judgment as a result of the actions taken pursuant to this
paragraph provided that such person shall, within five days after the
date on which he is served with any summons, complaint, process, notice,
demand, claim or pleading, deliver the original or a true copy thereof
to the legal advisor of such system. Upon such delivery, the legal
advisor of such system may assume control of the representation of such
person in connection with such claim, demand, suit, action or
proceeding. Such person shall cooperate fully with the legal advisor of
the system or any other person designated to assume such defense in
respect of such representation or defense.
 k. The retirement board is authorized to adopt procedures and/or to
promulgate rules and regulations as it deems necessary to adjust and
reconcile any payments from employers to actual amounts due whether such
payments were received prior or subsequent to the effective date of the
chapter of the laws of nineteen hundred ninety which added this
paragraph to this section.
 l. The provisions of paragraphs h and i of this subdivision shall
constitute a contract and the rights of the New York state teachers'
retirement system thereunder shall not be impaired in any way
whatsoever.
 m. In addition to any other payment or collection procedure provided
by this article, if the amounts credited from the appropriation for the
support of common schools are insufficient to fully cover the amounts to
be contributed by the employers, the retirement board is authorized to
certify the unpaid amount to the state comptroller, and the state
comptroller shall, to the extent not otherwise prohibited by law,
withhold such amount from any succeeding payment from any other form of
state aid provided to the employer. If any employer fails to pay the
amounts required to be contributed pursuant to this section, the
retirement system shall be entitled to reasonable attorney fees and
other expenses incurred to collect such amounts due and owing. Fees
shall be determined pursuant to prevailing market rates for the kind and
quality of the services furnished.
 n. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the
board of education or trustees of a school district which is a
participating employer, which has elected to make payments of the
employer contributions due and payable to the retirement system pursuant
to paragraph i of this subdivision in amortized annual installments, and
which has determined to make pre-payment of the total amount of such
contributions outstanding in accordance with said paragraph i, may adopt
a bond resolution authorizing the refinancing of such debt by the
issuance of bonds in the amount of such pre-payment without conducting a
vote on a tax to be collected in installments, provided that such
refinancing will result in savings to the school district, as certified
by the state comptroller, and provided further that the issuance of such
obligations otherwise complies with the requirements of the local
finance law and this chapter.
 3. Stable contribution option for participating educational employers
for the two thousand thirteen - two thousand fourteen plan year. a. In
addition to the definitions in section five hundred one of this article,
when used in this subdivision:
 (1) "participating educational employer" shall mean a school district
or board of cooperative educational services which elects to pay the
stable contribution amount in the manner provided in this subdivision;
 (2) "stable contribution amount" shall mean an amount equal to the
stable contribution rate multiplied by the pensionable salary base
(exclusive of payments for group term life insurance, deficiency
contributions, adjustments relating to prior fiscal years' obligations,
obligations pertaining to retirement incentives or any other obligations
that a participating educational employer is permitted to pay on an
amortized basis);
 (3) "stable contribution rate" shall mean fourteen percent for the two
thousand thirteen - two thousand fourteen plan year and the two thousand
fourteen - two thousand fifteen plan year and the rate as adopted by the
retirement board in accordance with paragraph h of this subdivision; and
 (4) "deferred employer contribution amount" shall mean an amount
adequate to fund the benefits for active and retired members associated
with such participating educational employer had such participating
educational employer not elected the provisions of this subdivision.
Such deferred employer contribution amount shall be calculated for each
year of participation in the stable contribution option with associated
interest determined specific to each applicable plan year's deferred
amount.
 b. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter or any other law to
the contrary, the retirement board, in its discretion, shall have
authority to implement the provisions of this subdivision. If the
retirement board elects to implement the provisions of this subdivision,
the provisions shall apply to the payment of participating educational
employer contributions in the plan year commencing July first, two
thousand thirteen, for the pension bill paid on September fifteenth,
October fifteenth, and November fifteenth of two thousand fourteen, and
for the subsequent six plan years. If a participating educational
employer does not elect the stable contribution option in the fiscal
year commencing on July first, two thousand thirteen for the pension
bill paid on September fifteenth, October fifteenth, and November
fifteenth of two thousand fourteen, it shall not be eligible to elect
the stable contribution option in any succeeding plan year.
 c. For each of the seven plan years to which the provisions of this
subdivision apply, the retirement board shall use a stable contribution
rate established by the retirement board for participating educational
employers.
 d. If the retirement board, in its discretion, decides to adopt a
stable contribution option pursuant to this subdivision, the retirement
board shall determine the stable contribution amount in each plan year
for a participating educational employer pursuant to subparagraph two of
paragraph a of this subdivision. Such stable contribution amount shall
be in lieu of a participating educational employer's actuarially
required contribution rate of normal and administrative contributions
pursuant to sections five hundred seventeen and five hundred nineteen of
this article for the plan year commencing July first, two thousand
thirteen, and for the next six subsequent plan years.
 e. Any participating educational employer which elects to pay the
stable contribution amount pursuant to this subdivision shall pay the
amount based on the stable contribution rate for a period of seven years
and such option shall be available to participating educational
employers from the two thousand thirteen - two thousand fourteen plan
year through the two thousand nineteen - two thousand twenty plan year.
In the sixth plan year, the two thousand eighteen - two thousand
nineteen plan year, the participating educational employer shall pay the
stable contribution rate and, in addition, commence payment for deferred
employer contributions in accordance with paragraph j of this
subdivision. Commencing with the plan year beginning July first, two
thousand twenty, the participating educational employer shall resume
payment of the actuarially required contribution rate of normal and
administrative contributions pursuant to sections five hundred seventeen
and five hundred nineteen of this article and, in addition, any payment
for deferred employer contribution amounts in accordance with paragraphs
j and k of this subdivision.
 f. A participating educational employer paying a stable contribution
amount shall remit, commencing with the July first, two thousand
thirteen plan year, an amount determined by the retirement board by
adding the following two amounts together:
 (1) the stable contribution amount calculated pursuant to this
subdivision; and
 (2) payments for group term life insurance, deficiency payments,
adjustments relating to prior fiscal years' obligations and obligations
pertaining to retirement incentives or any other obligations that a
participating educational employer is permitted to pay on an amortized
basis.
 g. The stable contribution amount must be paid in full by
participating educational employers on the dates specified in paragraph
h of subdivision two of this section.
 h. Prior to July first, two thousand fifteen and July first, two
thousand seventeen the retirement board is authorized to evaluate the
stable contribution rate used to calculate participating educational
employer stable contribution amounts. Such evaluation shall be based on
a projection of assets and liabilities so as to ensure that
contributions by participating educational employers which participate
in the stable contribution option are adequate to ensure that system
assets are sufficient to fund benefits for active and retired members.
The retirement board is authorized to increase the stable contribution
rate by up to two percentage points on July first, two thousand fifteen
and on July first, two thousand seventeen. The revised stable
contribution rate resulting from the foregoing evaluations and July
first, two thousand fifteen and July first, two thousand seventeen
stable rate increases may not, in combination, exceed eighteen percent.
The retirement board is authorized to decrease the stable contribution
rate, if warranted, but in no event shall the stable contribution rate
be less than fourteen percent.
 i. A participating educational employer may elect to terminate
participation in the stable contribution option and resume payment of
the actuarially required contribution of normal and administrative
contributions in accordance with sections five hundred seventeen and
five hundred nineteen of this article. Provided, however, that such
participating educational employer which elects to terminate
participation shall make a reconciliation contribution to the retirement
system, at an amount to be determined by the retirement board, adequate
to fund the benefits for active and retired members associated with such
participating educational employer had such participating educational
employer not elected the provisions of this subdivision. Such
reconciliation contribution shall be made over a period not to exceed
five years and shall be made in addition to the normal and
administrative contributions pursuant to sections five hundred seventeen
and five hundred nineteen of this article for the plan year in which
such participating educational employer chooses to resume payment of the
normal and administrative contributions pursuant to sections five
hundred seventeen and five hundred nineteen of this article. For the
purposes of determining the reconciliation contribution amount, the
retirement board shall assume interest on the deferred employer
contribution amount at a rate which approximates the monthly average
yield on United States treasury securities at ten-year constant maturity
for the twelve-month period preceding August first of each year plus one
percentage point. The interest rate associated with such deferred
employer contribution amount shall be specific to each applicable plan
year's deferred amount.
 j. In the sixth plan year, commencing July first, two thousand
eighteen, all participating educational employers having elected the
stable contribution option shall continue to contribute the stable
contribution amount to the retirement system and remit to the retirement
system the accrued deferred employer contributions accumulated in the
first five plan years. The stable payment of the deferred employer
contribution accrued by the participating educational employer shall be
paid to the retirement system in equal annual installments over a
five-year period, with interest on the unpaid portion to be based on the
monthly average yield on United States treasury securities at a ten-year
constant maturity for the twelve-month period preceding August first of
each year plus one percentage point. The interest rate associated with
such deferred employer contribution amount shall be specific to the rate
as measured on August first of the applicable plan year to such deferred
amount. Payments of the stable installments shall be made in the same
manner as other employer contributions as prescribed in this article.
Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed as prohibiting such
participating educational employer from making a reconciliation
contribution in accordance with paragraph i of this subdivision.
 k. In the eighth plan year, commencing July first, two thousand
twenty, all participating educational employers having elected the
stable contribution option shall resume payment of the actuarially
required contribution rate of normal and administrative contributions in
accordance with section five hundred seventeen and five hundred nineteen
of this article. Additionally, such employer will remit to the
retirement system the accrued deferred employer contributions
accumulated during the plan years commencing July first, two thousand
eighteen and July first, two thousand nineteen of the stable
contribution option. The stable payment of the deferred employer
contribution accrued by the participating educational employer shall be
paid to the retirement system in equal annual installments over a
five-year period with interest on the unpaid portion to be based on the
monthly average yield on United States treasury securities at a ten-year
constant maturity for the twelve-month period preceding August first of
each year plus one percentage point. The interest rate associated with
such deferred employer contribution amount shall be specific to the rate
as measured on August first of the applicable plan year to such deferred
amount. Payments of the stable installments shall be made in the same
manner as other employer contributions as prescribed in this article.
Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed as prohibiting such
participating educational employer from making a reconciliation
contribution in accordance with paragraph i of this subdivision.
 l. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subdivision, if the
retirement board decides to adopt a stable contribution option, in
accordance with this subdivision, and the funded status of the
retirement system reaches a threshold below eighty percent at the end of
any plan year during the seven plan year term of this option, the option
shall cease and participating educational employers who have elected the
stable contribution option shall resume payment of the actuarially
required contribution rate of normal and administrative contributions in
accordance with section five hundred seventeen and five hundred nineteen
of this article. Additionally, such employer will make a reconciliation
contribution to the retirement system, at an amount to be determined by
the retirement board, adequate to fund the benefits for active and
retired members associated with such participating educational employer
had such participating educational employer not elected the provisions
of this section. The payment of the deferred employer contribution
accrued by the participating educational employer shall be paid to the
retirement system in equal annual installments over a five-year period
with interest on the unpaid portion to be based on the monthly average
yield on United States treasury securities at a ten-year constant
maturity for the twelve-month period preceding August first of each year
plus one percentage point. The interest rate associated with such
deferred employer contribution amount shall be specific to the rate as
measured on August first of the applicable plan year to such deferred
amount. Payments of the stable installments shall be made in the same
manner as other employer contributions as prescribed in this article.
 m. The retirement board is authorized to promulgate rules and
regulations for implementation of this subdivision.
 § 522. Transfer of contributions between retirement systems. 1. Any
contributor, withdrawing from the retirement system and at such time
giving notice to the retirement board of his intention of becoming
within two years a member of another teachers' retirement system which
is being operated on an actuarial basis either under the laws of this
state or under the laws of another state, provided the system has a
provision similar to this provision permitting reciprocal transfer, may,
upon depositing within two years his accumulated contributions in such
other retirement system or if the member had no accumulated
contributions credited to his individual account in the retirement
system, upon joining such other retirement system within two years,
apply to the retirement board for a transfer from the pension
accumulation fund to the corresponding fund of such other retirement
system of the amount of his pension reserve as of the time when he
withdrew his contributions from the annuity savings fund or filed a
notice of withdrawal with the system, and the retirement board shall
transfer to such other retirement system the amount of such reserve,
provided that, if such other retirement system is not under the laws of
this state, credit for a pension benefit of equivalent actuarial value
to the amount of reserve transferred shall be given the teacher in the
other retirement system and that the retirement board is satisfied that
the retirement system to which said transfer is made is on a solvent
basis.
 2. Any contributor entering the retirement system after having
withdrawn from another retirement system and having given notice at the
time of withdrawal to the retirement board of such system of his or her
intention of becoming a member of the retirement system, may deposit in
the annuity savings fund the amount of his or her accumulated
contributions withdrawn from such other retirement system or if the
member had no accumulated contributions credited to his or her
individual account in such other retirement system, such member shall in
lieu of depositing moneys in the annuity savings fund, file a notice of
intent to transfer pursuant to rules and regulations adopted by the
retirement board. Upon the filing of a notice of intent to transfer as
provided by this subdivision, the pension reserve to his or her credit
in such other retirement system, if such other retirement system is
operated upon an actuarial basis under the laws of this state, shall be
transferred, and if such other system is operated upon an actuarial
basis under the laws of another state, may be transferred to the pension
accumulation fund. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this
article, such contributor shall be classified in this retirement system
as a present teacher or as a new entrant accordingly as he or she would
have been classified had the service rendered in the other retirement
system been rendered while a member of this retirement system. A person
so transferred to this retirement system or who has heretofore
transferred to this retirement system shall be deemed to have been a
member of this retirement system during the entire period of membership
service credited to him or her in the system from which he or she has
transferred. Such transferee, however, shall not receive more than three
per cent interest on his or her contributions and accumulated
contributions unless he or she has continuously been a member in either
the system from which he or she has transferred or in this retirement
system since a date prior to the first day of July, nineteen hundred
forty-eight. This shall not be construed to prevent a change in the
interest rate to such member if the interest rate payable to other
members of this retirement system is changed. In case he or she comes
from a retirement system not under the laws of this state, he or she
shall be given a prior service certificate showing a period of service
such that the liability incurred by the retirement system on his or her
account by reason of prior service shall be equal in amount to the
amount of the reserve so transferred, provided that in no case shall
such a contributor who is classified as a new entrant be given less
credit in his or her prior service certificate than he or she would have
received had no reserve been transferred on his or her account. In case
a contributor transfers between retirement systems under the laws of
this state, he or she shall be credited in the system to which he or she
is transferring with all service allowed to him or her in the first
system. Such contributor, notwithstanding any other provision of law,
shall on retirement be entitled to a pension based on salary earned
during member service in both retirement systems together, pursuant to
the statutory requirements of the second retirement system.
 3. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the law, a former member of
the New York city teachers' retirement system who holds membership in
the New York state teachers' retirement system on the effective date of
this act and who would have been entitled to transfer service credit to
such latter retirement system pursuant to this section had his
membership in the former retirement system not terminated, due to no
negligence on the part of the member, may have his transfer rights under
this section restored by depositing, within one year of the effective
date of this act, in the former retirement system an amount equal to the
contributions withdrawn from such system with regular interest thereon.
 4. In the case of a member of the New York city teachers' retirement
system with a membership date prior to July twenty-seventh, nineteen
hundred seventy-six and not less than twenty years of credited service
in that system who has transferred his/her membership to the system
pursuant to this section or section forty-three of the retirement and
social security law, as applicable and is a member of the system on or
after July first, nineteen hundred ninety-eight, the actuary shall
compute the actuarial accrued liability for the member's pension under
subdivision five of section five hundred thirty-five of this article
immediately following transfer as if such member had always been a
member of the system, using the service credited to such member which
was transferred to the system, the member's salary in connection with
such service and the actuarial assumptions used to compute pension
reserves pursuant to subdivision one of this section. If the sum of the
reserve-for-increased-take-home-pay, if any, and the pension reserve
received by the system from the New York city teachers' retirement
system in respect of such member exceeds such accrued liability as
determined by the actuary, such excess shall be allocated as of the date
of the receipt of such reserve-for-increased-take-home-pay to the
annuity savings fund for the benefit of such member and shall be treated
as if it had been contributed to such fund by the member, provided,
however, that, in no event, may the amount so allocated to the annuity
savings fund as provided herein exceed the amount of such
reserve-for-increased-take-home-pay, if any, actually received from the
New York city teachers' retirement system. In the case of any member
retiring prior to July first, two thousand one, any accumulated
contributions to the credit of such member in the annuity savings fund
as of the member's date of retirement resulting from a determination of
the actuary pursuant to this subdivision shall be paid to the retiree in
a lump sum with interest at the rate of five per centum per annum from
the date of retirement to the date of payment. The retirement board is
authorized to promulgate such rules and regulations as it may deem
necessary or appropriate to implement this subdivision.
 5. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, except
for the purposes of providing the benefits, if any, of subdivision four
of this section, with respect to transfers pursuant to this section
which occur on or after the effective date of the chapter of the laws of
two thousand twenty-three that amended this subdivision, no transfer of
a pension reserve pursuant to subdivision one or two of this section
shall be required when the member is transferring from a public
retirement system of the state with less than ten years of credited
service with the transferring retirement system at the time the transfer
is initiated. With respect to transfers pursuant to subdivision one or
two of this section which occur on or after the effective date of the
chapter of the laws of two thousand twenty-three that amended this
subdivision, the transfer of a pension reserve shall be required when
the member is transferring ten or more years of credited service from a
public retirement system of the state to any other public retirement
system of the state, excluding any transfers within and between the New
York city employees' retirement system, the New York city teachers'
retirement system and the New York city board of education retirement
system. For the purpose of giving the transferring member such status
and crediting such service in the retirement system to which the member
is transferring as such member was allowed in the retirement system from
which the member has transferred, the transfer shall be deemed complete
upon receipt by the transferee retirement system of (a) a statement from
the transferor retirement system of the transferring member's date of
membership in the transferor retirement system, tier status, service
credited to the transferred membership, and such other information as
the transferee retirement system may require to effectuate the transfer,
(b) such member's accumulated contributions from the transferor
retirement system, if same had not been previously withdrawn, or notice
from the transferor retirement system that such member had no
accumulated contributions, or notice from the transferor retirement
system that such member's accumulated contributions had been withdrawn
and the amount thereof and, as applicable, receipt from such member of
such member's accumulated contributions and interest, and (c) the
pension reserve in the case of a member who transfers in ten or more
years of credited service, except when transferring within and between
the New York city employees' retirement system, the New York city
teachers' retirement system and the New York city board of education
retirement system.
 § 523. State supervision. The operation of the retirement system shall
be subject to the supervision of the state department of financial
services.
 § 524. Exemption from taxation and execution. The right of a teacher
to a pension, an annuity, or a retirement allowance, to the return of
contributions, any benefit or right accrued or accruing to any person
under the provisions of this article, and the moneys in the various
funds created hereunder, are hereby exempt from any state or municipal
tax, and shall not be subject to execution, garnishment, attachment or
any other process whatsoever, and shall be unassignable except as in
this article specifically provided.
 § 525. Protection against fraud. 1. Any person who shall knowingly
make any false statement, or shall falsify or permit to be falsified any
record or records of this retirement system in any attempt to defraud
such system as a result of such act, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
and shall be punishable therefor under the laws of the state of New
York.
 2. Any violation of subdivision one of this section that results in a
member or beneficiary of the retirement system receiving a benefit or
payment in excess of one thousand dollars more than he or she would have
been entitled to shall be a class E felony. Any violation of subdivision
one of this section that results in a member or beneficiary of the
retirement system to receive a benefit or payment in excess of three
thousand dollars more than he or she would have been entitled to shall
be a class D felony.
 3. Should any change or error in records result in any employee or
beneficiary receiving from the retirement system more or less than he
would have been entitled to receive had the records been correct, then,
on the discovery of any such error, the retirement board shall correct
such error, and, as far as practicable, shall adjust the payments in
such a manner that the actuarial equivalent of the benefit to which he
was correctly entitled shall be paid.
 § 526. Merger of local teachers' retirement and pension systems with
the state system. 1. On April ninth, nineteen hundred twenty-three, the
public school teachers' retirement fund or system or the teachers
retirement or pension system of every city of the state having a
population of less than one million, created, established or maintained
under and pursuant to the provisions of any local act, having been
dissolved and discontinued and said systems at such time having become a
part of and been merged with the New York state teachers' retirement
system created, established and maintained as provided in this article,
on and after such date the provisions of this article shall apply,
except as herein otherwise provided, to the city in and for which such
local system was created, established and maintained and to the teachers
employed in the public schools therein, to the same extent and with the
same purpose and effect as though the said system in every such city had
been dissolved and discontinued and had become a part of the state
teachers' retirement system under the provisions of former section
eleven hundred nine-b of the education law, as added by chapter four
hundred forty-nine of the laws of nineteen hundred eleven, prior to
August first, nineteen hundred twenty-one.
 Within thirty days after April ninth, nineteen hundred twenty-three,
the trustees or other officers of any public school teachers' retirement
fund or system dissolved and discontinued shall cause to be transferred
to the state treasurer as ex officio treasurer and custodian of the
funds of the New York state teachers' retirement system all the funds to
the credit of such retirement fund or system so dissolved or
discontinued. The treasurer or other custodian of any such public school
teachers' retirement fund or system dissolved and discontinued shall pay
and account for all moneys or funds in his possession, at such time,
belonging to such retirement fund or system to the said state treasurer
as ex officio treasurer and custodian of the funds of the New York state
teachers' retirement system, and the funds so paid over shall thereupon
become a part of the retirement fund of New York state teachers'
retirement system.
 2. All members of any public school teachers' retirement system or
fund, dissolved and discontinued as herein provided, who are eligible to
membership under the provisions of this article, may become members of
the state teachers' retirement system, upon complying with the
provisions of this article.
 3. All persons who had been placed upon the retirement list in
accordance with the provisions of the act creating any now dissolved and
discontinued teachers' retirement system or fund, prior to April ninth,
nineteen hundred twenty-three, shall be entitled to receive the same
amounts which they would have been entitled to receive under the
provisions of this article if the said retirement fund or system had
been dissolved or discontinued as provided by law prior to August first,
nineteen hundred twenty-one. And the amount paid to such annuitants
shall in no case be less than the amount which they would have
respectively received had the retirement system or fund of which they
were members not been dissolved and discontinued as herein provided.
 § 527. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary the
retirement board shall determine the annuity payable as of the date of
retirement to each member of the system retired prior to the
twenty-eighth day of August, nineteen hundred fifty-eight, on the basis
of the mortality tables in force either on the first day of July,
nineteen hundred forty or the date such person joined the system,
whichever occurred later, and shall cause any additional amount which
would have been paid from the date of retirement had the annuity been
determined on such basis at retirement, to be paid to any retired
member, his designated beneficiary or estate, provided an application is
filed with the retirement board in the manner prescribed by the
retirement board and thereafter any such annuity as so determined shall
be paid to each such retired member or his designated beneficiary.
 § 528. Pensions-providing-for-increased-take-home-pay.
1. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary,
 a. beginning with the payroll period the first day of which is nearest
to April first, nineteen hundred sixty, and ending with the payroll
period immediately prior to that the first day of which is nearest to
April first, nineteen hundred seventy, the contribution of each member
of the retirement system who is a teacher within the provisions of
subdivision four of section five hundred one of this article in the
employ of the state of New York shall be reduced by five per centum of
the compensation paid such member, and
 b. beginning with the payroll period the first day of which is nearest
to April first, nineteen hundred sixty-four, and ending with the payroll
period immediately prior to that the first day of which is nearest to
April first, nineteen hundred seventy, the contribution of each member
of the retirement system who is a teacher within the provisions of
subdivision four of section five hundred one of this article in the
employ of the state of New York shall be reduced by an additional three
per centum of the compensation paid such member, and
 c. beginning with the payroll period the first day of which is nearest
to April first, nineteen hundred sixty-six, and ending with the payroll
period immediately prior to that the first day of which is nearest to
April first, nineteen hundred seventy, the contribution of each member
of the retirement system who is a teacher within the provisions of
subdivision four of section five hundred one of this article in the
employ of the state of New York whose rate of contribution is in excess
of eight per centum shall be suspended.
 Where a member's rate of contribution is less than the per centum by
which his contribution is reduced, such rate shall be discontinued. A
member whose rate of contribution shall be reduced pursuant to the
provisions of this subdivision shall be deemed to have elected to have
his rate so reduced unless he files an election pursuant to the
provisions of subdivision two of this section.
 2. Any member whose rate of contribution is reduced pursuant to the
provisions of subdivision one of this section may by a written notice,
duly acknowledged and filed with the retirement board within one year
after such reduction or within one year after he last became a member,
whichever is later, elect to make an additional contribution in addition
to other contributions otherwise allowed in this article equal to the
amount of such reduction. One year or more after the filing of such
notice a member may withdraw such election by filing a written notice
duly acknowledged and filed with the retirement board.
 3. For the period of time as the provisions of this section shall be
in effect, contributions for each member of the system whose rate of
contribution is reduced by virtue of the provisions of subdivision one
of this section shall be made to the pension accumulation fund by the
state of New York in the same manner and at the same time as other
contributions made by the state as employer of members of the retirement
system at a rate fixed by the actuary which shall be computed to be
sufficient to provide pensions-providing-for-increased-take-home-pay and
other benefits which become payable on account of members in the employ
of the state. The actuary engaged by the retirement board shall compute
an additional contribution to be known as the "special deficiency
contribution to provide a reserve-for-increased-take-home-pay." The
amount of the reserve-for-increased-take-home-pay shall be the present
value of that per centum of the member's compensation by which his
contribution is reduced, or would otherwise be reduced if his rate of
contribution equaled or exceeded eight per centum, during the period for
which his rate of contribution was reduced as provided in subdivision
one, plus regular and additional interest thereon to the date that
pension and other benefits become payable.
 4. Upon retirement a member whose rate of contribution shall be
reduced pursuant to the provisions of subdivision one of this section
will receive, in addition to the annuity and other pension benefits
provided by this article, a pension which is the actuarial equivalent of
the reserve-for-increased-take-home-pay to which he may be entitled, if
any.
 5. In addition to the return of accumulated contributions and the
death benefit provided by the provisions of section five hundred twelve
of this article, upon the death of a member who died before the
effective date of his retirement and was in service upon which his
membership was based when he died or was on the payroll in such service
and paid within a period of twelve months prior to his death and had not
been otherwise gainfully employed since he ceased to be on such payroll,
and provided further, he had credit for one or more years of service
while actually a member, then the reserve-for-increased-take-home-pay
attributable to such member shall be paid in the same manner and at the
same time as the death benefit is paid by reason of such member's
membership in the retirement system.
 6. The reserve-for-increased-take-home-pay shall be a portion of the
pension accumulation fund and upon the retirement of a new entrant an
amount equal to the reserve-for-increased-take-home-pay for such member
shall be transferred from the pension accumulation fund to the pension
reserve fund.
 7. If a person has been a member of the retirement system and
contributions have been made by the state as his employer to provide a
reserve-for-increased-take-home-pay and such person has ceased to be a
member of the system and upon rejoining the retirement system claims
credit for such period, the member shall not be required to pay for such
years of service as a contribution shall have been made by the state for
pensions-providing-for-increased-take-home-pay pursuant to the
provisions of this section.
 8. Commencing with the payroll period the first day of which is
nearest to April first, nineteen hundred sixty-one, the provisions of
this section shall not apply to any member for any period or periods
during which he ceases or has ceased contributing toward retirement
pursuant to subdivision one of section five hundred sixteen of this
article, provided, however, that such member shall receive credit
pursuant to this section for such period or periods for which he
contributes or has contributed toward retirement.
 § 529. Pensions providing for increased take home pay for certain
teachers. Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary,
beginning with the payroll period the first day of which is nearest to
April first, nineteen hundred sixty-one and ending with the payroll
period immediately prior to that the first day of which is nearest to
April first, nineteen hundred seventy, any member of the retirement
system who is a teacher within the provisions of subdivision four of
section five hundred one of this article in the employ of a community
college shall be deemed for the purposes of providing pensions for
increased take home pay to be a teacher within the provisions of section
five hundred twenty-eight of this article, provided that the board of
trustees of the community college employing such teacher files with the
retirement board a certified copy of the resolution, approved by the
local sponsor acting through its local legislative body or board or
other appropriate governing agency, of such board of trustees resolving
that teachers employed in such community college shall be eligible for
pensions providing for increased take home pay. Such resolutions shall
also specify the per centum of their compensation by which their
contributions shall be reduced, which shall be five per centum unless
eight per centum is specifically designated. In the event that such an
approved resolution is so filed, the contributions of such teachers so
employed in such community college shall be reduced by either five per
centum or eight per centum of their compensation, as provided in such
resolution, in the manner prescribed in section five hundred
twenty-eight of this article beginning with the payroll period the first
day of which is nearest to the first day of the month following the day
such certified approved resolution is filed, and thereafter the
contributions for each member of the retirement system employed by such
community college whose rate of contribution is reduced by virtue of the
provisions of this section and section five hundred twenty-eight of this
article shall be made to the pension accumulation fund by such community
college, the local sponsor, the local legislative body or board or other
appropriate governing agency in the same manner and at the same time as
other contributions are made by such community college, the local
sponsor, the local legislative body or board or other appropriate
governing agency as the employer of members of the retirement system at
a rate to be fixed in accordance with the procedure prescribed in
section five hundred twenty-eight of this article, and all applicable
provisions of said section five hundred twenty-eight subject to the
applicable per centum of a teacher's compensation by which his
contribution shall be reduced shall apply to such community college, the
local sponsor, the local legislative body or board or other appropriate
governing agency and to members of the retirement system employed by
such board of trustees.
 § 530. Pensions-providing-for-increased-take-home-pay-for-teachers. 1.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, a. beginning
on the first day of July, nineteen hundred sixty-five, and ending on the
thirtieth day of June, nineteen hundred seventy, the contribution of
each member of the retirement system who is a teacher within the
provisions of subdivision four of section five hundred one of this
article who is not in the employ of the state of New York or who is not
in the employ of a community college shall be reduced by five per centum
of the compensation paid such member, and
 b. beginning on the first day of July, nineteen hundred sixty-seven,
and ending on the thirtieth day of June, nineteen hundred seventy, the
contribution of each member of the retirement system who is a teacher
within the provisions of subdivision four of section five hundred one of
this article who is not in the employ of the state of New York or who is
not in the employ of a community college shall be reduced by an
additional three per centum of the compensation paid such member.
 Where a member's rate of contribution is less than the per centum by
which his contribution is reduced, such rate shall be discontinued. A
member whose rate of contribution shall be reduced pursuant to the
provisions of this subdivision shall be deemed to have elected to have
his rate so reduced unless he files an election pursuant to the
provisions of subdivision two of this section.
 2. Any member whose rate of contribution is reduced pursuant to the
provisions of subdivision one of this section may by a written notice,
duly acknowledged and filed with the retirement board within one year
after such reduction or within one year after he last became a member,
whichever is later, elect to make an additional contribution in addition
to other contributions otherwise allowed in this article equal to the
amount of such reduction. One year or more after the filing of such
notice a member may withdraw such election by filing a written notice
duly acknowledged and filed with the retirement board.
 3. For the period of time as the provisions of this section shall be
in effect, contributions for each member of the system whose rate of
contribution is reduced by virtue of the provisions of subdivision one
of this section shall be made to the pension accumulation fund by his
employer in the same manner and at the same time as other contributions
made by the employer as employer of members of the retirement system at
a rate fixed by the actuary which shall be computed to be sufficient to
provide pensions-providing-for-increased-take-home-pay-for-teachers and
other benefits which become payable on account of members not employed
by the state of New York or by a community college. The actuary engaged
by the retirement board shall compute an additional contribution to be
known as the "special deficiency contribution to provide a
reserve-for-increased-take-home-pay-for-teachers." The amount of the
reserve-for-increased-take-home-pay-for-teachers shall be the present
value of that per centum of the member's compensation by which his
contribution is reduced, or would otherwise be reduced if his rate of
contribution equaled or exceeded eight per centum, during the period for
which his rate of contribution was reduced as provided in subdivision
one, plus regular and additional interest thereon to the date that
pension and other benefits become payable.
 4. Upon retirement a member whose rate of contribution shall be
reduced pursuant to the provisions of subdivision one of this section
will receive, in addition to the annuity and other pension benefits
provided by this article, a pension which is the actuarial equivalent of
the reserve-for-increased-take-home-pay-for-teachers to which he may be
entitled, if any.
 5. In addition to the return of accumulated contributions and the
death benefit provided by the provisions of section five hundred twelve
of this article, upon the death of a member who died before the
effective date of his retirement and was in service upon which his
membership was based when he died or was on the payroll in such service
and paid within a period of twelve months prior to his death and had not
been otherwise gainfully employed since he ceased to be on such payroll,
and provided further, he had credit for one or more years of service
while actually a member, then the
reserve-for-increased-take-home-pay-for-teachers attributable to such
member shall be paid in the same manner and at the same time as the
death benefit is paid by reason of such member's membership in the
retirement system.
 6. The reserve-for-increased-take-home-pay-for-teachers shall be a
portion of the pension accumulation fund and upon the retirement of a
new entrant an amount equal to the
reserve-for-increased-take-home-pay-for-teachers for such member shall
be transferred from the pension accumulation fund to the pension reserve
fund.
 7. If a person has been a member of the retirement system and
contributions have been made by his employer to provide a
reserve-for-increased-take-home-pay-for-teachers and such person has
ceased to be a member of the system and upon rejoining the retirement
system claims credit for such period, the member shall not be required
to pay for such years of service as a contribution shall have been made
by his employer for pensions-providing-for-increased-take-home-pay-forteachers pursuant to the provisions of this section.
 8. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any member for
any period or periods during which he ceases or has ceased contributing
toward retirement pursuant to subdivision one of section five hundred
sixteen of this article, provided, however, that such member shall
receive credit pursuant to this section for such period or periods for
which he contributes or has contributed toward retirement.
 9. Each member of the retirement system as defined in subdivision one
of this section who is employed in the city school districts of the
cities of Buffalo and Yonkers may have his contribution reduced pursuant
to this section by five percentum of the compensation paid such member
during the school year commencing July first, nineteen hundred
sixty-four, provided his employer shall adopt and file with the
retirement board a resolution to such effect prior to July first,
nineteen hundred sixty-four.
 § 531. Abandonment of unclaimed contributions or other benefits;
transfer to the pension accumulation fund. 1. Except as otherwise
specifically provided by this article, after at least seven years have
elapsed since the member or contributor withdrew from service or ceased
to be a teacher for any cause other than death or retirement or seven
years have elapsed from the date any other person became entitled to a
benefit pursuant to this article, the retirement board may send a
statement to such person at the last known address of the person setting
forth the amount of the accumulated contributions or other benefits
standing to the credit of such person and give notice to said person
that unless he demands payment of said amount prior to a date at least
one year from the date the notice is given, said amount will be deemed
abandoned and will be transferred by the retirement board to the pension
accumulation fund.
 2. The retirement board shall cause to be published at least once in
an appropriate publication of the New York state department of
education, a publication for professional educators or in a periodical
of general circulation, a list setting forth the names of persons who
have unclaimed accumulated contributions or other benefits in the New
York state teachers' retirement system.
 3. At the expiration of six months from the date of the publication of
the notices required by subdivision two of this section, the accumulated
contributions or other benefits of the persons so listed shall be deemed
abandoned and shall be placed in the pension accumulation fund to be
used for the purposes of said fund.
 4. Any accumulated contributions or other benefits so deemed abandoned
and transferred to the pension accumulation fund may be claimed by the
person entitled to the accumulated contributions or other benefits, or
in the event of his death by his estate or by such person or persons as
he shall have nominated to receive such accumulated contributions, by
filing a claim with the retirement board in such form and in such manner
as may be prescribed by the retirement board, seeking the return of such
abandoned accumulated contributions or other benefits without interest,
and in the event such claim is properly made the retirement board shall
pay over to the person or persons or estate making such claim the amount
of such accumulated contributions or other benefits without interest.
The payment shall be made from the pension accumulation fund.
 5. Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary and
in lieu of any other procedure provided for in this section, the
retirement board is authorized to mandate the distribution of unclaimed
amounts not to exceed one thousand dollars in each case to former
members or contributors, or persons entitled to a benefit from the
system, in cases in which at least seven years have elapsed since the
member or contributor withdrew from service or ceased to be a teacher
for any cause other than death or retirement or at least seven years
have elapsed from the date any other person became entitled to a benefit
from the system pursuant to any provision of this chapter or of the
retirement and social security law.
 § 532. Supplemental retirement allowance. a. A supplemental retirement
allowance shall be paid to pensioners who have retired from the
retirement system prior to the calendar year nineteen hundred
ninety-four. Such supplemental retirement allowance shall be payable on
the basis provided for herein, commencing with a payment for the month
of September, nineteen hundred ninety-nine and continuing through the
month of August, two thousand. Said supplemental retirement allowance
shall be a percentage of the retirement allowance otherwise payable,
computed without optional modification, but excluding any annuity
derived from voluntary contributions made by members, except those made
pursuant to elections under subdivision one of section five hundred
eleven-a or paragraph c of subdivision three of section five hundred
sixteen of this article. Said percentage, for each calendar year of
retirement, is set forth in subdivision b of this section. Said
supplemental retirement allowance shall be computed on the basis of the
first fourteen thousand dollars of such annual retirement allowance and
shall be payable commencing September first, nineteen hundred
ninety-nine to all disability pensioners and recipients of an accidental
death benefit, and to other pensioners who have attained age sixty-two
or who have been retired for ten or more years and have attained age
fifty-five.
 b. 1. In calculating the supplemental retirement allowance in
accordance with subdivision a of this section, the following percentages
will be used for each calendar year of retirement, as appropriate:
Calendar year of retirement Percentage
1993 1.5
1992 1.5
1991 1.5
1990 1.5
1989 2.8
1988 3.7
1987 4.5
1986 5.5
1985 6.3
1984 7.4
1983 8.3
1982 10.5
1981 12.5
1980 15.6
1979 19.9
1978 25.4
1977 30.3
1976 37.8
1975 42.5
1974 54.0
1973 73.0
1972 86.0
1971 96.7
1970 105.0
1969 141.8
1968 169.0
1967 195.9
1966 203.7
1965 230.5
1964 254.5
1963 278.6
1962 310.0
1961 330.0
1960 340.0
1959 390.0
1958 427.3
1957 442.3
 The supplemental retirement allowance shall be rounded off to the
nearest dollar.
 1-a. For those pensioners retired from the retirement system prior to
the calendar year nineteen hundred fifty-seven the percentage referred
to in this section shall be determined by the ratio of two indexes, in
the following manner. The average of the twelve monthly consumer price
indexes of the calendar year nineteen hundred ninety-five divided by the
average of the twelve monthly consumer price indexes of the calendar
year of retirement shall be the ratio of the indexes. Said ratio, minus
one, shall be expressed as a percentage and shall be adjusted to the
lower one-tenth of one per centum. Such adjusted percentage shall be the
percentage of the retirement allowance, computed without optional
modification, which is payable as a supplement. Such percentage shall be
computed by the actuary and certified to the retirement board which
shall, by directive, promulgate a schedule of percentages by year of
retirement to be used for this purpose. The supplemental retirement
allowance shall be rounded off to the nearest dollar.
 c. The benefits herein above provided for shall be in lieu of the
benefits presently provided by section five hundred ten and articles
four and six of the retirement and social security law, unless such
benefits are in excess of those provided by this section, in which
latter case such benefits shall be paid by the retirement system
pursuant to this section.
 d. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the widow or widower of
a deceased retired teacher, who had elected one of the options under
section five hundred thirteen of this article which provides that
benefits are to be continued for life to the widow or widower after the
death of the teacher, shall be entitled to receive a monthly
supplemental retirement allowance pursuant to this subdivision. Such
monthly supplemental retirement allowance shall commence (1) with the
payment for the month of September, nineteen hundred seventy-eight, or
(2) the month following commencement of widowhood or widowerhood,
whichever is later. The amount of the supplemental retirement allowance
provided by this subdivision shall be one-half of the amount which would
have been payable to the retiree as a supplemental retirement allowance,
had he or she survived.
 e. 1. Each pensioner of the retirement system who retired before July
first, nineteen hundred eighty shall be paid, commencing with a payment
for the month of July two thousand twenty-one a basic supplemental
pension, the total of which when added to his or her yearly retirement
allowance computed without optional modification, but excluding any
annuity derived from contributions made by members pursuant to
paragraphs a and b of subdivision three of section five hundred sixteen,
section five hundred twenty-eight, section five hundred twenty-nine,
section five hundred thirty, section five hundred thirty-three and
section five hundred thirty-five of this article, shall equal the lesser
of nineteen thousand two hundred fifty dollars or the sum of five
hundred fifty dollars multiplied by the number of years of full-time New
York state service not to exceed thirty-five years with which he or she
was credited at the time of his or her retirement.
 2. The benefits provided for pursuant to this subdivision shall be in
lieu of the benefits provided by articles four and six of the retirement
and social security law, subdivisions a, b and c of this section, and
subdivision f of section five hundred thirty-two-a of this article,
unless such a retired member would be eligible to receive a greater
benefit pursuant to any of such provisions, in which latter case this
subdivision shall not apply.
 f. Contributions shall be made to the supplemental retirement
allowance fund by, or on account of, each employer at a rate computed by
the actuary and approved by the retirement board, which shall be
computed to be sufficient to provide the benefits established by this
section which are payable during the period of time that this section
shall be in effect. The retirement board may from time to time transfer
sufficient monies from the pension accumulation fund to the supplemental
retirement allowance fund to meet the obligations imposed by this
section. Such advances shall be restored to the pension accumulation
fund pursuant to paragraph a of subdivision two of section five hundred
twenty-one of this article.
 g. 1. Commencing July first, nineteen hundred eighty-three, an
additional supplemental pension shall be paid to those pensioners who on
June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-three were receiving
supplemental benefits computed pursuant to article four of the
retirement and social security law or computed pursuant to paragraph one
of subdivision e of this section as it read prior to amendment by
chapter four hundred seven of the laws of nineteen hundred
seventy-seven. Such additional supplemental pension shall equal ten
percent of the total of the supplemental pension paid to such pensioner
pursuant to article four of the retirement and social security law or
paragraph one of subdivision e of this section as it read prior to
amendment by chapter four hundred seven of the laws of nineteen hundred
seventy-seven, and the yearly retirement allowance computed without
optional modification, but excluding any annuity derived from voluntary
contributions made by members, pursuant to paragraphs a and b of
subdivision three of section five hundred sixteen, section five hundred
twenty-eight, section five hundred twenty-nine, section five hundred
thirty, section five hundred thirty-three and section five hundred
thirty-five of this article.
 2. The benefits provided pursuant to paragraph one of this subdivision
shall be in lieu of the benefits provided by any other provision of law,
unless such a pensioner would be eligible to receive a greater benefit
pursuant to any such other provision, in which latter case this
subdivision shall not apply.
 § 532-a. Cost-of-living adjustment. a. A cost-of-living adjustment
shall be payable on the basis provided for in this section to: (i) all
pensioners who have attained age sixty-two and have been retired for
five years; (ii) all pensioners who have attained age fifty-five and
have been retired for ten years; (iii) all disability pensioners
regardless of age who have been retired for five years; and (iv) all
recipients of an accidental death benefit regardless of age who have
been receiving such benefit for five years.
 b. Said cost-of-living adjustment shall be a percentage of the annual
retirement allowance otherwise payable, computed without optional
modification, excluding any annuity derived from voluntary contributions
made by members, except those made pursuant to elections under
subdivision one of section five hundred eleven-a or paragraph c of
subdivision three of section five hundred sixteen of this article, but
including any benefit derived from subdivision f of this section and any
prior year's cost-of-living adjustment derived from this section. Said
percentage is set forth in subdivision d of this section.
 c. Said cost-of-living adjustment shall be computed on a base benefit
amount not to exceed eighteen thousand dollars of the annual retirement
allowance defined in subdivision b of this section.
 d. The percentage referred to in this section shall be determined
annually by reference to the consumer price index (all urban consumers,
CPI-U, U.S. city average, all items, 1982-84=100), published by the
United States bureau of labor statistics, for each applicable calendar
year. Said percentage shall equal fifty percent of the annual inflation,
as determined from the increase in the consumer price index in the one
year period ending on the March thirty-first prior to the cost-of-living
adjustment effective on the ensuing September first. Said percentage
shall then be rounded up to the next higher one-tenth of one percent and
shall not exceed three percent nor be less than one percent.
 e. Said cost-of-living adjustment shall be payable in monthly
installments and shall take effect September first of each year
commencing with a payment for the month of September, two thousand one,
or, if later, as soon as practicable after the retired member first
becomes eligible to receive the benefits provided pursuant to paragraph
a of this section.
 f. Commencing September first, two thousand, all retired members who
have retired prior to the calendar year nineteen hundred ninety-seven
and who meet the eligibility criteria set forth in subdivision a of this
section shall be paid an adjusted benefit in monthly installments on the
basis provided for in this subdivision. Said adjusted benefit shall be
equal to a percentage of the change in consumer price index (all urban
consumers, CPI-U, U.S. city average, all items, 1982-84=100), published
by the United States bureau of labor statistics, measured from the year
of retirement through calendar year nineteen hundred ninety-seven
according to the following schedule:
 Year of retirement Percentage
 1968 through 1996 50%
 1966 and 1967 55%
 1965 60%
 1964 65%
 1963 70%
 1962 80%
 1961 90%
 prior to 1961 100%
Said adjusted benefit shall be computed on a base benefit amount not to
exceed eighteen thousand dollars of the retirement allowance otherwise
payable, computed without optional modification excluding any annuity
derived from voluntary contributions made by members, except those made
pursuant to elections under subdivision one of section five hundred
eleven-a or paragraph c of subdivision three of section five hundred
sixteen of this article. Any benefits received pursuant to this
subdivision shall be in lieu of any benefits received pursuant to
section five hundred thirty-two of this article, unless such benefits
are in excess of those provided by this section, in which case such
benefits shall be paid by the retirement system pursuant to such
provision.
 g. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the surviving spouse of
a deceased retired member who retired under an option which provides
that benefits are to be continued for life to the surviving spouse after
the death of the retired member, shall be entitled to receive benefits
pursuant to this section. Said benefits shall be fifty percent of the
monthly benefits which the pensioner would be receiving pursuant to this
section if living, and shall commence (i) with a payment for the month
of September, two thousand, or (ii) the month following the death of the
deceased retired member, whichever is later.
 h. The benefits provided pursuant to this section shall be in lieu of
the benefits presently provided by section five hundred ten or article
four or six of the retirement and social security law unless such
benefits are in excess of those provided by this section, in which case
such benefits shall be paid by the retirement system pursuant to such
provision.
 i. The liability created by this section shall be funded through the
normal rate of contribution in accordance with subparagraph two of
paragraph f of subdivision two of section five hundred seventeen of this
article.
 § 533. Non-contributory retirement plan. a. Any other provision of
law to the contrary notwithstanding, no further contributions to the
retirement system, as provided in sections five hundred eleven-a or five
hundred sixteen of this article, shall be required of any member.
 b. Contributions shall be made to the pension accumulation fund, as
provided in section five hundred seventeen of this article, at a rate
computed by the actuary and approved by the retirement board, which
shall be computed to be sufficient to provide the benefits established
by this section.
 c. Nothing contained in this section shall impair the right of any
member to make contributions pursuant to sections five hundred eleven-a
and five hundred sixteen of this article. Any member may elect to
contribute pursuant to sections five hundred eleven-a and five hundred
sixteen of this article, by written notice duly acknowledged and filed
with the retirement board on or before June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
sixty-nine or within one year after he last became a member, whichever
is later. Where a member makes an election to contribute, as provided
herein, he shall contribute to the retirement system as otherwise
provided in this article. One year or more after the filing of the
notice of the election to contribute, the member may withdraw such
election and elect not to contribute.
 d. 1. On and after July first, nineteen hundred sixty-eight a member
shall be eligible for service retirement when he meets the conditions
set forth in sections five hundred ten or five hundred eleven-a of this
article, by the filing of a statement with the retirement board as
required by subdivision one of section five hundred ten of this article.
For the purposes of this section, all members shall be deemed to have
made the election for special service retirement under section five
hundred eleven-a of this article.
 2. A member who retires on or after July first, nineteen hundred
sixty-eight, under the provisions of this section, shall receive a
service retirement pension which shall be in lieu of the service
retirement pension and the pension-for-increased-take-home-pay otherwise
authorized under this article, subject to any adjustments made pursuant
to subdivision g of this section. Such pension, for the period of
credited state service rendered prior to July first, nineteen hundred
fifty-nine, and for all credited out-of-state service, shall be computed
as provided in section five hundred ten of this article. Such pension,
for the period of credited state service rendered on and after July
first, nineteen hundred fifty-nine, shall be one-fiftieth of final
average salary for each year of such service rendered during the first
twenty-five years of the member's total service, plus one-sixtieth of
final average salary for each year of such service rendered during that
portion of the member's total service which is in excess of twenty-five
years but not in excess of thirty-five years, plus one-seventieth of
final average salary for each year of such service rendered during that
portion of the member's total state service which is in excess of
thirty-five years.
 3. In addition to the retirement allowance provided in paragraph two
of this subdivision, a member who has at least twenty years of credited
state service and retires during the month of July, nineteen hundred
sixty-eight, shall receive an added pension allowance equal to sixteen
per cent of the pension otherwise provided in this article. For persons
retiring subsequent to July, nineteen hundred sixty-eight, the added
pension authorized hereunder shall be reduced at the rate of one-sixth
of one per cent for each month thereafter.
 4. The additional pension provided under this section shall not be
included in computing any pension reserve payable pursuant to the
provisions of paragraph three of subdivision b of section five hundred
twelve of this article.
 e. In addition to the pension hereinabove provided, a member shall
receive an annuity which shall be the actuarial equivalent of his
accumulated contributions at the time of his retirement, in accordance
with section five hundred sixteen of this article.
 f. The benefits hereinabove provided shall be payable unless the
member would otherwise under the provisions of this article be entitled
to a greater benefit, in which event the greater benefit shall be
payable.
 g. If at the time of retirement any portion of the employer's
contribution has been committed by election of the member toward
purchase of a variable annuity, the retirement board shall deduct from
the member's pension allowance as otherwise computed under this section,
an amount equal to the actuarial equivalent of the amounts so committed,
plus regular and additional interest thereon to the date of retirement.
 § 535. Career retirement plan. 1. Any other provision of law to the
contrary notwithstanding, on or after July first, nineteen hundred
seventy a member may retire pursuant to the provisions of this section
when,
 a. he has credit for thirty-five or more years of total service, or
 b. he has attained age fifty-five or older and has received credit for
five or more years of full time New York state service, at least two of
which have been rendered since the date upon which he last joined the
retirement system and since June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
sixty-seven, or
 c. he has attained age fifty-five or older and has credit for two or
more years of full time service in the period subsequent to June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred sixty-seven and has rendered two years of
full time New York state service in the period subsequent to his
attainment of age fifty-three and subsequent to the date upon which he
last joined the retirement system by filing with the system a statement
duly attested, setting forth at what time not less than thirty days nor
more than ninety days subsequent to the execution and filing thereof he
desires such retirement.
 In the case of persons who last became members on or after July first,
nineteen hundred seventy-three, the provisions of this section shall
apply only to those who retire prior to July first, nineteen hundred
seventy-four.
 2. A member who retires pursuant to the provisions of this section and
who is credited with at least twenty years of full time New York state
service at the time of his retirement, shall receive a pension
consisting of:
 a. one and two-tenths per cent of his final average salary multiplied
by the number of years of his credited New York state service rendered
prior to July first, nineteen hundred fifty-nine, and
 b. two per cent of his final average salary multiplied by the number
of years of his credited New York state service rendered subsequent to
June thirtieth, nineteen hundred fifty-nine, and
 c. one per cent of his final average salary multiplied by the number
of years of out-of-state service to his credit, excluding, however, any
such service credits which would bring his total years of credited
service above thirty-five years.
 3. In addition to the pension allowance provided in subdivision two of
this section, a member who is credited with at least twenty years of
full time New York state service and retires during the month of July,
nineteen hundred seventy, shall receive an added pension allowance equal
to twelve per cent of the pension allowance provided in paragraphs a and
b of subdivision two of this section. For persons retiring subsequent to
July, nineteen hundred seventy, the added pension authorized hereunder
shall be reduced at the rate of one-sixth of one per cent for each month
thereafter.
 4. A member who retires pursuant to the provisions of this section and
who is credited with less than twenty years of full time New York state
service at the time of his retirement shall receive a pension which is
computed by multiplying the pension calculated in accordance with
subdivision two of this section by five per cent for each year of
credited full time state service, but in no event shall the pension
payable pursuant to this subdivision be less than fifty per cent of the
pension computed in accordance with subdivision two of this section.
 5. a. In lieu of the pension provided by subdivisions two and three of
this section, a member who retires pursuant to the provisions of this
section on or after July first, nineteen hundred seventy-six and who is
credited with at least twenty years of full-time New York state service
at the time of his retirement, shall receive a pension consisting of:
 1. one and eighty one-hundredths per cent of his final average salary
times the number of years of his credited New York state service
rendered prior to July first, nineteen hundred fifty-nine, and
 2. two per cent of his final average salary times the number of years
of his credited New York state service rendered subsequent to June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred fifty-nine, and
 3. one per cent of his final average salary times the number of years
of out-of-state service to his credit, excluding, however, any such
service credits which would bring his total years of credited service
above thirty-five years.
 b. In lieu of the pension provided by subdivision four of this
section, a member, who retires pursuant to the provisions of this
section on or after July first, nineteen hundred seventy-six and who is
credited with less than twenty years of full-time New York state service
at the time of his retirement, shall receive a pension which is computed
by multiplying the pension calculated in accordance with paragraph a of
this subdivision by five per cent for each year of credited full-time
New York state service, but in no event shall the pension payable
pursuant to this subdivision be less than fifty per cent of the pension
computed in accordance with paragraph a of this subdivision.
 6. In no event shall the pension provided pursuant to the provisions
of this section exceed seventy-five per cent of the member's final
average salary.
 7. A member who retires pursuant to the provisions of this section
shall receive the service retirement pension provided by this section
and such pension shall be in lieu of any other service retirement
pension and the pension for increased-take-home-pay otherwise authorized
under this article.
 8. In addition to the service retirement pension provided by this
section, the member shall receive an annuity which shall be the
actuarial equivalent of his accumulated contributions at the time of his
retirement.
 9. Nothing herein shall alter in any manner either the amount of the
death benefit specified in paragraph three of subdivision b of section
five hundred twelve of this article or the date upon which a member is
first eligible for the benefit described therein.
 10. The benefits provided by this section shall be payable unless the
member would otherwise under the provisions of this article be entitled
to a greater benefit, in which event the greater benefit shall be
payable.
 11. Anything in this article to the contrary notwithstanding, a person
who becomes a member on or after July first, nineteen hundred seventy,
so long as this section is in effect, shall be permitted to establish
his eligibility for retirement under sections five hundred ten, five
hundred eleven-a and five hundred thirty-three of this article, solely
for the purpose of entitling his estate or beneficiary to the death
benefit payable under paragraph three of subdivision b of section five
hundred twelve of this article.
 12. Anything in this article to the contrary notwithstanding, a person
who becomes a member on or after July first, nineteen hundred seventy,
so long as this section is in effect, shall not be permitted to make
contributions pursuant to this article, except for purchase of prior
service credits or military service credits.
 13. On and after July first, nineteen hundred seventy all members
shall be deemed to have made the elections permitted under subdivision
one of section five hundred eleven-a and paragraph c of subdivision
three of section five hundred sixteen of this article, whether or not a
formal application for such benefit was submitted to the retirement
board, and on and after July first, nineteen hundred seventy no
contribution shall be required of any member under subdivision one of
section five hundred eleven-a, as well as subdivision one and paragraph
c of subdivision three of section five hundred sixteen of this article.
 § 536. Deductions from benefits of certain retired members. 1.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a pensioner who is retired
from the retirement system shall have the right, at any time after such
pensioner's retirement, to execute and file a deduction authorization
card with the retirement board authorizing the deduction from such
pensioner's retirement allowance of membership dues and such pensioner's
share of the cost for employee organization-sponsored benefit plans and
the payment thereof to a retiree organization of which the pensioner is
then a member and which is then affiliated with either an employee
organization certified or recognized as the collective bargaining
representative of all employees in the negotiating unit of which the
pensioner was a part prior to his or her retirement or with an employee
organization with which such employee organization is then affiliated.
The retirement board shall thereafter deduct from the retirement
allowance of such pensioner the amount of membership dues and such
amounts required to be paid by such pensioner for such authorized
employee organization-sponsored benefit plans, and shall transmit the
sum so deducted to said retiree organization. Such authorization shall
continue in effect until revoked in writing by such pensioner. For
purposes of this section, the term "employee organization-sponsored
benefit plans" shall include any and all insurance plans and/or other
benefit plans sponsored by such retiree organization whether provided by
(a) a not-for-profit corporation licensed under article forty-three of
the insurance law; (b) any insurance company authorized to do business
in this state; (c) a health maintenance organization issued a
certificate of authority pursuant to article forty-four of the public
health law; or (d) a self-insurance arrangement, welfare fund or benefit
fund.
 2. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a retired member shall
have the right, at any time after his or her retirement, to execute and
file a deduction authorization card with the retirement board
authorizing the payment of voluntary contributions to the political
committee, as defined in subdivision one of section 14-100 of the
election law, of such member's employee organization, provided such
organization is certified or recognized pursuant to article fourteen of
the civil service law as the representative of all employees in the
negotiating unit in which such retired member was then employed. Such
authorization shall continue in effect until revoked in writing by such
member. The board shall determine the cost of administering deductions
for voluntary contributions to the political committee and the cost
incurred by the retirement system in administering such contributions
shall be paid from the funds of the political committee.
 § 537. Lump sum payment of de minimis service retirement benefit.
Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, a member of the
retirement system who is entitled to receive a retirement allowance,
other than for disability, pursuant to this article or pursuant to
article eleven or fifteen of the retirement and social security law,
which retirement allowance prior to optional modification is twenty-four
hundred dollars per annum or less, may elect at retirement to receive,
in lieu of such retirement allowance, a lump sum payment which has been
certified by the actuary to be of actuarial equivalent value to such
retirement allowance and approved by the retirement board. Such lump sum
shall be calculated using the interest rate on thirty year United States
treasury bonds as of January first of the calendar year in which the
retirement becomes effective. Upon payment of such lump sum, any and all
obligations of the retirement system to such member shall be totally
discharged. Commencing January first, two thousand four, the interest
rate on ten year United States treasury obligations as of January first
of the calendar year in which the retirement becomes effective shall be
used. Commencing January first, two thousand sixteen, the average annual
interest rate on ten year United States treasury obligations for the
days during the calendar year that precedes the calendar year in which
the retirement becomes effective shall be used.
 § 538. Excess benefit plan. Notwithstanding any other law to the
contrary, the retirement board is authorized in its sole discretion to
establish a qualified governmental excess benefit arrangement within the
meaning of, in conformity with and then only to the extent and so long
as permitted by subsection m of section four hundred fifteen of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, for the purpose of providing
such retirement benefits as would otherwise have been payable to
retirees of the system, but for the application of the limitations on
benefits of subsection b of section four hundred fifteen of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. The retirement board is also
authorized to promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to implement a qualified governmental excess benefit plan as provided in
this section.
 § 539. Certain actions by retiring members. 1. Notwithstanding any law
to the contrary, this section shall apply to any member of the system
who is otherwise eligible to retire pursuant to the provisions of this
article or pursuant to article fourteen or fifteen of the retirement and
social security law.
 2. Subject to the limitations in subdivisions three and four of this
section, a member shall be retired for service or with a deferred
retirement allowance, as requested by the member, upon or on a date
after the filing of a retirement application with the retirement system.
 3. A member shall not file for service retirement or for a deferred
retirement allowance any earlier than ninety days prior to the date on
which the member desires to be retired.
 4. A member shall not be retired under any provision of law until the
member has ceased to be paid on the payroll of an employer participating
in the retirement system. In the case of a member who has the right to
retire for disability under article fourteen of the retirement and
social security law, disability retirement shall not commence any
earlier than the date on which primary social security disability
benefits commence.
 5. A member may retroactively withdraw his or her retirement for
service or with a deferred retirement allowance by filing a revocation
of retirement no later than fourteen days following the date upon which
the member was retired. The retirement system shall have no obligation
to make any payment on account of any service retirement or deferred
retirement allowance during said period.
 6. An option selection duly filed by the member with the retirement
system shall become effective upon retirement. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, a member who has been retired for service or with a deferred
retirement allowance may file an option selection or change or
withdrawal of an option selection previously filed no later than thirty
days following the date on which the member has retired; a member who
has been retired for disability may file an option selection or a change
or withdrawal of an option selection previously filed no later than (i)
thirty days following the date on which such member's application for
disability retirement was approved by the retirement board or (ii)
thirty days following the date on which the member was retired for
disability, whichever is later.
 7. A member subject to the provisions of this article who has
accumulated contributions credited to the member's individual account in
the annuity savings fund may elect to withdraw such contributions
pursuant to subdivision six of section five hundred sixteen of this
article within the period provided in subdivision six of this section
for the selection, change or withdrawal of an option selection.
 ARTICLE 12
 HEALTH AND SAFETY GRANTS FOR NONPUBLIC SCHOOL CHILDREN
Section 549. Legislative findings.
 550. Definitions.
 551. Apportionment.
 552. Applications, reports, regulations.
 553. Installments.
 § 549. Legislative findings. The legislature hereby finds and
declares that:
 1. The state has a primary responsibility to ensure the health,
welfare and safety of children attending both public and nonpublic
schools.
 2. The state discharges this responsibility to public school children
through substantial amounts of per pupil financial assistance to local
school districts. The fiscal crisis in nonpublic education, however, has
caused a diminution of proper maintenance and repair programs,
threatening the health, welfare and safety of nonpublic school children,
particularly in urban areas. Such areas are generally identified by a
high incidence of families receiving assistance to dependent children
and deteriorating physical structures, including nonpublic school
buildings. Financial resources necessary to properly maintain and repair
such buildings are beyond the capabilities of low-income people whose
children attend nonpublic schools.
 3. In recognition of the financial plight of urban areas in attracting
qualified teachers, the federal government has enacted Title IV of the
Higher Education Act of nineteen hundred sixty-five, which provides
incentives to teachers to instruct in those schools which serve a high
concentration of students from low-income families.
 4. It is incumbent upon the state to ensure that the physical
environment in such Title IV areas is both healthy and safe. Incidental
to such goals, but none the less significant, is the contribution that a
healthy and safe school environment makes to the stability of urban
neighborhoods.
 5. To insure a healthy and safe school environment for children
attending nonpublic schools, the state has the right to make grants for
maintenance and repair expenditures which are clearly secular, neutral
and non-ideological in nature.
 § 550. Definitions. In this article:
 1. "Commissioner" shall mean the state commissioner of education.
 2. "Qualifying school" shall mean a nonprofit elementary or secondary
school in the state of New York, other than a public school, which (a)
is providing instruction in accordance with article seventeen and
section thirty-two hundred four of this chapter, (b) has not been found
to be in violation of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of nineteen
hundred sixty-four, 78 Stat. 252, 42 U.S.C. § 2000 (d), (c) which is
entitled to a tax exemption under section five hundred one (a) and five
hundred one (c)(3) of the Federal Internal Revenue Code of nineteen
hundred fifty-four, as amended, and (d) has been designated during the
base year as serving a high concentration of pupils from low-income
families for purposes of Title IV of the Federal Higher Education Act of
nineteen hundred sixty-five (20 U.S.C.A. § 425).
 3. "Base year" shall mean the school year immediately preceding the
current year.
 4. "Current year" shall mean the school year during which an
apportionment is to be paid pursuant to this article.
 5. "Health, welfare and safety grants" shall mean the apportionment
made pursuant to this article which shall be used for the maintenance
and repair of nonpublic school facilities and equipment to ensure the
health, welfare and safety of enrolled pupils.
 6. "Maintenance and repair" shall mean the provision of heat, light,
water, ventilation and sanitary facilities; cleaning, janitorial and
custodial services; snow removal; necessary upkeep and renovation of
buildings, grounds and equipment; fire and accident protection; and such
other items as the commissioner may deem necessary to ensure the health,
welfare and safety of enrolled pupils.
 7. "Average daily attendance" shall mean the total number of
attendance days of enrolled pupils in grades one through twelve during
the base year, divided by the number of days the school was in session
during such year.
 § 551. Apportionment. 1. In order to meet proper health, welfare and
safety standards in qualifying schools for the benefit of the pupils
enrolled therein, there shall be apportioned health, welfare and safety
grants by the commissioner to each qualifying school for the school
years beginning on and after July first, nineteen hundred seventy-one,
an amount equal to the product of thirty dollars multiplied by the
average daily attendance of pupils receiving instruction in such school,
to be applied for costs of maintenance and repair. Such apportionment
shall be increased by ten dollars multiplied by the average daily
attendance of pupils receiving instruction in a school building
constructed prior to nineteen hundred forty-seven. In no event shall the
per pupil annual allowance computed under this section exceed fifty per
centum of the average per pupil cost of equivalent maintenance and
repair in the public schools of the state on a state-wide basis, as
determined by the commissioner, and in no event shall the apportionment
to a qualifying school exceed the amount of expenditures for maintenance
and repair of such school as reported pursuant to section five hundred
fifty-two of this article.
 2. The apportionment pursuant to this section shall be reduced by one
one hundred eightieth for each day less than one hundred eighty days
that such school was actually in total session in the base year, except
that the commissioner may disregard such reduction up to five days if he
finds that the school was not in session for one hundred eighty days
because of extraordinary adverse weather conditions, impairment of
heating facilities, insufficiency of water supply, shortage of fuel or
the destruction of a school building, and if the commissioner further
finds that such school cannot make up such days of instruction during
the school year. No such reduction shall be made, however, for any day
on which such school was in session for the purpose of administering the
regents examinations or the regents scholarship examinations, or any
day, not to exceed three days, when such school was not in session
because of a conference of teachers called by the principal of the
school.
 § 552. Applications, reports, regulations. Each qualifying school
which seeks an apportionment pursuant to this article shall submit to
the commissioner an application therefor, at such times, in such form
and containing such information as the commissioner may by regulation
prescribe in order to carry out the purposes of this article. Such
applications shall include an audited statement of the expenditures of
maintenance and repair of such qualifying school for the base year.
 § 553. Installments. The amount to be apportioned to a qualifying
school in any current year shall be paid in two equal installments, the
first to be made on or before January fifteenth and the other not later
than June fifteenth of such year, except that for the school year
commencing July first, nineteen hundred seventy-one such apportionment
shall be made in one payment on or before June fifteenth, nineteen
hundred seventy-two. The commissioner may provide for later payments
for the purpose of adjusting and correcting apportionments. The amount
to be apportioned to a qualifying school shall be payable on order and
warrant of the comptroller on vouchers certified or approved by the
commissioner in the manner provided by law.
 ARTICLE 12-A
 ARTHUR O. EVE ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION OPPORTUNITY PROGRAM
Section 559. Legislative findings.
 560. Short title.
 561. Definitions.
 562. Tuition reimbursement payments to parents.
 563. Commissioner; powers.
 § 559. Legislative findings. The legislature hereby finds and declares
that:
 1. The vitality of our pluralistic society is, in part, dependent upon
the capacity of individual parents to select a school, other than
public, for the education of their children. A healthy competitive and
diverse alternative to public education is not only desirable but indeed
vital to a state and nation that have continually reaffirmed the value
of individual differences.
 2. The Supreme Court of the United States has recognized and
reaffirmed this right of selection. This right, however, is diminished
or even denied to children of lower-income families, whose parents, of
all groups, have the least options in determining where their children
are to be educated.
 3. Quality education is made possible for all children in our state
only because the burden of providing it has been carried by taxpayers
who support both public and nonpublic education. Any precipitous decline
in the number of nonpublic school pupils would cause a massive increase
in public school enrollment and costs. Such an increase would seriously
jeopardize quality education for all children and aggravate an already
serious fiscal crisis in public education.
 4. In recognition of the initiative of parents who support both public
and nonpublic education, it is a legitimate purpose for the state to
partially relieve the financial burden of parents who provide a
nonpublic education for their children which satisfies the compulsory
education laws of the state. Such assistance is clearly secular, neutral
and nonideological in nature and is consistent with the historical and
continuing role of the state in providing a quality education for all
children and in nurturing a pluralistic society.
 5. The Arthur O. Eve Elementary and Secondary Education Opportunity
Program is hereby established, which consists of tuition reimbursement
for parents of low income, in order to provide partial assistance in
meeting the financial burden of supporting the compulsory education of
their children who are full-time students in New York nonpublic
elementary and secondary schools.
 § 560. Short title. This article shall be known as the "Arthur O. Eve
Elementary and Secondary Education Opportunity Program".
 § 561. Definitions. The following terms, whenever used in this
article, shall have the following meanings:
 a. "Parent" means a legal resident of the state of New York with a New
York taxable income of under five thousand dollars who is a parent,
stepparent, adoptive parent and the spouse of an adoptive parent of a
pupil enrolled in a nonpublic school, or a resident with such taxable
income standing in loco parentis to such pupil.
 b. "Taxable income" means the amount of combined net taxable income,
if any, of both parents computed in accordance with the provisions of
section six hundred eleven of the tax law computed without the benefit
of the modification of federal adjusted gross income for nonpublic
school tuition pursuant to paragraph (14) of subsection (c) of section
six hundred twelve of the tax law, for the year for which a tuition
reimbursement payment is sought. If the parents of a pupil are living
apart, the taxable income of the parent who claims reimbursement under
this article shall be based upon the taxable income of that parent with
whom the pupil is living, or who exercises custody if the pupil is a
minor, or would exercise custody if the applicant were a minor and any
appropriate payments for the support of the pupil from the other parent.
 c. "Nonpublic school" means any nonprofit elementary or secondary
school in the State of New York, other than a public school, which (i)
is providing instruction in accordance with article seventeen and
section thirty-two hundred four of this chapter, (ii) has not been found
to be in violation of Title VI Civil Rights Act of 1964, 78 Stat. 252,
42 U.S.C. § 2000 (d), and (iii) which is entitled to a tax exemption
under section five hundred one (a) and five hundred one (c) (3) of the
Federal Internal Revenue Code of nineteen hundred fifty-four, as
amended.
 d. "Tuition" means the amount actually paid by a parent for the
enrollment of a pupil at a nonpublic school for the calendar year for
which a tuition reimbursement payment is sought.
 e. "Pupil" means a resident of the state of New York who has been
enrolled full-time in a nonpublic school and whose parents' combined
taxable income is less than five thousand dollars.
 f. "Commissioner" means the commissioner of education of the State of
New York.
 g. "Regular school year" means all of the months of the calendar year
exclusive of July and August.
 § 562. Tuition reimbursement payments to parents. 1. Upon the filing
by a parent of the verified statement as required by subdivision two,
the commissioner shall make a tuition reimbursement payment to such
parent for tuition expenses made in the preceding calendar year. Only
one such payment shall be made on behalf of any pupil in a calendar
year. Such payment shall be the lesser of either (a) fifty percent of
the tuition paid by the parent during the preceding calendar year for
the elementary or secondary education of each pupil, or (b) five dollars
per month for the period of enrollment in a nonpublic school during the
regular school year for each pupil in grades one through eight, and ten
dollars per month for the period of enrollment in a nonpublic school
during the preceding regular school year for each pupil in grades nine
through twelve. Whenever payments as herein computed total less than ten
dollars, no such payment shall be made.
 2. In order to be eligible for tuition reimbursement hereunder, the
parent of a pupil shall, by May first of the year following the calendar
year for which reimbursement is sought, file with the commissioner a
verified statement, in such form as he shall provide, stating that the
pupil was enrolled during such year in a nonpublic school or schools
and, in addition, the following information: (a) the name, address and
taxable income of the parent; (b) the name, address and birth date of
the pupil; (c) the grade in which the pupil was enrolled during each
month in a nonpublic school in such year; (d) the name and address of
the nonpublic school or schools attended by such pupil; (e) a receipted
tuition bill. For reimbursement for the calendar year nineteen hundred
seventy-one, such verified statement shall be filed not later than July
first, nineteen hundred seventy-two.
 3. No parent shall be eligible to receive a tuition reimbursement
payment who has claimed a modification of federal adjusted gross income
for nonpublic school tuition pursuant to paragraph fourteen of
subsection (c) of section six hundred twelve of the tax law based upon
the same tuition expenditures.
 4. The state tax commission shall, when requested by the commissioner, compare any verified statement filed with the commissioner
pursuant to this article with the state income tax returns if any, filed
by the parent making such verified statement and shall report any
discrepancies to the commissioner. All verified statements filed with
the commissioner and all reports made to him by the state tax
commission, pursuant to this article shall be deemed confidential and,
except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise
prescribed by law, it shall be unlawful for the commissioner or any
officer or employee of the department to divulge or make known in any
manner the amount of income or any other particulars set forth in any
verified statement filed with him hereunder or report made to him
pursuant to this subdivision; but nothing contained herein shall be
considered to prohibit the commissioner's publication of statistics so
classified as to prevent the identification of particular affidavits or
reports.
 § 563. Commissioner; powers. The commissioner shall have
responsibility for the administration of the program created by this
article and may promulgate such regulations as are necessary to carry
out the provisions of this article. The amount required to be paid
under the provisions of this article shall be payable on order and
warrant of the comptroller on vouchers certified or approved by the
commissioner in the manner provided by law.
 ARTICLE 13
 HIGHER EDUCATION STUDENT FINANCIAL AID PROGRAMS
Section 601. Definitions.
 602. Duties of the commissioner.
 603. Evaluation by the board of regents.
 604. General awards.
 605. Academic performance awards.
 605-a. Scholarships for academic excellence.
 606. County awards for professional education in nursing,
 medicine, dentistry, optometry or veterinary medicine.
 607. Required disclosure to matriculated students.
 608. World trade center memorial scholarships.
 608-a. Military enhanced recognition, incentive and tribute
 ("MERIT") scholarships.
 609. Tuition, aid and placement report.
 § 601. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall
have the following meanings unless otherwise specified:
 1. "President" shall mean the president of the New York state higher
education services corporation.
 2. "College" shall mean any institution of higher education,
recognized and approved by the regents of the university of the state of
New York, which provides a course of study leading to the granting of a
post-secondary degree or diploma.
 3. "Vocational institution" shall mean a business, trade, technical or
other occupational school approved as such by the regents of the
university of the state of New York or accredited by a nationally
recognized accrediting agency or association accepted as such by the
regents of the state of New York.
 4. "Approved program", for the purpose of determining a student's
eligibility for awards provided in articles thirteen and fourteen of
this chapter and subject to specific modification by sections of such
articles, shall mean the following programs of study approved by the
commissioner pursuant to this article in accordance with rules of the
board of regents and registered by the state education department in
accordance with regulations of the commissioner or, where applicable,
registered by the state department of health and forwarded to the state
education department: (1) collegiate level programs leading to a degree,
or programs leading to a diploma or certificate that are fully
creditable towards a degree program in that institution; (2) study and
training programs offered by a hospital school, a community college, a
unit of the state university of New York, a unit of the city university
of New York, or an institution chartered by the regents or by the
legislature for the purpose of granting degrees, leading to licensure as
a professional registered or practical nurse or to certification in an
area of medical or health technology; and (3) two-year programs offered
in a registered private business school.
 5. "Children" as referenced in subdivision four of section six hundred
four and sections six hundred eight, six hundred eight-a, six hundred
sixty-eight-a, six hundred sixty-eight-b, six hundred sixty-eight-d and
six hundred sixty-eight-e of this title shall mean: (a) birth children,
adopted children, stepchildren who survive an individual, or children
for whom an individual was a legal guardian, and (b) other children
related by blood, adoption or marriage to an individual for whom such
individual had assumed and was exercising custody and care as of the
date of such individual's death.
 6. "Impact area" as referenced in sections six hundred eight and six
hundred sixty-eight-d of this title shall mean the secure zone
established by the city of New York surrounding the world trade center
and the crash sites during the period that disasters were declared or
rescue and recovery efforts were underway.
 7. "Financial dependent" as referenced in sections six hundred four,
six hundred eight, six hundred eight-a, six hundred sixty-eight-b, six
hundred sixty-eight-d and six hundred sixty-eight-e of this title shall
mean a person who is dependent for his or her support upon an
individual, other than one who was involved in, supported, or was
responsible for the act or acts of terrorism or other intentional act or
acts that caused such death, injury or illness, who has died or become
severely and permanently disabled as described in such sections,
provided that a person shall be considered a financial dependent and
shall be eligible for awards pursuant to these sections upon a showing
of unilateral dependence or mutual interdependence upon such individual,
which may be evidenced by a nexus of factors, including but not limited
to common ownership of property, common householding, shared budgeting
and the length of the relationship between the financial dependent and
such individual.
 § 602. Duties of the commissioner. 1. Selection and certification of
academic performance award recipients. (a) The commissioner shall select
the qualified recipients of academic performance awards, from among
candidates who meet and exceed the minimum eligibility requirements, in
order of merit on the basis of such combination of test scores, academic
records, and personal qualifications as the commissioner deems
appropriate. If awards are allocated on the basis of geographic or
political units in the state, and if for any reason there is an
insufficient number of qualified applicants in any unit, the remaining
number of awards in such unit shall be allocated to the best qualified
applicants in the entire state. No person shall be eligible to receive
an academic performance award under this article who fails to achieve
the minimum standard of test scores, academic record, or, in the
judgment of the commissioner, personal qualifications necessary to
demonstrate promise of successful completion of the program for which
the award is made; (b) The commissioner shall certify to the president
those students eligible to receive academic performance awards.
 2. The commissioner shall promulgate regulations defining the
following terms by which the president can determine a student's
eligibility for student aid and loan programs: (a) full-time study or
attendance; (b) part-time study or attendance; (c) full-time and
part-time accelerated study beyond the regular program of study for the
academic year; (d) permissible use of general and academic performance
awards; (e) matriculation; and (f) loss of good academic standing.
 3. The commissioner shall promulgate regulations by which the
president shall determine whether a student has entered an approved
program during the academic year prior to the normal effective date of
the student's award.
 4. If any person because of administrative error or inadvertency
should fail to receive an academic performance award which he would
otherwise be entitled to receive, the commissioner may certify such
person to the president as eligible to receive such award without regard
to the total number of such awards authorized under this article, and
payments shall be made thereon out of moneys available in the same
manner as other academic performance awards are paid.
 § 603. Evaluation by the board of regents. On or before January
first, nineteen hundred seventy-six, and annually thereafter on or
before December first, the board of regents shall make a report to the
governor and the temporary president of the senate, the speaker of the
assembly, the senate finance committee, the assembly ways and means
committee and the standing committees of the legislature having
jurisdiction of higher education evaluating all financial assistance and
loan programs established by this article, which report shall contain
such recommendations as the regents may deem appropriate.
 § 604. General awards. 1. Tuition assistance program awards are
available for all students who are enrolled in approved programs and who
demonstrate the ability to complete such courses, in accordance with
standards established by the commissioner.
 2. Regents awards for children of deceased and disabled veterans are
available for eligible students in an approved program.
 3. Regents awards for children of deceased state correction officers
and state civilian employees of a correctional facility are available
for eligible students in an approved program pursuant to section six
hundred sixty-nine of this chapter.
 4. Regents awards for children of deceased police officers,
firefighters, volunteer firefighters and correction officers are
available for eligible students in an approved program pursuant to
section six hundred sixty-four of this chapter.
 5. Veterans tuition awards are available for eligible students
enrolled in approved undergraduate or graduate programs at degree
granting institutions and approved vocational training programs pursuant
to section six hundred sixty-nine-a of this title.
 6. Tuition awards for part-time undergraduate students enrolled in
approved programs in degree-granting institutions.
 * 7. Tuition benefit for active members of the New York army national
guard, New York air national guard and naval militia members enrolled in
approved post-secondary degree programs in degree-granting institutions.
 * NB Repealed September 1, 2026
 9. Memorial scholarships for children, spouses and financial
dependents of deceased firefighters, volunteer firefighters, police
officers, peace officers, and emergency medical service workers.
 10. World trade center memorial scholarships.
 11. American Airlines flight 587 memorial scholarships pursuant to
section six hundred sixty-eight-f of this title.
 12. Continental Airlines flight 3407 memorial scholarships pursuant to
section six hundred sixty-eight-g of this title.
 § 605. Academic performance awards. 1. Regents college scholarships.
Regents college scholarships shall be awarded to students completing
their high school programs for attendance in approved programs, on the
basis of nationally established competitive examinations.
 a. County allocation. Twenty-five thousand such scholarships shall be
awarded each year and shall be allocated to each county in the state in
the same ratio that the number of students residing in such county who
were graduated from approved high schools in the state during the school
year preceding the date of the examination for the award of such
scholarships bears to the total number of students residing in the state
who were graduated from approved high schools in the state during such
school year; provided, that no county shall be allocated fewer than
forty scholarships, except that Hamilton county shall be allocated no
fewer than sixteen scholarships. In the event that a scholarship awarded
pursuant to this paragraph is declined by a student or for any reason
revoked by the commissioner or the president, its benefits shall lapse
and there shall be no further payment or reawarding of such scholarship.
 b. School allocation. If in any year the candidates who are graduates
of a given approved high school in the state and who are awarded
scholarships under paragraph a of this subdivision do not constitute at
least one person for every forty persons who were graduated from such
school during the school year preceding the date of the examination for
the award of such scholarships, then additional scholarships shall be
awarded in such year in the number required to provide such allocation
of scholarship awards for each such school, and such additional
scholarships shall be awarded directly to candidates from each such
school in accordance with the provisions of section six hundred two of
this chapter. In the event that a scholarship awarded pursuant to this
paragraph is declined by a student or for any reason revoked by the
commissioner or the president, its benefits shall lapse and there shall
be no further payment or reawarding of such scholarship.
 2. Regents professional education in nursing scholarships. Regents
professional education in nursing scholarships shall be awarded on the
same basis as regents college scholarships to students completing their
high school programs for attendance in programs for the training of
registered professional nurses at colleges or schools approved by the
regents. Eight hundred such scholarships shall be awarded each year.
Such scholarships shall be allocated to each county in the state in the
same ratio that the number of students residing in such county who were
graduated from approved high schools in the state during the school year
preceding the date of the examination for the award of such scholarships
bears to the total number of students residing in the state who were
graduated from approved high schools in the state during such school
year, provided, that no county shall be allocated fewer than four
scholarships, except that Fulton and Hamilton counties shall each be
allocated no fewer than two scholarships; provided, however, that no
county shall be allocated fewer scholarships than such county received
during the year nineteen hundred seventy-two--nineteen hundred
seventy-three.
 3. Regents professional education in medicine or dentistry
scholarships. Regents professional education in medicine or dentistry
scholarships shall be awarded annually, on a competitive basis, to
students beginning professional study in medicine or dentistry. One
hundred such scholarships shall be awarded annually, and shall be
classified and allocated in accordance with regents rules. The
provisions of this subdivision shall only apply to any recipient who
receives his or her first award payment prior to the nineteen hundred
eighty-five--nineteen hundred eighty-six academic year.
 3-a. Regents professional education in optometry scholarships. Regents
professional education in optometry scholarships shall be awarded
annually, on a competitive basis, to students beginning professional
study in optometry. Five such scholarships shall be awarded annually in
optometry, and shall be classified and allocated in accordance with
regents rules. The provisions of this subdivision shall only apply to
any recipient who receives his or her first award payment prior to the
nineteen hundred eighty-five--nineteen hundred eighty-six academic year.
 3-b. Regents professional education in veterinary medicine
scholarships. Regents professional education in veterinary medicine
scholarships shall be awarded annually, on a competitive basis, to
students beginning professional study in veterinary medicine. Ten such
scholarships shall be awarded annually in veterinary medicine, and shall
be classified and allocated in accordance with regents rules. The
provisions of this subdivision shall only apply to any recipient who
receives his or her first award payment prior to the nineteen hundred
eighty-five--nineteen hundred eighty-six academic year.
 4. Regents physician shortage scholarships. At least thirty percent of
the regents professional education in medicine or dentistry scholarships
awarded each year shall be awarded to students beginning or engaged in
the professional study in medicine who agree to practice medicine upon
completion of their professional training in an area in New York state
designated as having a shortage of physicians, provided, however, that
to the extent that regents physician shortage scholarships are not
awarded, such scholarships shall be awarded as regents professional
education in medicine and dentistry scholarships. The provisions of this
subdivision shall only apply to any recipient who receives his or her
first award payment prior to the nineteen hundred eighty-five--nineteen
hundred eighty-six academic year.
 a. In selecting and certifying scholarship recipients under this
section, priority shall be accorded to applicants in the following
order:
 (1) first, to any applicant who (1) has a family income of six
thousand dollars or less and (2) resides in an area designated as having
a shortage of physicians pursuant to paragraph c of this subdivision;
 (2) second, to any applicant who has a family income of six thousand
dollars or less;
 (3) third, to any applicant who (1) has a family income of ten
thousand dollars or less and (2) resides in an area designated as having
a shortage of physicians pursuant to paragraph c of this subdivision;
 (4) fourth, to any applicant who has a family income of ten thousand
dollars or less;
 (5) fifth, to any other applicant.
 b. With respect to recipients who have received award payments prior
to the nineteen hundred eighty-two--nineteen hundred eighty-three
academic year, with such time as the commissioner shall by regulation
provide, a recipient of an award shall have practiced medicine in an
area designated as having a shortage of physicians pursuant to paragraph
d of this subdivision for that number of months calculated by
multiplying by nine the number of annual awards he received. If a
recipient fails to comply fully with such condition, the president shall
be entitled to recover from such recipient an amount which bears the
same ratio to (a) the aggregate of the amount of the awards received as
(b) the number of months the recipient failed to comply with this
condition bears to the number of months he was obligated to comply with
this condition, together with interest at seven percent per annum
computed from the date on which he completed his professional training
and/or active military service. A recipient shall not be required to
comply with the provisions of this paragraph unless he shall have
received a medical degree and any obligation to comply with such
provisions shall be cancelled upon his death. The regents shall make
regulations to provide for the waiver or suspension of any financial
obligation where compliance would involve extreme hardship.
 c. The requirements of this paragraph shall apply to any recipient who
receives his or her first award payment commencing with the nineteen
hundred eighty-two--nineteen hundred eighty-three academic year or
subsequently, and the requirements of paragraph (b) of this subdivision
shall not apply to such recipients. Within such time as the commissioner
shall by regulation provide, a recipient of an award shall have
practiced medicine in an area designated as having a shortage of
physicians pursuant to paragraph (d) of this subdivision for that number
of months calculated by multiplying by nine the number of annual awards
received by the recipient. If a recipient fails to comply fully with
such condition, the president shall be entitled to recover from such
recipient an amount determined by the formula:
 A = 2B (t-s)
 t
in which "A" is the amount the president is entitled to recover; "B" is
the sum of all awards paid to the recipient and the interest on such
amount which would be payable if at the times such awards were paid they
were loans bearing interest at the maximum prevailing rate; "t" is the
total number of months in the recipient's period of obligated services;
and "s" is the number of months of service actually rendered by the
recipient. Any amount which the president is entitled to recover under
this paragraph shall be paid within the one year period beginning on the
date that the recipient failed to comply with this condition. A
recipient shall not be required to comply with the provisions of this
paragraph unless he or she shall have received a medical degree and
until he or she shall have completed his or her professional training,
or active military service, or both. Any obligation to comply with such
provisions shall be cancelled upon the death of the recipient. The
commissioner shall make regulations to provide for the waiver or
suspension of any financial obligation where compliance would involve
extreme hardship.
 d. The regents, after consultation with the commissioner of health,
shall designate those areas of New York state which have a shortage of
physicians for the purposes of this subdivision and, should it be
necessary in selecting among the applicants, may establish relative
rankings of those areas.
 e. A recipient of an award shall report annually to the New York state
higher education services corporation, on forms prescribed by it, as to
the performance of the required services or the recipient's current
status, commencing the calendar year following graduation from medical
school and continuing until the recipient shall have completed, or it is
determined he or she shall not be obligated to complete, the required
services. The corporation may also require recipient to file a report on
his or her current status prior to graduation during any calendar year
in which an application for an additional award is not filed. If the
recipient shall fail to file any report required hereunder within thirty
days of written notice to the recipient, mailed to the address shown on
the last application for an award or last report filed, whichever is
later, the president of the corporation may impose a fine of up to one
thousand dollars. The president shall have the discretion to waive the
filing of a report, excuse a delay in filing, or a failure to file a
report, or waive or reduce any fine imposed for good cause shown.
 5. Regents scholarships for war veterans. Regents scholarships for war
veterans shall be awarded on a competitive basis, for study beginning
with the college year nineteen hundred seventy-five--nineteen hundred
seventy-six. Six hundred such scholarships shall be awarded in such year
to veterans of the armed forces of the United States who have served on
active duty (other than for training) between October one, nineteen
hundred sixty-one and March twenty-nine, nineteen hundred seventy-three,
and who on the date by which applications are required to be submitted
(a) have been released from such active duty on conditions not other
than honorable, or (b) have a qualifying condition, as defined in
section one of the veterans' services law, and have received a discharge
other than bad conduct or dishonorable from such service, or (c) are
discharged LGBT veterans, as defined in section one of the veterans'
services law, and have received a discharge other than bad conduct or
dishonorable from such service. Such scholarships shall be allocated to
each county in the state in the same ratio that the number of legal
residents in such county, as determined by the most recent federal
census, bears to the total number of residents in the state; provided,
however, that no county shall be allocated fewer scholarships than such
county received during the year nineteen hundred
sixty-eight--sixty-nine.
 6. Regents scholarships in Cornell University. a. Number. Cornell
University shall grant, on a competitive basis, tuition reducing
scholarships, to be known as regents scholarships in Cornell University,
in the total amount of at least thirty thousand dollars each year for
new freshman awards. At least one such scholarship shall be awarded
annually for each senate district of the state.
 b. Amount. Each such scholarship shall entitle the recipient to a
credit against tuition in any of the tuition paying divisions of Cornell
University for four years or five years, depending on the number of
years required for the baccalaureate. The tuition credit for each such
scholarship shall be determined by Cornell University on the basis of
the financial status of the scholarship holder as related to the cost of
education at such university. No such scholarship shall reduce the
tuition by less than one hundred dollars nor by more than one thousand
dollars.
 c. Eligible list. Such scholarships shall be awarded annually by
Cornell University in the order of merit to candidates who meet the
requirements for admission to Cornell University and whose names appear
on lists established as the result of competitive examinations prepared
under the direction of the commissioner of education. In the award of
such scholarships, preference shall be given, where other qualifications
are equal, to the children of those who have died in the military
service of the United States.
 d. Statewide list. If a scholarship belonging to a senate district
shall not be claimed by a resident thereof or if there be no resident of
such senate district entitled to such a scholarship, any sum available
for a scholarship or scholarships for residents of such senate district,
together with any unexpended balance of the total amount of thirty
thousand dollars, shall be used to make awards to additional candidates
in order of merit from a statewide list.
 e. Report. A complete list of the names and addresses of the
scholarship recipients, and the amount of tuition credit granted to
them, shall be filed by Cornell University with the commissioner and the
president not later than October first of each year.
 7. Empire state challenger scholarships for teachers. Empire state
challenger scholarships for prospective elementary and secondary school
teachers of mathematics or science or other fields of teacher shortage
as identified by the commissioner on or after January first, nineteen
hundred eighty-six, shall be awarded on a competitive basis as
determined by the commissioner, for study beginning with the college
year nineteen hundred eighty-four--eighty-five or thereafter. a.
Twenty-six such scholarships shall be awarded annually to residents of
each judicial district as defined in section one hundred forty of the
judiciary law, who enroll in a registered program for the preparation of
teachers in such teacher shortage fields at any New York institution of
higher education. The commissioner shall to the extent practicable
ensure that recipients of such scholarships include individuals who are
unrepresented or underrepresented in the respective disciplines.
 b. Within such time as the commissioner by regulations provide, the
recipient of an award shall have taught in the field or fields for which
the scholarship was awarded in an elementary or secondary school in New
York state for that number of months calculated by multiplying by five
the number of annual awards granted to the recipient except that a
recipient who as of July first, nineteen hundred ninety-three has
received fewer than three annual awards shall be exempt from such
conditions. If a recipient fails to comply fully with such condition,
the president shall be entitled to recover from such recipient an amount
which bears the same ratio to (i) the aggregate of the amount of the
awards received as (ii) the number of months the recipient failed to
comply with this condition bears to the number of months the recipient
was obligated to comply with this condition, together with interest at
ten percent per annum computed from the date on which the recipient
completed professional training. Such recovery may be made over such
period of time as is prescribed by the president. Any obligation to
comply with such provisions shall be cancelled upon the recipient's
death. The commissioner shall adopt regulations to provide for the
waiver or suspension of any financial obligation in whole or in part
where compliance would involve severe hardship. In determining whether
to grant such waiver or suspension, the commissioner may consider
whether the recipient failed to complete the registered program for the
preparation of teachers or completed such program under financial
hardship by reason of the discontinuance of funding for the award of
scholarships pursuant to this subdivision.
 7-a. New York state math and science teaching incentive program awards
pursuant to section six hundred sixty-nine-d of this title.
 8. Empire state challenger fellowships for teachers. a. Six hundred
fifty Empire state challenger fellowships shall be awarded annually in
accordance with paragraphs b, c and d of this subdivision on a
competitive basis as determined by the commissioner to individuals
enrolled in a registered graduate program in any New York institution of
higher education which leads to permanent certification as a teacher of
mathematics or science or other fields of teacher shortage as identified
by the commissioner on or after January first, nineteen hundred
eighty-six. The commissioner shall to the extent practicable ensure that
recipients of such fellowships include individuals who are unrepresented
or underrepresented in the respective disciplines.
 b. A maximum of twenty-five fellowships for full-time study shall be
reserved for teachers whose positions have been abolished within two
years preceding the date of application for a fellowship because of a
decline in student enrollment and who are qualified to pursue graduate
study to obtain certification to teach mathematics or science or other
fields of teacher shortage as identified by the commissioner on or after
January first, nineteen hundred eighty-six.
 c. A maximum of four hundred twenty-five fellowships for full-time
study shall be reserved for individuals who have earned baccalaureate
degrees in mathematics, the physical sciences, the biological sciences,
engineering or other disciplines related to fields of teacher shortage
as identified by the commissioner on or after January first, nineteen
hundred eighty-six but are not eligible for provisional or permanent
certification, and who are qualified to pursue graduate study in a
program leading to the degree of master of arts in teaching, or the
equivalent as determined by the commissioner.
 d. Not less than two hundred fellowships for part-time study shall be
made available to persons not receiving a fellowship reserved in
paragraphs b and c of this subdivision. In the event that there are
full-time fellowships reserved under such paragraphs b and c that have
not been awarded after awards have been made for all qualified
applicants, such excess number of fellowships shall be available for
award as part-time fellowships pursuant to this paragraph.
 e. Within such time as the commissioner shall by regulation provide, a
recipient of an award shall have taught in the field or fields for which
the fellowship was awarded in an elementary or secondary school in New
York state for ten months for a full-time award or for that number of
months calculated by multiplying by five the number of part-time awards
granted to the recipient. If a recipient fails to comply fully with such
condition, the president shall be entitled to recover from such
recipient an amount which bears the same ratio to (i) the aggregate of
the amount of the awards received as (ii) the number of months the
recipient failed to comply with this condition bears to the number of
months the recipient was obligated to comply with this condition,
together with interest at ten percent per annum computed from the date
on which the recipient completed professional training. Such recovery
may be made over such period of time as is prescribed by the president.
Any obligation to comply with such provisions shall be cancelled upon
the recipient's death. The commissioner shall have regulations to
provide for the waiver or suspension of any financial obligation in
whole or part under this subdivision where compliance would involve
extreme hardship. In determining whether to grant such waiver or
suspension, the commissioner may consider whether the recipient failed
to complete the registered graduate program leading to permanent
certification as a teacher or completed such program under financial
hardship by reason of the discontinuance of funding for the award of
fellowships pursuant to this subdivision.
 9. Regents physician loan forgiveness program. Regents physician loan
forgiveness awards shall be awarded annually to physicians who agree to
practice medicine in an area of New York state designated by the regents
as having a shortage of physicians. Such awards shall be classified and
allocated in accordance with regents rules.
 a. Eligibility. (1) The applicant must be a resident of New York state
and licensed to practice medicine.
 (2) The applicant must have completed a professional residency program
within the five years immediately preceding the period for which the
first award would be granted, or be within two years of completion of an
accredited residency program in a primary care specialty designated in
short supply by the board of regents.
 (3) The applicant must agree to practice medicine in an area in New
York state designated as having a shortage of physicians. The regents,
after consultation with the commissioners of health, corrections and
community supervision, mental health and developmental disabilities,
shall designate those regions and facilities of New York state which
have a shortage of physicians for the purposes of this section and
establish relative rankings thereof.
 b. Selection. The commissioner, in consultation with the commissioner
of health, shall establish criteria for the selection of participants in
the program. An applicant must satisfy at least one of the criteria
established. A priority shall be accorded to any applicant who is
completing the second year of the service requirement and is reapplying
for a new award. The criteria shall include but not be limited to the
following:
 (i) reapplication for a new award by a person who is completing the
second year of a service requirement;
 (ii) receipt of specific training in a primary care specialty or
obstetrics, determined by the regents to be in short supply;
 (iii) receipt of specific training or experience in serving a shortage
area;
 (iv) receipt of specific training or experience matching a specific
medical need existing in a shortage area; and
 (v) agreement pursuant to subdivision (d) of this section to practice
in an area determined by the regents to have a severe shortage of
primary care physician services.
 c. Notification. (1) The commissioner shall then forward approved
applications to the president and shall notify unsuccessful applicants;
 (2) The president shall verify the approved applicants':
 (i) eligibility; and
 (ii) total undergraduate and medical school student expense;
 (3) The president shall notify applicants of their award entitlement.
 d. Service requirement. Within such time as the commissioner shall by
regulation provide, a recipient of an award shall have agreed to
practice medicine in a specific area designated as having a shortage of
physicians for a period of twelve months for each annual payment to be
received by the recipient. Physicians in training who receive an award
shall not receive credit toward their required service for time spent in
a training program. In no case shall the total number of months of
service required be less than twenty-four. The president shall, in
consultation with the commissioner, develop and secure from each award
recipient, a written agreement to:
 (i) practice medicine in the designated shortage area;
 (ii) to accept Medicare and Medicaid payments; and
 (iii) to provide thirty-five hours per week of direct patient care in
the designated shortage area being served, or to the designated
population being served.
If a recipient fails to comply fully with such conditions, the president
shall be entitled to receive from such recipient an amount to be
determined by the formula:
 A = 2B (t-s)
 ---
 t
in which "A" is the amount the president is entitled to recover; "B" is
the sum of all payments made to the recipient and the interest on such
amount which would be payable if at the times such awards were paid they
were loans bearing interest at the maximum prevailing rate; "t" is the
total number of months in the recipient's period of obligated services;
and "s" is the number of months of service actually rendered by the
recipient. Any amount which the president is entitled to recover under
this paragraph shall be paid within the five-year period beginning on
the date that the recipient failed to comply with this service
condition. Nothing in the written agreement shall affect the terms of
employment of the individual who shall negotiate, separate and apart
from the program, his or her salary and other forms of employment with
an agency, institution or a program in which he or she shall be
employed.
 Any obligation to comply with such provisions as outlined in this
section shall be cancelled upon the death of the recipient. The
commissioner shall make regulations to provide for the waiver or
suspension of any financial obligation which would involve extreme
hardship.
 e. Reporting. A recipient of an award shall report annually to the New
York state higher education services corporation, and the department of
health on forms prescribed by the president, as to the performance of
the required services, commencing with the calendar year in which the
recipient begins to practice medicine in a shortage area and continuing
until the recipient shall have completed, or it is determined that he or
she shall not be obligated to complete, the required services. If the
recipient shall fail to file any report required hereunder within thirty
days of written notice to the recipient, mailed to the address shown on
the last application for an award or last report filed, whichever is
later, the president of the corporation may impose a fine of up to one
thousand dollars. The president shall have the discretion to waive the
filing of a report, excuse a delay in filing or a failure to file a
report, or waive or reduce any fine imposed for good cause shown.
 f. Other awards. Award recipients shall be eligible to apply for one
additional award.
 * 10. Regents health care professional opportunity scholarships.
Regents health care professional opportunity scholarships shall be
awarded annually to students who are beginning or engaged in an approved
program in medicine or dentistry and who are economically disadvantaged
and/or members of an underrepresented minority group, provided, however,
that to the extent that regents health care professional opportunity
scholarships are not awarded, such scholarships shall be awarded as
regents professional opportunity scholarships. These scholarships shall
be classified and allocated in accordance with regents rules.
 a. In selecting and certifying scholarship recipients under this
subdivision, priority shall be accorded to applicants in the following
order:
 (1) First, to any applicant who is economically disadvantaged as
defined by the regents and a minority historically underrepresented in
the profession as determined by the regents after consultation with the
council on professional career opportunity created by section nine
hundred forty-one of the executive law;
 (2) Second, to any applicant who is a minority underrepresented in the
profession as determined by the regents after consultation with the
council on professional career opportunity created by section nine
hundred forty-one of the executive law;
 (3) Third, to any applicant who is a graduate of the state-sponsored
opportunity program pursuant to section sixty-four hundred fifty-one or
sixty-four hundred fifty-two of this chapter.
 In the event that there are more applicants who have the same priority
than there are remaining scholarships, the commissioner shall distribute
the remaining number of such scholarships by means of a lottery or other
form of random selection.
 b. The commissioner shall then forward approved applications to the
president and shall notify unsuccessful applicants.
 c. The president shall notify applicants of their award entitlement.
 d. The president shall, in consultation with the commissioner, develop
and secure from each successful applicant a written agreement to
practice medicine or dentistry, as appropriate, in a designated shortage
area. Within such time as the commissioner shall by regulation provide,
a recipient of an award shall have practiced medicine or dentistry in an
area designated as having a shortage of physicians or dentists, as
appropriate, for that number of months calculated by multiplying by
twelve the number of annual payments received by the recipient. In no
case shall the total number of months of service required be less than
twenty-four. If a recipient fails to comply fully with such conditions,
the president shall be entitled to receive from such recipient an amount
to be determined by the formula:
 A = 2B (t-s)
 ---
 t
in which "A" is the amount the president is entitled to recover; "B" is
the sum of all payments made to the recipient and the interest on such
amount which would be payable if at the times such awards were paid they
were loans bearing interest at the maximum prevailing rate; "t" is the
total number of months in the recipient's period of obligated services;
and "s" is the number of months of service actually rendered by the
recipient. Any amount which the president is entitled to recover under
this paragraph shall be paid within the five-year period beginning on
the date that the recipient failed to comply with this service
condition. Nothing in the written agreement shall affect the terms of
employment of the individual who shall negotiate, separate and apart
from the program, his or her salary and other forms of employment with
an agency, institution or a program in which he or she shall be
employed.
 Any obligation to comply with such provisions as outlined in this
section shall be cancelled upon the death of the recipient. The
commissioner shall make regulations to provide for the waiver or
suspension of any financial obligation which would involve extreme
hardship.
 e. A recipient of an award shall report annually to the New York state
higher education services corporation, on forms prescribed by it, as to
the performance of the required services, commencing with the calendar
year in which the recipient begins to practice medicine or dentistry in
a shortage area and continuing until the recipient shall have completed,
or it is determined that he or she shall not be obligated to complete,
the required services. If the recipient shall fail to file any report
required hereunder within thirty days of written notice to the
recipient, mailed to the address shown on the last application for an
award or last report filed, whichever is later, the president of the
corporation may impose a fine of up to one thousand dollars. The
president shall have the discretion to waive the filing of a report,
excuse a delay in filing or a failure to file a report, or waive or
reduce any fine imposed for good cause shown.
 * NB Scholarship terminated per ch. 31/85, as amended
 * 11. Regents professional opportunity scholarships. a. Regents
professional opportunity scholarships shall be awarded annually to
students who are beginning or engaged in an approved program leading to
a degree in a profession licensed by the regents or other field
designated by the regents and who are economically disadvantaged and/or
members of an underrepresented minority group. Such scholarships shall
be classified and allocated in accordance with regents rules. In
selecting and certifying scholarship recipients under this subdivision,
priority shall be accorded to applicants in the following order:
 (1) First, to any applicant who is economically disadvantaged as
defined by the regents and a minority historically underrepresented in
the profession or field as determined by the regents after consultation
with the council on professional career opportunity created by section
nine hundred forty-one of the executive law;
 (2) Second, to any applicant who is a minority underrepresented in the
profession or field determined by the regents after consultation with
the council on professional career opportunity created by section nine
hundred forty-one of the executive law;
 (3) Third, to any applicant who is enrolled in or is a graduate of the
state-sponsored opportunity program pursuant to section sixty-four
hundred fifty-one or sixty-four hundred fifty-two of this chapter.
 In the event that there are more applicants who have the same priority
than there are remaining scholarships, the commissioner shall distribute
the remaining number of such scholarships by means of a lottery or other
form of random selection.
 b. The commissioner shall then forward approved applications to the
president and shall notify unsuccessful applicants.
 c. The president shall notify applicants of their award entitlement.
 d. Within such time as the commissioner shall by regulation provide, a
recipient of an award shall have resided and been employed in a
profession or field designated by the regents in New York state for that
number of months calculated by multiplying by twelve the number of
annual awards received by the recipient. If a recipient fails to comply
fully with such condition, the state shall be entitled to recover from
such recipient an amount determined by the formula:
 A = 2B (t-s)
 ---
 t
in which "A" is the amount the president is entitled to recover; "B" is
the sum of all awards paid to the recipient and the interest on such
amount which would be payable if at the times such awards were paid they
were loans bearing interest at the maximum prevailing rate; "t" is the
total number of months in the recipient's period of obligated services;
and "s" is the number of months of service actually rendered by the
recipient. Any amount which the president is entitled to recover under
this paragraph shall be paid within the five-year period beginning on
the date that the recipient failed to comply with this service
condition. Nothing in the written agreement shall affect the terms of
employment of the individual who shall negotiate, separate and apart
from the program, his or her salary and other forms of employment.
 Any obligation to comply with such provisions as outlined in this
section shall be cancelled upon the death of the recipient. The
commissioner shall make regulations to provide for the waiver or
suspension of any financial obligation which would involve extreme
hardship.
 e. A recipient of an award shall report annually to the New York state
higher education services corporation, on forms prescribed by it, as to
the performance of the required services, until the recipient shall have
completed, or it is determined that he or she shall not be obligated to
complete, the required services. If the recipient shall fail to file any
report required hereunder within thirty days of written notice to the
recipient, mailed to the address shown on the last application for an
award or last report filed, whichever is later, the president of the
corporation may impose a fine of up to one thousand dollars. The
president shall have the discretion to waive the filing of a report,
excuse a delay in filing or a failure to file a report, or waive or
reduce any fine imposed for good cause shown.
 * NB Scholarship terminated per ch. 31/85, as amended
 12. Empire state scholarships of excellence. One thousand empire state
scholarships of excellence shall be awarded each year, beginning with
the nineteen hundred eighty-six--nineteen hundred eighty-seven academic
year to students completing their high school programs who in each
county receive the highest scores on the nationally established
competitive examinations upon which the regents college scholarships are
based. The awarded scholarships shall be allocated to each county in the
state in the same ratio that the number of students residing in such
county who were graduated from approved high schools in the state during
the school year preceding the date of the examination for the award of
such scholarships bears to the total number of students residing in the
state who were graduates from approved high schools in the state during
such school year provided that no county shall be allocated less than
two scholarships, except Hamilton county which shall be allocated no
less than one scholarship. In the event that a scholarship awarded
pursuant to this subdivision is declined by a student, or, for any
reason, is revoked by the commissioner or the president, its benefits
shall lapse and there shall be no further payment or reawarding of such
scholarship.
 § 605-a. Scholarships for academic excellence. 1. (a) Beginning with
the nineteen hundred ninety-seven--ninety-eight academic year and
thereafter, scholarships for academic excellence shall be awarded to
students completing their high school programs for attendance in
approved programs. The academic merit criteria for awarding these
scholarships will be determined by taking the weighted average of a
student's score on Regents examinations taken by students prior to their
senior year in all of the following five subject areas: comprehensive
English; global studies; U.S. history/government; level 3 math; and
science, which shall consist of the weighted average of the combination
of exams taken in chemistry, biology, earth science and physics. For
those schools not offering regents examinations in all such five subject
areas, awards shall be based on criteria developed by the commissioner
and subject to the approval of the director of the budget.
 (b) School allocation. (i) Each high school in the state, as defined
in regulations of the commissioner adopted for such purpose and subject
to the approval of the director of the budget, shall be allocated: for
the nineteen hundred ninety-seven--ninety-eight academic year, a single
scholarship of one thousand dollars; and for the nineteen hundred
ninety-eight--ninety-nine academic year and thereafter, a single
scholarship of one thousand five hundred dollars which shall be awarded
to the top scholar of such school as determined by the academic merit
criteria set forth in paragraph (a) of this subdivision.
 (ii) The remaining scholarships for the nineteen hundred
ninety-seven--ninety-eight academic year of one thousand dollars, and
for the nineteen hundred ninety-eight--ninety-nine academic year and
thereafter, of one thousand five hundred dollars shall be allocated to
high schools in the state as defined in regulations of the commissioner
for such purpose and subject to the approval of the director of the
budget, in the same ratio that the number of students enrolled in the
twelfth grade at such high school in the prior school year bears to the
total number of students who were enrolled in the twelfth grade in the
state during the prior school year. The ratio shall be multiplied by the
number of scholarships available and the results, rounded to the nearest
whole number, shall be the number of scholarships allocated to the
school. Such awards shall be distributed on the basis of the academic
merit criteria as set forth in paragraph (a) of this subdivision.
 (iii) All scholarships of five hundred dollars shall be allocated in
the same manner as described in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph.
 * 2. In the event that a scholarship awarded is declined by a student,
or for any reason revoked by the commissioner or the president, its
benefits shall lapse and there shall be no further payments or awarding
of such scholarship.
 * NB Effective until July 1, 2026
 * 2. In the event that a scholarship awarded is declined by a student,
or for any reason revoked by the commissioner or the president, its
benefits shall lapse and there shall be no further payments or awarding
of such scholarship; provided however, if an award is declined by a
student prior to the end of their high school program, the scholarship
shall be awarded, to the extent practicable, to the next most qualified
student pursuant to paragraph (a) of subdivision one of this section.
 * NB Effective July 1, 2026
 § 606. County awards for professional education in nursing, medicine,
dentistry, optometry or veterinary medicine. Each county of the state
outside New York city is hereby authorized to establish awards in such
manner as the local legislative body of such county may determine, for
attendance by legal residents of this state, who meet the citizenship
requirements established by article fourteen of this chapter for the
professional study of nursing, medicine, dentistry, optometry or
veterinary medicine, at approved nursing, medical, dental, optometry or
veterinary medicine schools within the United States, conditioned upon
the promise of the scholarship holder to practice nursing, medicine,
dentistry, optometry or veterinary medicine in such county for such
period as such body may fix, following his licensing as a nurse,
physician, dentist, optometrist or veterinarian. Each such award shall
entitle the recipient to such sum of money as may be fixed by such body
while in attendance at approved nursing, medical, dental, optometry or
veterinary medicine schools in the United States during a period of not
to exceed four years of professional study and for physicians for a
further period of not to exceed two years while engaged in an internship
or as a resident physician in an accredited hospital in the United
States. Such awards may, as an alternative to awards hereinbefore
authorized, be granted by any such county to those already so licensed
to practice nursing, medicine, dentistry, optometry or veterinary
medicine upon the promise of such grantees to practice within the county
for a period of time and upon such terms and conditions as the county
may fix, provided such recipient did not receive a similar award while a
student. The county shall appropriate annually such sums of money as
may be necessary to defray the costs of such awards and moneys so
appropriated shall be deemed appropriated for a lawful county purpose
and shall be raised by the same method as moneys required for other
lawful county purposes.
 § 607. Required disclosure to matriculated students. The commissioner
of education shall promulgate rules and regulations to reflect and
administer the intent of section 493A of the Higher Education Act of
1965 as last amended by P.L. 94-482 concerning institutional and
financial aid for students.
 The information, to be disseminated through but not limited to,
college catalogues or bulletins, shall include in addition to that
information cited by congress, job placement and graduate school
placement statistics where available.
 All material required by this section and all material contained in
the bulletin shall be truthfully representative of the institution.
 § 608. World trade center memorial scholarships. 1. Notwithstanding
subdivisions three and five of section six hundred sixty-one of this
title, children, spouses and financial dependents of innocent victims
who have died or have been severely and permanently disabled, or those
innocent victims who have become severely and permanently disabled as a
direct result of an injury sustained in the impact area of the September
eleventh, two thousand one attack on the United States of America, shall
be eligible to receive a scholarship in an annual amount determined
pursuant to subdivision two of section six hundred sixty-eight-d of this
title. The attack on the United States of America shall consist of the
attack on the world trade center, the attack on the Pentagon and the
hijackings and crashes of United Airlines flights 93 and 175 and
American Airlines flights 11 and 77.
 2. Awards under this section shall be payable for each of not more
than four academic years of undergraduate study or five academic years
if a program normally requires five years, as defined by the
commissioner pursuant to this article.
 § 608-a. Military enhanced recognition, incentive and tribute
("MERIT") scholarships. 1. Eligible persons. a. Children, spouses and
financial dependents of members of the armed forces or state organized
militia who at any time on or after the second day of August, nineteen
hundred ninety, while in service in the armed forces of the United
States, as defined by subdivision eight of section one of the military
law, or in a force of the state organized militia, as defined by
subdivision nine of section one of the military law: (i) while a legal
resident of New York state, died, became severely and permanently
disabled or was classified as missing in action in a combat theater or
combat zone of operations as part of military operations related to such
military service or died as a result of injury or illness suffered or
incurred during such military service; or (ii) while a legal resident of
New York state, died or became severely and permanently disabled as a
result of injury or illness suffered or incurred during military
training operations in preparation for duty in a combat theater or
combat zone of operations.
 b. A member of the armed forces of the United States who: (i) became
severely and permanently disabled as a result of service in the armed
forces of the United States, as defined by subdivision eight of section
one of the military law, in a combat theater or combat zone of
operations as part of military operations at any time on or after the
second day of August, nineteen hundred ninety; and (ii) was a legal
resident of New York state at the time of military service.
 c. A member of the armed forces of the United States who: (i) became
severely and permanently disabled as a result of injury or illness
suffered or incurred during military training operations in preparation
for duty in a combat theater or combat zone of operations; and (ii) was
a legal resident of New York state at the time of military service.
 d. A member of the state organized militia who: (i) became severely
and permanently disabled as a result of injury or illness suffered or
incurred during active military service, as defined in subdivision six
of section one of the military law; and (ii) was a legal resident of New
York state at the time of military service.
 2. Awards under this section shall be payable for each of not more
than four academic years of undergraduate study or five years if a
program normally requires five years, as defined by the commissioner
pursuant to this article.
 § 609. Tuition, aid and placement report. In academic year two
thousand sixteen--two thousand seventeen, all non-public institutions of
higher education, recognized and approved by the regents of the
university of the state of New York, which provide a course of study
leading to the granting of a four year post-secondary degree or diploma,
except for a non-public degree-granting institution that does not offer
a program of study that leads to a baccalaureate degree, or at a
registered not-for-profit business school qualified for tax exemption
under section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code for federal income
tax purposes that does not offer a program of study that leads to a
baccalaureate degree, shall report to the senate and assembly chairs of
the higher education committees on or before August fifteenth, two
thousand sixteen, on the following: factors that drive cost increases;
tuition trends for the past six years and percentage of year to year
increases; total cost of fees; if the institution has an endowment and
the amount of such endowment; the average institutional financial aid
package by income bracket as defined by the National Center for
Education Statistics' Integrated Post-Secondary Education Data System;
graduation rates for four, five and six years; enrollment trends over
the past six years; the amount spent to educate students per FTE; the
percentage of students who are TAP and Pell eligible; administrative and
operating costs and the percentage of those costs funded by tuition; and
cost saving measures implemented over the past six years, if any.
 ARTICLE 13-A
 LIBERTY SCHOLARSHIPS
Section 610. Liberty scholarships.
 611. Liberty scholarship advisory committee.
 612. Liberty partnerships.
 § 610. Liberty scholarships. 1. Establishment of liberty scholarships.
The president of the higher education services corporation shall award
liberty scholarships for payment annually beginning with the nineteen
hundred ninety-one--nineteen hundred ninety-two academic year, and in
each academic year thereafter, to students eligible pursuant to
subdivision two of this section. In administering this program, the
president is hereby authorized to exercise all powers and duties
authorized under article fourteen of this chapter.
 2. Eligibility for scholarship. Liberty scholarships shall be awarded
to persons:
 a. who have applied for such scholarship;
 b. who have graduated from a secondary school located within New York
state or have received a high school equivalency diploma from New York
state;
 c. who have not attained the age of twenty-two as of June thirtieth
prior to the academic year for which the initial award is received and
who are undergraduate students receiving aid under this chapter for the
first time during academic year nineteen hundred ninety-one--nineteen
hundred ninety-two or thereafter;
 d. who have enrolled in an approved program in a degree-granting
institution located in New York state within twenty-four months of the
date that the recipient graduated from secondary school or received a
high school equivalency diploma, provided that those students who are
temporarily unable to avail themselves of the award due to illness,
military service or other causes in accordance with rules of the board
of regents prior to receipt of the first payment of an award may be
granted a leave of absence pursuant to regulations of the trustees of
the higher education services corporation;
 e. who satisfy the requirements of section six hundred sixty-one of
this chapter;
 f. who retain good academic standing as defined by the commissioner;
and
 g. who qualify for a scholarship pursuant to subdivision six of this
section.
 3. Application. Application for payment of a liberty scholarship shall
be made in conjunction with an application for tuition assistance in
accordance with rules of the board.
 4. Application for other student financial assistance. a. A student
enrolled in a program of full-time study shall not be entitled to
receive a scholarship unless the recipient (1) receives a tuition
assistance award or supplemental tuition assistance award pursuant to
section six hundred sixty-seven or six hundred sixty-seven-a of this
chapter and (2) receives a Pell grant award pursuant to section one
thousand seventy-a of title twenty of the United States code.
 b. A recipient enrolled in a program of part-time study shall not be
entitled to receive a scholarship unless the recipient receives a Pell
grant award pursuant to section one thousand seventy-a of title twenty
of the United States code.
 5. Duration. a. Subject to the requirements of subdivision two of this
section, a recipient shall be entitled to an annual scholarship for not
more than (1) four academic years of full-time undergraduate study or
the equivalent thereof of part-time study, or (2) five academic years,
or the equivalent thereof of part-time study, if the program of study
normally requires five years, as defined by the commissioner pursuant to
article thirteen of this chapter.
 b. For purposes of this subdivision and subdivision fourteen of
section six hundred five of this chapter, the term "part-time study"
means enrollment for at least six but less than twelve semester hours,
or the equivalent, per semester or at least four but less than eight
semester hours per quarter in an approved undergraduate program.
 c. Any semester, quarter or term of attendance during which a student
receives an award for part-time study pursuant to this section shall be
counted as one-half of a semester, quarter or term, as the case may be,
toward the maximum term of eligibility for tuition assistance awards
pursuant to section six hundred sixty-seven of this chapter.
 6. Amount. a. The president shall grant annual scholarships in the
following amounts:
 (1) If the recipient attends an institution of the city university of
New York or an institution of the state university of New York other
than the statutory colleges at Cornell, the college of environmental
science and forestry at Syracuse and the college of ceramics at Alfred,
the annual scholarship award shall be an amount equal to the non-tuition
cost of attendance at such institution or college reduced by (i) the
amount of a Pell grant and (ii) the amount of such other state and
federal scholarships and grants, other than tuition assistance or
supplemental tuition assistance received under this chapter, which do
not require repayment, awarded to the recipient for the cost of
attendance at the institution being attended, as reported to the
president; provided, however, that such scholarship shall be reduced one
dollar for every three dollars of income in excess of eighteen thousand
dollars of income; or
 (2) If the recipient attends any other degree-granting institution
within New York state and enrolls in a program approved by the
commissioner, the annual scholarship award shall be based upon an amount
equal to the average non-tuition cost of attendance, as determined by
the commissioner in consultation with the president and as approved by
the director of the budget, for a student at the state university of New
York or actual non-tuition cost of attendance at such institution,
whichever is less, reduced by (i) the amount of a Pell grant the
recipient would have been entitled to had the recipient attended the
state university of New York and (ii) the amount of such other state and
federal scholarships and grants, other than tuition assistance or
supplemental tuition assistance received under this chapter, which do
not require repayment, awarded to the recipient for the cost of
attendance at the institution being attended, as reported to the
president; provided, however, that such scholarships shall be reduced
one dollar for every three dollars of income in excess of eighteen
thousand dollars of income.
 (3) Scholarships and grants that reduce the cost of attendance for
purposes of determining the amount of a scholarship award shall not
include supplemental financial assistance provided on a last dollar
basis pursuant to the provisions of section sixty-four hundred fifty-one
or sixty-four hundred fifty-two of this chapter.
 (4) "Non-tuition cost of attendance", as used in this paragraph, shall
mean: (i) the actual amount charged by the institution for room and
board and (ii) an allowance for transportation, books and supplies as
determined by the commissioner in consultation with the president and as
approved by the director of the budget, provided that such determination
shall be made no later than December first of each year for use in the
succeeding academic year. In the event a student does not incur room or
board charges at the institution, "non-tuition cost of attendance" shall
mean an allowance for room and board as determined by the commissioner
in consultation with the president and approved by the director of the
budget. In determining allowances pursuant to this subparagraph, the
commissioner may take into consideration the allowances provided for in
the Pell grant program.
 b. For the purposes of determining annual scholarships, the term
"income" shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of
section six hundred sixty-three of this chapter, except that in making
such determination, adjusted gross income, as defined in regulations of
the trustees of the corporation, shall be used instead of New York state
net taxable income.
 c. In no event shall the combination of all student financial aid
received by a student exceed the recipient's total cost of attendance at
the institution being attended.
 7. Ineligibility for a tuition assistance, supplemental tuition
assistance or Pell grant award in a particular academic year shall not
prevent a recipient from receiving a liberty scholarship award in any
subsequent year in which such recipient shall become eligible for a
tuition assistance, supplemental tuition assistance or Pell grant award,
provided, however, the seven-year period referred to in subdivision
seven of section six hundred sixty-five of this chapter, or an
eight-year period for part-time study, shall not have elapsed.
 8. Relationship to educational opportunity programs. Liberty
scholarship recipients who qualify for admission to the educational
opportunity programs established in section sixty-four hundred fifty-one
or sixty-four hundred fifty-two of this chapter shall in no way be
precluded from participation in such programs as a result of their
status as liberty scholarship recipients. Recipients who qualify and are
selected for participation in the opportunity programs shall be eligible
to receive the same tutoring and counseling services provided to other
educational opportunity program students, and shall be eligible to
receive supplemental financial assistance through the educational
opportunity programs for any approved costs not otherwise funded under
such scholarship.
 9. Notification. The superintendent of schools or other chief school
officer of each public school district and the chief school officer of
nonpublic secondary schools shall take steps to inform students and
parents about the liberty scholarship program and various types of
student financial aid that are available for their college educations.
The corporation, in cooperation with the commissioner, shall assist such
efforts by making available to school districts, nonpublic secondary
schools and students information relating to such programs and aid. In
addition, the commissioner, in cooperation with the president and school
officials shall also provide such other information as is appropriate to
encourage students to complete high school and to assist students in
preparing to attend college.
 10. Regulations. All regulations of the commissioner or regulations of
the trustees of the corporation to implement the provisions of this
article shall be subject to the approval of the director of the budget.
 § 611. Liberty scholarship advisory committee. There is hereby
created a liberty scholarship advisory committee, which shall consist of
eleven persons appointed by the governor, two of whom shall be upon the
recommendation of the president pro tem of the senate and two of whom
shall be upon the recommendation of the speaker of the assembly. Such
members shall serve at the pleasure of the governor, except that those
recommended by other authorities shall serve at the pleasure of such
recommending authorities, and shall include, but not be limited to,
representatives of secondary schools, business and industry, labor and
nonprofit or voluntary organizations. In addition to such eleven
members, the president of the higher education services corporation, the
commissioner of education, the chancellor of the state university of New
York, the chancellor of the city university of New York and the
president of the commission of independent colleges and universities
shall serve on the committee as ex-officio members. The governor shall
designate one member to serve as chairperson of the committee. No later
than April first, nineteen hundred eighty-nine, such committee shall
prepare a plan that (i) identifies counseling and support services for
students available from institutions of higher education, secondary
schools, government agencies, business and industry, labor, nonprofit
organizations and volunteers and (ii) proposes ways in which such
counseling and support services can be coordinated to promote continuity
of counseling and support. In addition, the advisory committee shall
make recommendations as to the implementation of such plan and shall
periodically report on the degree to which such plan has been
successfully implemented. The president, commissioner and the
chancellors of the public universities shall make available personnel to
act as staff for the committee. The members of the committee shall
receive no compensation for their services, but shall be entitled to
reimbursement for their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties.
 § 612. Liberty partnerships. 1. The commissioner shall award grants
for the purpose of providing support services to students enrolled in
public and non-public schools who are identified as having a high risk
of dropping out of school. Such awards shall be made on a competitive
basis to degree-granting institutions of higher education or consortia
of degree-granting higher education institutions in cooperation with
school districts and not-for-profit community-based organizations. In
addition, in areas of the state where no degree-granting institution or
consortium of degree-granting institutions of higher education can
provide appropriate services to students, the commissioner may award
grants to not-for-profit community-based organizations in cooperation
with school districts.
 a. All grant applications shall contain the following program
elements:
 (1) a program for identifying students who are at-risk of dropping out
as measured by academic performance, attendance, discipline problems,
and other factors affecting school performance including but not limited
to teenage pregnancy or parenting, residence in a homeless shelter or
temporary living arrangement, substance abuse, child abuse or neglect,
or limited English proficiency;
 (2) a program for encouraging the use of volunteers and facilitating
parent involvement where possible and involvement of current or former
liberty scholarship recipients as peer or mentor counselors in programs;
and
 (3) a program to provide for continuity of services throughout a
student's progression through secondary school.
 b. In awarding such grants, the commissioner shall give priority to
applications that:
 (1) provide services to school districts receiving an apportionment
under subdivision twenty-five of section thirty-six hundred two of this
chapter;
 (2) provide services to schools identified by the commissioner as in
need of assistance pursuant to the comprehensive assessment report;
 (3) provide services to rural schools with students at risk;
 (4) replicate model programs of demonstrated effectiveness, including
models that provide for small group partnerships with low student-staff
ratios. The commissioner shall identify model programs with proven
effectiveness and shall make such models available to grant applicants;
 (5) demonstrate a high level of institutional commitment to programs
in fields relevant to counseling and mentoring, including but not
limited to education, social work, psychology and sociology and the
extent to which such institution shall involve faculty members and
graduate/professional students from such degree programs;
 (6) the need for such services in the area the institution proposes to
serve; and
 (7) the degree to which the institution proposes to cooperate with
school districts and not-for-profit community based organizations to
provide services and insure continuity of such services until such
students graduate from high school or receive a high school equivalency
diploma.
 c. Services for non-public school students shall be provided at sites
other than sectarian non-public schools.
 2. Services. Funds available under this section shall be used for
compensatory and support services to students who are identified as
being at risk of dropping out of school. Services to be provided under
this section may include skills assessment, tutoring, academic and
personal counseling, family counseling and home visits, staff
development activities for personnel with direct responsibility for such
students and mentoring programs.
 3. Allowable costs. Allowable costs under this program shall include,
but not be limited to: salaries of program personnel, including graduate
student stipends; transportation costs for students and program
personnel; instructional materials; reimbursement to school districts
for release time granted to employees while participating in the
planning and development of activities funded pursuant to this section;
training of program personnel; costs related directly to program
provisions, including summer and weekend activities; and administrative
costs directly attributable to the program.
 4. a. For school years commencing in nineteen hundred eighty-nine--
ninety and thereafter, the amount that shall be made available for
funding liberty partnership grants shall be equal to four percent of the
base year enrollment of children in public and non-public schools in New
York state in grades seven through twelve, as computed in accordance
with regulations of the commissioner, multiplied by seven hundred fifty
dollars, provided, however, that notwithstanding the foregoing, the
amount that shall be made available for funding liberty partnership
grants for the nineteen hundred eighty-nine--ninety, nineteen hundred
ninety--ninety-one and nineteen hundred ninety-one--ninety-two school
years shall be twenty-five percent, fifty percent, and seventy-five
percent, respectively, of the amount to be provided pursuant to this
subdivision.
 b. The grant recipients shall provide students at public and nonpublic
schools the opportunity to receive compensatory and support services in
an equitable manner consistent with the number and need of the children
in such schools.
 5. Regulations. The commissioner shall adopt regulations for the
implementation of this section.
 6. Annual report. The commissioner shall prepare an annual report
evaluating the programs funded under this section and under sections
sixty-four hundred fifty-four and sixty-four hundred fifty-five of this
chapter and making appropriate recommendations. The report shall be
submitted on or before December first, to the governor, the temporary
president of the senate and the speaker of the assembly.
 ARTICLE 13-B
 STUDENT LENDING ACCOUNTABILITY, TRANSPARENCY AND ENFORCEMENT ACT
Section 620. Definitions.
 621. Prohibition of gifts made by lending institutions to
 covered institutions and their employees.
 622. Prohibition of receipt of gifts by covered institutions.
 623. Prohibition of receipt of gifts by covered institution
 employees.
 624. Covered institution employee prohibitions and reporting
 requirements.
 625. Misleading identification of lending institutions'
 employees.
 626. Loan disclosure and prohibition of quid pro quo high risk
 loans.
 627. Standards for preferred lender lists.
 628. Proper execution of master promissory notes.
 629. Disclosures at request of covered institutions.
 630. Penalties.
 631. Rules and regulations.
 632. Non-exclusivity of rights or remedies.
 § 620. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall
have the following meanings unless otherwise specified:
 1. "Borrower" shall mean a student attending a covered institution in
this state, or a parent or person in parental relation to such student,
who also obtains an educational loan from a lending institution to pay
for or finance higher education expenses.
 2. "Covered institution" shall mean any college, vocational
institution, or approved program as defined in section six hundred one
of this title.
 3. "Covered institution employee" shall mean any employee, agent,
contractor, director, officer or trustee of a covered institution.
 4. "Educational loan" shall mean any loan that is made, insured, or
guaranteed under Part B of Title IV of the Federal Higher Education Act
of nineteen hundred sixty-five, as amended, any high risk loan or any
private loan issued by a lending institution for the purposes of paying
for or financing higher education expenses.
 5. "Gift" shall mean any discount, favor, gratuity, inducement, loan,
stock, thing of value, or other item having more than nominal value.
 a. The term "gift" shall include, but is not limited to:
 (1) Any money, service, loan, entertainment, honoraria, hospitality,
lodging costs, meals, registration fees, travel expenses, discount,
forbearance or promise;
 (2) Gifts provided in kind, by purchase of a ticket, payment in
advance, or reimbursement after expenses have been incurred;
 (3) Any computer hardware for which the recipient pays below-market
prices;
 (4) Any printing costs or services.
 b. The term "gift" shall not include any of the following:
 (1) A lending institution's own brochure or promotional literature;
 (2) Food, refreshments, training, or informational material furnished
to a covered institution employee as an integral part of a training
session, if such training contributes to the professional development of
the covered institution employee.
 c. Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect the private
philanthropic activities of banks or other lending institutions that are
unrelated to educational loans.
 6. "High risk loans" shall mean any agreement between a lending
institution and a covered institution that provides for the lending
institution to provide loans to students with a poor or no credit
history, who would otherwise not be eligible for educational loans.
 7. "Higher education expenses" shall include the following:
 a. tuition and fees;
 b. costs incurred for books, supplies, transportation, and
miscellaneous personal expenses; and
 c. room and board costs.
 8. "Lending institution" shall mean:
 a. any entity that itself or through an affiliate makes educational
loans to pay for or finance higher education expenses or that
securitizes such loans;
 b. any entity, or association of entities, that guarantees educational
loans; or
 c. any industry, trade or professional association or other entity
that receives money, related to educational loan activities, from any
entity described above in paragraphs a and b of this subdivision.
 9. "Preferred lender list" shall mean a list of one or more
recommended or suggested lending institutions that a covered institution
makes available for use, in print or any other medium or form, by
borrowers, potential borrowers or others.
 10. "Revenue sharing" shall mean any arrangement whereby a lending
institution pays a covered institution or an affiliated entity or
organization of such covered institution a percentage of the principal
of each loan directed towards the lending institution from a borrower at
the covered institution.
 § 621. Prohibition of gifts made by lending institutions to covered
institutions and their employees. 1. A lending institution may not,
directly or indirectly, offer or provide any gift to a covered
institution or a covered institution employee, in exchange for any
advantage or consideration provided to such lending institution related
to its educational loan activities.
 2. A lending institution may not engage in revenue sharing with a
covered institution.
 § 622. Prohibition of receipt of gifts by covered institutions. 1. A
covered institution may not, directly or indirectly, solicit, accept or
receive any gift from or on behalf of a lending institution, in exchange
for any advantage or consideration provided to such lending institution
related to its educational loan activities.
 2. A covered institution may not engage in revenue sharing with a
lending institution.
 § 623. Prohibition of receipt of gifts by covered institution
employees. 1. A covered institution shall require that no covered
institution employee on his or her own behalf or on behalf of another,
directly or indirectly, solicits, accepts or receives any gift from or
on behalf of a lending institution. Nothing in this section shall be
construed as prohibiting a covered institution employee from conducting
business with a lending institution, provided that such business is
unrelated in any manner whatsoever to a covered institution.
 2. A covered institution employee, on his or her own behalf or on
behalf of another, shall not directly or indirectly solicit, accept or
receive any gift from or on behalf of a lending institution. Nothing in
this section shall be construed as prohibiting a covered institution
employee from conducting business with any lending institution, provided
that such business is unrelated in any manner whatsoever with the
covered institution.
 3. Covered institution employees shall report to the department any
instance of a lending institution attempting to give a gift to such
covered institution employees.
 § 624. Covered institution employee prohibitions and reporting
requirements. 1. A lending institution shall require that no covered
institution employee receives any remuneration for serving as a member
or participant of an advisory board of a lending institution or receives
any reimbursement of expenses for so serving.
 2. A covered institution shall require that no covered institution
employee of such covered institution receives any remuneration for
serving as a member or participant of an advisory board of a lending
institution or receives any reimbursement of expenses for so serving.
 3. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting:
 a. a covered institution employee's participation on an advisory board
of a lending institution that is unrelated in any manner whatsoever to
educational loans; or
 b. a covered institution employee, who does not have a direct interest
in or does not benefit from the functions of the covered institution's
financial aid office, from serving on a board of directors of a publicly
traded or privately held company.
 4. Covered institution employees who are directly involved with or
benefit from the functions of the covered institution's financial aid
office shall be required to report to the department, in a form and
manner prescribed by the department, all participation or financial
interests related to any lending institution.
 § 625. Misleading identification of lending institutions' employees.
1. A lending institution shall require that no employee or agent of
such lending institution is identified to borrowers or potential
borrowers of a covered institution as an employee, representative or
agent of such covered institution.
 2. A covered institution shall require that no employee or agent of a
lending institution is identified to borrowers or potential borrowers of
such covered institution as an employee, representative or agent of such
covered institution.
 3. No employee, representative or agent of a lending institution may
staff a covered institution's financial aid offices.
 § 626. Loan disclosure and prohibition of quid pro quo high risk
loans. 1. Should a borrower or potential borrower consult a covered
institution's financial aid office in connection with obtaining an
educational loan to pay for or finance higher education expenses, the
covered institution shall inform the borrower or potential borrower of
all available financing options under Title IV of the Federal Higher
Education Act of nineteen hundred sixty-five, as amended, including
information on any terms and conditions of available loans under such
title that are more favorable to the borrower, before a lending
institution may provide a private educational loan to a borrower
attending a covered institution.
 2. A lending institution shall not enter into an agreement or
otherwise provide any high risk loans, in exchange for the covered
institution providing concessions or promises to the lending institution
that may prejudice other borrowers or potential borrowers.
 3. A covered institution shall not enter into an agreement or
otherwise provide any high risk loans, in exchange for the covered
institution providing concessions or promises to the lending institution
that may prejudice other borrowers or potential borrowers.
 § 627. Standards for preferred lender lists. A covered institution
that provides or makes available a preferred lender list must comply
with the following standards:
 1. A preferred lender list must disclose the process by which the
covered institution selected lending institutions for such preferred
lender list, including, but not limited to, the method and criteria used
to choose the lending institutions and the relative importance of those
criteria;
 2. A preferred lender list must state in the same font size and same
manner as the predominant text on the document that borrowers have the
right and ability to select the education loan provider of their choice,
are not required to use any of the lenders on such preferred lender
list, and will suffer no penalty for choosing a lender that is not on
such preferred lender list;
 3. The covered institution's decision to include a lending institution
on any preferred lender list and the covered institution's decision as
to where on the preferred lender list the lending institution's name
appears shall be determined solely by consideration of the best
interests of the borrowers who may use such preferred lender list
without regard to the pecuniary interests of the covered institution;
 4. The contents of any preferred lender list shall be reviewed and
updated no less than annually;
 5. No lending institution shall be placed on a preferred lender list
unless such lending institution provides assurance to the covered
institution and to borrowers who take out loans from such lending
institution that the advertised benefits upon repayment will continue to
inure to the benefit of borrowers regardless of whether the lending
institution's loans are sold;
 6. No lending institution that, to the covered institution's knowledge
after reasonable inquiry, has an agreement to sell its loans to another
unaffiliated lending institution shall be included on a preferred lender
list unless such agreement is disclosed therein in the same font size
and same manner as the predominant text on the document in which the
preferred lender list appears;
 7. No lending institution shall be placed on a covered institution's
preferred lender lists or in favored placement on a covered
institution's preferred lender lists for a particular type of loan, in
exchange for benefits provided to the covered institution or to the
covered institution's students in connection with a different type of
loan.
 § 628. Proper execution of master promissory notes. A covered
institution shall not direct in any manner whatsoever potential
borrowers to any electronic master promissory notes or other loan
agreements that do not provide a reasonable and convenient alternative
for the borrower to complete a master promissory note with any federally
approved lending institution offering the relevant loan in this state.
 § 629. Disclosures at request of covered institutions. Except for
educational loans made, insured, or guaranteed by the federal
government, upon the request of any covered institution, a lending
institution shall disclose to such covered institution, in reasonable
detail and form, the historic default rates of the borrowers from such
covered institution, and the rates of interest charged to borrowers from
such covered institution in the year preceding the disclosures and the
number of borrowers obtaining each rate of interest.
 § 630. Penalties. 1. If after providing notice and an opportunity for
a hearing the department determines that a covered institution or
lending institution has violated any terms or provisions of this
article, then the covered institution or lending institution may be
liable for a civil penalty. Regardless of the department's determination
that a covered institution or lending institution is liable for a single
violation or a series of violations under this article, the maximum
penalty shall not exceed fifty thousand dollars. In taking action
against a covered institution or lending institution, consideration
shall be given to the nature and severity of violations of this article.
 2. If after providing notice and an opportunity for a hearing the
department determines that a covered institution employee has violated
any terms or provisions of this article, then the covered institution
employee may be liable for a civil penalty. Regardless of the
department's determination that a covered institution employee is liable
for a single violation or a series of violations under this article, the
maximum penalty shall not exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars. In
taking action against a covered institution employee, consideration
shall be given to the nature and severity of violations of this article.
 3. If after providing notice and an opportunity for a hearing the
department determines that a lending institution has violated a term or
provision of this article, such lending institution shall not be placed
or remain on any covered institution's preferred lender list unless
notice of such violation is provided to all potential borrowers of the
covered institution.
 4. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the department from reaching
a settlement agreement with a covered institution, covered institution
employee or lending institution in order to effectuate the purposes of
this section. Provided, however, if such settlement agreement is reached
with a covered institution or lending institution, the department shall
provide notice of such action to all potential borrowers in a form and
manner prescribed by the department.
 5. The department shall deposit the funds generated from this section
into the student lending education account, created by section
ninety-seven-hhhh of the state finance law. Such funds shall be given to
covered institutions upon application to the department for the purposes
of:
 a. Educating borrowers and potential borrowers on the educational loan
process, including, but not limited to, available educational loan
options, understanding rates and terms of student loans, managing costs
and credit responsibilities, student loan repayment and loan
consolidation; and
 b. Reimbursing borrowers from inflated educational loan prices caused
by revenue sharing agreements between such covered institution and a
lending institution.
 § 631. Rules and regulations. The commissioner and the department
shall promulgate rules and regulations necessary for the implementation
of this article.
 § 632. Non-exclusivity of rights or remedies. Nothing in this article
shall be construed to limit, in any manner, any rights or remedies
otherwise available under law to any person or entity, including, but
not limited to, the attorney general of the state of New York.
 ARTICLE 13-C
 STUDENT DEBT; PROHIBITED PRACTICES
Section 640. Student debt; prohibited practices.
 § 640. Student debt; prohibited practices. 1. No degree-granting
institution or licensed private career school, as defined by section
five thousand one of this chapter, shall:
 (a) withhold a transcript because a student owes a debt to such
institution or school;
 (b) condition the provision of a transcript on a student's payment of
a debt to such institution or school; or
 (c) charge a higher fee or provide less favorable treatment of a
transcript request because a student owes a debt to such institution or
school, provided however, that an institution or school may charge a fee
for the issuance of a transcript.
 2. In addition to such penalties as may otherwise be applicable by
law, the superintendent of financial services may, after notice and
hearing, enjoin such transcript withholding practices and require any
institution or school found to be in violation of the provisions of this
article to pay to the people of this state a penalty of five hundred
dollars for each violation.
 3. In addition to the right of action granted to the superintendent of
financial services pursuant to this section, any person who has been
injured by reason of any violation of this section may bring an action
in their own name to enjoin such unlawful act or practice. The court
may, in its discretion, award reasonable attorneys' fees to the
prevailing plaintiff.
 ARTICLE 14
 NEW YORK STATE HIGHER EDUCATION SERVICES CORPORATION
 PART I
 CORPORATE STRUCTURE
Section 651. Definitions.
 652. New York state higher education services corporation;
 purposes; board of trustees.
 652-a. Employees of the New York state higher education
 services corporation; background checks.
 653. Powers and duties of the board.
 654. President of the corporation.
 655. Powers and duties of the president.
 656. Contributions to corporation; tax deduction thereof.
 657. Tax exemption of corporation.
 658. Supervision by the superintendent of financial
 services.
 659. Audits.
 660. Expenditure of funds.
 PART II
 STUDENT FINANCIAL AID
 SUBPART I
 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 661. Eligibility requirements and conditions governing
 awards and loans.
 662. Revocations.
 663. Income; a determinant of amount of awards.
 664. Concurrent awards.
 665. Payment.
 665-a. Institutional participation in award programs.
 SUBPART II
 GENERAL AWARDS
Section 666. Tuition awards for part-time undergraduate students.
 667. Tuition assistance program awards.
 667-a. Supplemental tuition assistance program.
 667-c. Part-time tuition assistance program awards.
 667-d. Enhanced tuition awards.
 668. Regents awards for children of deceased and disabled
 veterans.
 668-a. Regents awards for children of deceased police
 officers, peace officers, firefighters and volunteer
 firefighters.
 668-b. Memorial scholarships for children, spouses and
 financial dependents of deceased firefighters,
 volunteer firefighters, police officers, peace
 officers, and emergency medical service workers.
 668-c. Awards for Vietnam veterans' children born with Spina
 Bifida enrolled in approved undergraduate or graduate
 programs at degree granting institutions.
 668-d. World trade center memorial scholarships.
 668-e. Military enhanced recognition, incentive and tribute
 ("MERIT") scholarships.
 668-f. American Airlines flight 587 memorial scholarships.
 668-g. Continental Airlines flight 3407 memorial scholarships.
 669. Regents awards for children of deceased state
 correction officers and state civilian employees of a
 correction facility.
 669-a. Veterans tuition awards program.
 669-b. Recruitment incentive and retention program for members
 of the New York state organized militia.
 669-c. Volunteer recruitment service scholarships.
 669-d. New York state math and science teaching incentive
 program.
 669-e. New York state science, technology, engineering and
 mathematics incentive program.
 669-f. New York state masters-in-education teacher incentive
 scholarship program.
 669-g. The New York state achievement and investment in merit
 669-h. Excelsior scholarship. scholarship (NY-AIMS).
 SUBPART III
 ACADEMIC PERFORMANCE AWARDS
Section 670. Regents college scholarships.
 670-a. Empire state scholarships of excellence.
 670-b. Scholarships for academic excellence.
 671. Regents professional education in nursing scholarships.
 672. Regents professional education in medicine or dentistry
 scholarships.
 672-a. Regents professional education in optometry
 scholarships.
 672-b. Regents professional education in veterinary medicine
 scholarships.
 673. Regents physician shortage scholarships.
 674. Regents veterans with war service scholarships.
 675. Empire state challenger scholarships for teachers.
 676. Empire state challenger fellowships for teachers.
 677. Regents physician loan forgiveness program.
 677-a. Physician loan repayment program.
 678. Regents health care professional opportunity
 scholarships.
 679. Regents professional opportunity scholarships.
 SUBPART IV
 OTHER AWARDS
Section 679-a. New York state licensed social worker loan forgiveness
 program.
 679-b. Primary care practitioner scholarship program.
 679-c. Senator Patricia K. McGee nursing faculty scholarship
 program.
 679-d. New York state nursing faculty loan forgiveness
 incentive program.
 679-e. New York state district attorney and indigent legal
 services attorney loan forgiveness program.
 679-f. New York state young farmers loan forgiveness incentive
 program.
 679-g. New York state get on your feet loan forgiveness
 program.
 679-h. New York state child welfare worker incentive
 scholarship program.
 679-i. New York state child welfare worker loan forgiveness
 incentive program.
 679-j. The New York state teacher loan forgiveness program.
 PART III
 STUDENT LOANS
Section 680. Powers and duties.
 681. Capacity of minors.
 681-a. Guaranteed student loans; special requirements.
 683-a Sale of student loan; notification to borrower.
 683-b. Information furnished by the state tax commission and
 the comptroller.
 PART IV
 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section 686. Dissolution of corporation.
 687. Separability.
 688. Construction.
 689. Transfer of officers and employees.
 689-a. Tuition credits.
 PART V
 THE NEW YORK HIGHER EDUCATION LOAN PROGRAM
Section 690. Definitions.
 691. Powers and duties.
 692. Education loans; special requirements.
 693. Repayment of loans.
 694. Sale of education loans.
 694-a. Miscellaneous.
 694-b. Reporting.
 PART I
 CORPORATE STRUCTURE
Section 651. Definitions.
 652. New York state higher education services corporation;
 purposes; board of trustees.
 652-a. Employees of the New York state higher education services
 corporation; background checks.
 653. Powers and duties of the board.
 654. President of the corporation.
 655. Powers and duties of the president.
 656. Contributions to corporation; tax deduction thereof.
 657. Tax exemption of corporation.
 658. Supervision by the superintendent of financial services.
 659. Audits.
 660. Expenditure of funds.
 § 651. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall
have the following meanings unless otherwise specified:
 1. "Corporation" shall mean the New York state higher education
services corporation.
 2. "Board" shall mean the board of trustees of the New York state
higher education services corporation.
 3. "President" shall mean the president of the corporation.
 4. "College", "vocational institution" and "approved program" shall
have the same meanings as defined in article thirteen.
 5. "Academic year" shall mean the regular school year beginning July
first and ending June thirtieth.
 6. "Federal student aid programs" shall mean the programs of the
United States government making financial aid available to pay for the
cost of attending post-secondary institutions and established under
Title IV of the Higher Education Act of nineteen hundred sixty-five, as
amended, or any successor statute.
 7. "Lend" shall include one or more of the following services: the
origination, disbursement, servicing, and/or collection of any student
or parent education loan made by or on behalf of a lending institution a
government entity, or an institution of higher education for the purpose
of paying for higher education expenses as well as serving as a
secondary market for these loans.
 § 652. New York state higher education services corporation; purposes;
board of trustees. 1. There is hereby created in the State Education
Department and within the University of the State of New York as
established under the Board of Regents, an educational corporation to be
known as the New York State Higher Education Services Corporation.
 2. The purposes of such corporation shall be:
 a. To improve the post-secondary educational opportunities of eligible
students through the centralized administration of New York state
financial aid and loan programs;
 b. To coordinate the state's administrative effort in student
financial aid and loan programs with those of other levels of
government;
 c. To support the administration by the federal government, other
states, and institutions of post-secondary education of the federal
student aid programs established under Title IV of the Higher Education
Act of nineteen hundred sixty-five, as amended, or any successor
statute.
 3. The corporation shall be governed and all of its corporate powers
exercised by a board of trustees which shall consist of fifteen members,
nine of whom shall be appointed by the governor with the advice and
consent of the senate. The members not requiring the advice and consent
of the senate shall be the commissioner of education, the chancellor of
the state university, the chancellor of the city university of the city
of New York, and three students. One such student shall be the president
of the student assembly of the state university of New York, one such
student shall be the chair of the united student senate of city
university of New York, and one such student shall be a student
registered in a full time course of study at a state university
community college. In the event a student who shall be a member by
reason of his or her office in a student organization shall fail to
qualify, the student who holds the next highest office in the
organization shall be the member of the board.
 4. All members shall be at least eighteen years of age, citizens of
the United States and residents of the state. The appointed members
shall consist of two representatives of banking institutions within the
state, two such members shall be the presidents of independent
institutions of higher education within the state, one such member shall
be a president or chief executive officer of a school licensed or
registered pursuant to section five thousand one of this chapter, one
such member shall be a financial aid officer at a higher education
institution in New York, one such member shall be a president or chief
executive officer of a degree granting proprietary college located
within the state, one such member shall be a student currently
registered and in full time attendance at a degree granting independent
institution of higher education in New York, and one shall be
representative of the public.
 5. The appointed members shall serve for terms of six years each and
shall be eligible for reappointment to successive terms; provided,
however, that the student representative of the state university
community colleges shall serve for a term of one year.
 6. The board of trustees shall elect, from among its appointed
members, a chairman and vice-chairman who shall serve in such offices
for terms of one year and who shall be eligible for reelection for
successive terms. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in
the same manner as original appointments. Trustees, including the
chairman and vice-chairman, shall receive no compensation for their
services but shall be reimbursed for their expenses actually and
necessarily incurred by them in the performance of their duties under
this article.
 7. a. The board of trustees shall provide for the holding of regular
meetings and such special meetings at the call of the chairman, as may
be necessary. A majority of the trustees shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of any business and the act of the majority of the
trustees present at any meeting shall be deemed the act of the board.
 b. The agenda for any such meeting of the board of trustees shall be
available electronically on the higher education services corporation
website three days prior to the meetings and shall be considered a
public record. The attendance, minutes, voting record, and either
transcripts or video record, for any such meeting of the board of
trustees shall be electronically available on the higher education
services corporation website no later than seven days after the meeting
and shall be considered public records. Information posted on the higher
education services corporation website regarding board of trustee
meetings shall remain on the site as archived data for a minimum of ten
years.
 c. Any such meeting of the board of trustees shall be conducted in
accordance with article seven of the public officers law.
 8. The commissioner of education, the chancellor of the state
university and the chancellor of the city university each may, by
official authority filed in his or her respective department or
university, and with the secretary of the board, designate an officer of
his or her respective department or university to represent and exercise
all the powers of such commissioner or chancellor as the case may be at
all meetings of the board from which such commissioner or chancellor may
be absent.
 § 652-a. Employees of the New York state higher education services
corporation; background checks. 1. Current and prospective employees of
the corporation shall be subject to background and security clearance
investigations required in the ordinary course of the corporation's
business if background and security clearance are necessary for employee
participation or proposed participation in the administration of federal
student loans or other federal programs under the federal direct loan
program.
 2. Such background or security clearance investigation shall be
performed by the corporation or on behalf of the corporation by a state
or federal government agency authorized to perform such investigations.
The corporation shall be authorized to request and receive from the
division of criminal justice services or federal government agency
having facilities for performing such services: security clearance
information, including criminal background and credit information for
corporation employees, New York state employees seeking transfer to the
corporation under section seventy of the civil service law, New York
state employees seeking hire at the corporation who are on a preferred
list subject to section eighty-one of the civil service law, or New York
state employees seeking hire at the corporation through their place on
an eligible list as defined in section fifty-six of the civil service
law and who have successfully completed a promotional exam subject to
section fifty-two of the civil service law if such security information
is necessary for the employees to be in compliance with the
administration of federal student loans or other federal programs under
the federal direct loan program. The corporation shall inform subjects
of background and security clearance investigations of the factors to be
considered in the evaluation of the criminal background information and
credit information obtained.
 3. If an employee or prospective employee needs background and
security clearance in order to be compliant with the administration of
federal student loans or other federal programs under the federal direct
loan program, the corporation shall be authorized to require such an
employee or prospective employee to submit to the corporation or other
state or federal government agency authorized to perform such
investigations identifying information, which shall include
fingerprints, personal information, or other authorizations, required by
the corporation or the division of criminal justice services or federal
government agency authorized to perform such investigations. The
fingerprints so obtained shall be forthwith forwarded to the division of
criminal justice services for a state criminal history record check, and
the federal bureau of investigation or other federal government agency
having facilities for conducting a national criminal history record
check, for the purposes of determining whether or not criminal charges
are pending against the employee or prospective employee or whether or
not the employee or prospective employee had previously been convicted
of a crime, and such agency shall report a finding of such pending
charges and previous convictions, if any, to the corporation in writing
or by electronic means or any other method agreed upon by the
corporation and the agency. All such criminal history records or other
background information received by the corporation shall be confidential
pursuant to applicable federal and state laws, rules and regulations,
and shall not be published or in any way disclosed except to those
employees of the corporation responsible for evaluating the information
obtained or upon the request of federal officials responsible for
administration of a federal student loan program. All determinations
made pursuant to this section shall be in accordance with the provisions
of subdivision sixteen of section two hundred ninety-six of the
executive law and article twenty-three-A of the correction law unless
such provisions are in direct conflict with federal law or federal loan
program requirements. The corporation shall provide the subject of the
criminal history check or checks with a copy of any criminal history
record together with a copy of article twenty-three-A of the correction
law and inform such applicant of his or her right to seek correction of
any incorrect information contained in such record. The subject shall
have the right to seek correction of any incorrect information contained
in such records pursuant to applicable state and federal laws and
regulations. The corporation shall be responsible for any fees
associated with background and security checks required by this section
for current employees.
 § 653. Powers and duties of the board. In furtherance of the purposes
set forth in this article, the board of trustees shall have the
following powers and duties:
 1. To take, hold and preserve, on behalf of the corporation all moneys
appropriated to the corporation or otherwise available to it.
 2. a. To submit to the governor, the temporary president of the
senate, the speaker of the assembly, the senate finance committee, the
assembly ways and means committee and the standing committees of the
legislature having jurisdiction of higher education, at such times as
the director of the budget may prescribe a student aid and loan budget
request for the following state fiscal year. The budget request shall
include, but not be limited to estimates of the number and
characteristics of students eligible for aid and loans, other than
education loans made under the New York higher education loan program
pursuant to part V of this article which budget request shall be
developed by the president after consultation with the board of regents
in order to implement the student financial aid and loan programs, other
than education loans made under the New York higher education loan
program pursuant to part V of this article provided for in this article.
Notwithstanding, the budget request shall also include an estimate of
the amounts needed for state operations within the New York higher
education loan program account for purposes of the New York higher
education loan program established pursuant to part V of this article. A
copy of the budget request shall be transmitted to the commissioner for
his information. The budget request submitted by the board shall be
subject to approval annually as part of the executive budget.
 b. At the time and in the format prescribed by the Director of the
Budget, the Board shall submit to the Division of the Budget an
administrative and operating budget request. This budget request shall
be subject to approval annually as part of the executive budget.
 c. In order further to assure the payment by the corporation to
lending institutions for defaulted loans, other than education loans
made under the New York higher education loan program pursuant to part V
of this article in the respective amounts as guaranteed by the
corporation pursuant to contract, there shall be annually apportioned
and paid to the corporation such estimated amount, if any, as shall be
certified by the board to the governor and director of the budget as
necessary to provide for the payment of all such defaults for the next
ensuing state fiscal year. The board shall, as part of its annual budget
request, make and deliver to the governor and director of the budget,
its certificate stating the estimated amount, if any, required to pay
such defaults for the ensuing state fiscal year, if any, and said sums
shall be apportioned and paid to the corporation during such fiscal
year.
 3. To submit on or before November first of each calendar year an
annual report to the board of regents, the governor, the temporary
president of the senate, the speaker of the assembly, the senate finance
committee, the assembly ways and means committee and the standing
committees of the legislature having jurisdiction of higher education.
 4. To sue and be sued in the name of the corporation provided,
however, a claim for money damages against the corporation, except where
such claim is based on an alleged guarantee made by the corporation
under the federal guaranteed student loan programs or is for interest or
other subsidies payable by the federal government under such programs,
shall be made solely under and pursuant to the provisions of the court
of claims act including but not limited to service thereunder upon the
attorney general. Except in the case where the provisions of the court
of claims act apply, process in any action or proceeding may be served
upon the secretary of state as agent for the corporation, in the manner
provided by section three hundred six of the business corporation law.
Provided, however, notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law,
the venue of an action brought by or on behalf of the corporation on any
loan made or guaranteed by it which is in default, may be laid in Albany
county or any other county otherwise permitted by law and in any action
brought against the corporation the venue shall be laid in the county of
Albany. Provided further however, that in an action brought by or on
behalf of the corporation on any loan made or guaranteed by it which is
in default, a defendant shall be entitled, upon motion made in the
county in which venue has been laid and upon a showing of facts
sufficient to require a trial of any issue of fact, to a change of venue
to any other county permitted by law.
 5. To procure a policy or policies of group life insurance to insure
the repayment of loans made or guaranteed by the corporation in the
event of the death of an individual to whom a loan is made or guaranteed
hereunder.
 6. To appoint an advisory council to consist of three student
financial aid officers from public institutions of higher education,
three student financial aid officers from private institutions of higher
education, three representatives of banking institutions within the
state, and four students, one of whom shall be a student registered in a
full time course of study at an institution of the state university, one
of whom shall be a student registered in a full time course of study at
an institution of the city university of the city of New York, one of
whom shall be a student registered in a full time course of study at an
independent institution of higher education within the state, and one of
whom shall be a student registered in a full time course of study at a
community college located outside of the city of New York, to assist the
corporation on a regular basis in carrying out its purposes. The four
student members shall be appointed after consultation with and
recommendations from appropriate student organizations. Appointments
shall be for a period of three years, except that of the student members
which shall be for one year, and except that of the members first
appointed from public institutions of higher education and of the
members first appointed from private institutions of higher learning and
of the members first appointed from banking institutions, respectively,
one shall be appointed for a term of one year beginning July first,
nineteen hundred seventy-five and ending June thirtieth, nineteen
hundred seventy-six, one shall be appointed for a term of two years
beginning July first, nineteen hundred seventy-five and ending June
thirtieth, nineteen hundred seventy-seven and one shall be appointed for
a term of three years beginning July first, nineteen hundred
seventy-five and ending June thirtieth, nineteen hundred seventy-eight.
Any members whose employment or student status ceases to conform to the
above requirements shall be required to resign. Vacancies shall be
filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as original
appointments.
 7. To prescribe, with the approval of the comptroller, a system of
accounts.
 8. To take, hold and administer, on behalf of the corporation and for
any of its purposes, real property, personal property and moneys, or any
interest therein, and the income therefrom, either absolutely or in
trust, for any purpose of the corporation. The board may acquire
property or moneys for such purpose by purchase or lease in accordance
with the requirements of article eleven of the state finance law and by
the acceptance of gifts, grants, bequests, devises or loans; provided,
however, that no obligation of the corporation shall be a debt of the
state.
 9. To perform such other acts as may be necessary or appropriate to
carry out the objects and purposes of the corporation as specified in
this article including promulgation of rules and regulations, which
shall be filed in accordance with section one hundred one-a of the
executive law.
 § 654. President of the corporation. 1. The governor shall appoint,
with the advice and consent of the senate, the president of the
corporation. The president shall be the chief executive officer of the
corporation and shall serve at the pleasure of the governor.
 2. Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same
manner as the original appointment.
 3. The salary of the president shall be fixed by the governor from
appropriations made to the corporation.
 § 655. Powers and duties of the president. In administering the
provisions of this article, the president shall have the following
powers and duties:
 1. To administer the student financial aid programs specified in this
article.
 2. To receive from the commissioner the list of academic performance
award recipients in order of merit and to notify such recipients of
their status as part of their application for other general awards or
loans.
 3. To lend money and guarantee loans upon such terms and conditions
as the board may prescribe in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
 4. To propose rules and regulations, subject to approval by the board
of trustees, governing the following:
 a. Application for and the granting and administration of student aid
and loan programs, the repayment of loans or the guarantee of loans made
by the corporation; and administrative functions in support of state and
federal student aid programs.
 b. Other matters relating to the activities of the corporation,
including but not limited to the limitation, suspension or termination
of approval of aid, loan, or loan guarantee applications for students
attending or planning to attend colleges or vocational institutions
whenever the board of regents has determined that such a college or
vocational institution no longer meets minimum certification
requirements or the board of trustees has determined, after notice and
affording an opportunity for hearing, that such college or vocational
institution has violated or failed to carry out any regulation
prescribed under this article or adopted by the board of trustees
pursuant to the powers granted in this article.
 c. Procedures to be followed for submission of information by
colleges or vocational institutions as may be necessary to provide for
any administrative function by such institutions participating in any
federal or state student aid programs, including applications therefor
and repayment thereof, except that obligations of colleges shall be
limited to the following requirements:
 (i) those required by the federal student aid programs;
 (ii) periodic reports on the status of student borrowers at the
particular college;
 (iii) interviews or other appropriate communications with student
borrowers at the time an application for a loan is certified or as soon
thereafter as feasible emphasizing the importance of the loan
obligation;
 (iv) interviews or other appropriate communications with student
borrowers who are graduating or are known to be terminating their
enrollment emphasizing the importance of the loan obligation;
 (v) providing the corporation, upon request, with the last known
addresses of borrowers who have graduated or otherwise left the college
and who are in default, including any change of address known to the
college after such request;
 (vi) certification of student loans as frequently as is advisable and
feasible, and as lenders will process them (on an annual, semester,
quarterly or other academic period basis), with such certification
limited to those educational expenses approved under the federal student
aid programs;
 (vii) cooperation in whatever way is feasible and appropriate under
institutional regulations in advising defaulting borrowers of their loan
obligations.
 5. To establish, revise from time to time, charge and collect fees as
the corporation shall determine, consistent with the applicable
provisions of the New York state and federal student aid programs.
 6. To prepare and make available explanatory pamphlets concerning
state aid and loan programs.
 7. To establish a comprehensive collection of information and
materials relative to public and private sources of higher education
financial assistance available to students and to the characteristics of
the students who are the recipients of such assistance.
 8. To conduct financial aid program reviews of a post-secondary
institution's procedures and records with respect to: certification to
the corporation of eligible students for purposes of tuition assistance
program and New York state sponsored student aid programs; compliance of
financial aid programs with the provisions of this article and the
relevant portion of the regulations of the commissioner; disbursement of
tuition assistance program and other awards; and the capacity of
institutions to administer New York state and federal financial aid
programs.
 9. To request and receive from any department, division, board,
bureau, commission or agency of the state or any subdivision thereof
such assistance and data as it deems necessary to properly carry out its
powers, duties and functions.
 10. To develop for the board of trustees a proposed budget for the
following state fiscal year in such form as the board may require and in
accordance with the provisions of section six hundred fifty-three.
 11. To appoint such officers, employees and agents, as he may deem
necessary, prescribe their duties, fix their compensation and provide
for reimbursement of their expenses within amounts available therefor by
appropriation; subject, however, to the provisions of the civil service
law, which shall apply to the corporation in the same manner as such law
applies to a municipal corporation other than a city.
 12. To perform such other acts as may be necessary or appropriate to
carry out effectively the general objects and purposes of the
corporation, as specified in this article.
 § 656. Contributions to corporation; tax deduction thereof.
Notwithstanding the provisions of any general or special law all
domestic corporations or associations organized for the purpose of
carrying on business in this state, and any person, are hereby
authorized to make contributions to the New York state higher education
services corporation or to the New York higher education loan program
variable rate default reserve fund, the New York higher education loan
program fixed rate default reserve fund, or the state of New York
mortgage agency higher education loan program default reserve fund, as
applicable and such contributions shall be allowed as deductions in
computing the net taxable income of any such person, corporation or
association for purposes of any income or franchise tax imposed by the
state or any political subdivision thereof.
 § 657. Tax exemption of corporation. 1. The property, income,
obligations and activities of the corporation shall be exempt from all
taxes and assessments.
 2. The state of New York does hereby pledge to and agree with the
holders of the bonds, notes, or other obligations of the corporation
pursuant to this article, or of the state of New York mortgage agency
authorized in section two thousand four hundred six of the public
authorities law for the corporate purposes authorized in section two
thousand four hundred five-a of the public authorities law, or of any
other state entity authorized to issue bonds or notes under the New York
education loan program codified in part V of this article that are
issued for such purpose, and with the holders of such education loans,
that the provisions of law applicable to the New York education loan
program variable rate default reserve fund, the New York education loan
program fixed rate default reserve fund, or the state of New York
mortgage agency New York education loan program default reserve fund, as
applicable, and to the powers of the corporation to receive and deposit
in each such fund the applicable amounts described therein shall not be
amended in a manner adversely affecting the interests of such holders
without adequate provision being made to protect such interests and that
the corporation shall not be required to pay any taxes or assessments
upon any of its property or upon its activities pursuant to the
provisions of this article, or upon any moneys, funds, revenues or other
income held or received by the corporation, and that the obligations and
notes of the corporation and the income therefrom shall at all times be
exempt from taxation, except for estate and gift taxes and taxes on
transfers. Each of the corporation, the state of New York mortgage
agency and any such other public benefit corporation, is authorized to
include this pledge and agreement of the state in any agreements with
the holders of such bonds and with the holders of such education loans.
 § 658. Supervision by the superintendent of financial services. The
corporation in its administration of student loan programs shall be
subject to the supervision and examination of the superintendent of
financial services, but shall not be deemed to be a banking organization
nor required to pay a fee for any such supervision or examination.
 § 659. Audits. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter,
the state comptroller shall, from time to time but not less than once in
every three years, examine the books and accounts of the New York state
higher education services corporation created by this article, including
its receipts, disbursements, contracts, leases, investments and any
other matters relating to its financial standing. In lieu of such an
examination, the state comptroller is hereby authorized to accept from
the corporation an external examination of its books and accounts made
at the request of the corporation.
 § 660. Expenditure of funds. All moneys appropriated for the
Corporation, or derived from other sources in the course of the
administration thereof, shall be expended upon vouchers approved by the
president as the chief administrative officer of the corporation, or by
such employees of the corporation as shall be designated by the
president by a rule or written direction filed with the Comptroller,
when and in the manner authorized by the board.
 PART II
 STUDENT FINANCIAL AID
 SUBPART I
 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 661. Eligibility requirements and conditions governing awards
 and loans.
 662. Revocations.
 663. Income; a determinant of amount of awards.
 664. Concurrent awards.
 665. Payment.
 665-a. Institutional participation in award programs.
 § 661. Eligibility requirements and conditions governing awards and
loans. 1. Applicability. The eligibility requirements and conditions
established in this section shall apply to all general awards, academic
performance awards and student loans other than education loans made
pursuant to part V of this article.
 2. Application and recipient qualifications. At least annually and at
such times as the board shall establish, a student and, where
applicable, the parents and spouse of such student seeking aid or loans
under the provisions of this article, shall submit to the corporation on
forms it shall establish such information as the board may require.
 4. Attendance in approved courses of study in approved institutions.
To be eligible to receive payments from the president a student:
 a. Must be matriculated in an approved program, as defined by the
commissioner pursuant to article thirteen of this chapter, or pursuant
to paragraph b of this subdivision, in an institution situated in the
state, which has been approved and operating in this state for at least
one year, and has been approved for participation in federal student
financial aid programs authorized by Title IV of the Higher Education
Act of 1965, as amended. Nothing in this subdivision shall preclude
payment of an award to a recipient who receives instruction outside the
state, which instruction is conducted by an institution situated in the
state, and is part of the student's program of study at such
institution; provided, however, that nothing in this subdivision shall
preclude the receipt of a loan pursuant to section six hundred eighty of
this article; provided, further, that students not attending
institutions eligible for participating in federal Title IV financial
aid programs on or before July first, two thousand seven: (i) who
received their first award under this article before the two thousand
six--two thousand seven academic year shall be eligible for payments
until the end of the two thousand nine--two thousand ten academic year;
or (ii) who received their first award under this article for the two
thousand six--two thousand seven academic year through and including the
two thousand nine--two thousand ten academic year shall be eligible for
payments until the end of the two thousand fourteen--two thousand
fifteen academic year.
 b. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary and the
rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, the president shall
make tuition assistance program awards available to full-time resident
undergraduate students not currently eligible for awards under
subdivision three of section six hundred sixty-seven of this part and
who are attending an educational institution in this state that:
 (i) is exempt from federal taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code; and
 (ii) has its headquarters and main campus located within the state and
is eligible for funds under Title IV of the Higher Education Act of
1965, as amended; and
 (iii) is accredited by an agency recognized by the United States
secretary of education, or by a successor federal agency; and
 (iv) enrollment in which institution would render the student eligible
to receive a federal Pell grant in accordance with section one thousand
seventy of title twenty of the United States code, et. seq. and the
regulations promulgated thereunder; and
 (v) provides a program of instruction lasting at least three years,
for which the student is enrolled.
 b-1. Tuition assistance program awards that are made available to
students pursuant to paragraph b of this subdivision shall not be
awarded if an applicant:
 (i) does not meet the citizenship requirements pursuant to subdivision
three of this section;
 (ii) does not meet the income requirements pursuant to section six
hundred sixty-three of this subpart;
 (iii) does not maintain good academic standing pursuant to paragraph c
of subdivision six of section six hundred sixty-five of this subpart,
and if there is no applicable existing academic standards schedule
pursuant to such subdivision, then such recipient shall be placed on the
academic standards schedule applicable to students enrolled in a
four-year or five-year undergraduate program; or
 (iv) is in default in the repayment of any state or federal student
loan, has failed to comply with the terms of any service condition
imposed by an academic performance award made pursuant to this article,
or has failed to make a refund of any award.
 c. Must be in full-time attendance, as defined by the commissioner,
except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, and, for a
student having completed his or her second academic year, must have a
cumulative C average or its equivalent. The president may waive the
requirement that the student have a cumulative C average or its
equivalent for undue hardship based on: (i) the death of a relative of
the student; (ii) the personal injury or illness of the student; or
(iii) other extenuating circumstances; and
 d. For students who first receive aid pursuant to this chapter in
academic year nineteen hundred ninety-six--nineteen hundred ninety-seven
to academic year two thousand six--two thousand seven, must have a
certificate of graduation from a school providing secondary education,
or the recognized equivalent of such certificate; or have achieved a
passing score, as determined by the United States secretary of
education, on a federally approved examination which demonstrates that
the student can benefit from the education being offered;
 e. For students who first receive aid pursuant to this chapter in
academic year two thousand six--two thousand seven, must have a
certificate of graduation from a recognized school providing secondary
education within the United States, or the recognized equivalent of such
certificate, or have been admitted to such institution after receiving a
passing score on a federally approved ability to benefit test that has
been independently administered and evaluated, as provided by the
commissioner;
 f. For students who first receive aid pursuant to this chapter in
academic year two thousand seven--two thousand eight or thereafter, must
have (i) a certificate of graduation from a school providing secondary
education from a state within the United States; or (ii) the recognized
equivalent of such certificate; or (iii) received a passing score on a
federally approved ability to benefit test that has been identified by
the board of regents as satisfying the eligibility requirements of this
section and has been independently administered and evaluated as defined
by the commissioner; or (iv) received a high school diploma, or the
equivalent thereof, from an online high school program located within
the United States that is accredited in accordance with paragraph four
of appendix three hundred two of the Job Corps Policy and Requirements
Handbook (Guidelines for the Ongoing Quality Monitoring of Job Corps
High School Diploma (HSD) Programs), as amended from time to time;
 g. For students who are disabled as defined by the Americans With
Disability Act of 1990, 42 USC 12101, the full-time attendance
requirement is eliminated. Such disabled students may be in part-time
attendance, as defined by the commissioner in order to be eligible to
receive payments from the president.
 5. Residence. a. (i) Except as provided in subdivision two of section
six hundred seventy-four of this part and subparagraph (ii) of this
paragraph, an applicant for an award at the undergraduate level of study
must either (a) have been a legal resident of the state for at least one
year immediately preceding the beginning of the semester, quarter or
term of attendance for which application for assistance is made, or (b)
be a legal resident of the state and have been a legal resident during
his last two semesters of high school either prior to graduation, or
prior to admission to college. Provided further that persons shall be
eligible to receive awards under section six hundred sixty-eight or
section six hundred sixty-nine of this part who are currently legal
residents of the state and are otherwise qualified.
 (ii) An applicant who is not a legal resident of the state eligible
pursuant to subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, but is a United States
citizen, a permanent lawful resident, an individual who is granted U or
T non-immigrant status pursuant to the Victims of Trafficking and
Violence Protection Act of 2000, a person granted temporary protected
status pursuant to the Federal Immigration Act of 1990, an individual of
a class of refugees paroled by the attorney general of the United States
under his or her parole authority pertaining to the admission of
noncitizens to the United States, or an applicant without lawful
immigration status shall be eligible for an award at the undergraduate
level of study provided that the student:
 (a) attended a registered New York state high school for two or more
years, graduated from a registered New York state high school and
applied for attendance at the institution of higher education for the
undergraduate study for which an award is sought within five years of
receiving a New York state high school diploma; or
 (b) attended an approved New York state program for a state high
school equivalency diploma, received a state high school equivalency
diploma and applied for attendance at the institution of higher
education for the undergraduate study for which an award is sought
within five years of receiving a state high school equivalency diploma;
or
 (c) is otherwise eligible for the payment of tuition and fees at a
rate no greater than that imposed for resident students of the state
university of New York, the city university of New York or community
colleges as prescribed in subparagraph eight of paragraph h of
subdivision two of section three hundred fifty-five or paragraph (a) of
subdivision seven of section sixty-two hundred six of this chapter.
 Provided, further, that a student without lawful immigration status
shall also be required to file an affidavit with such institution of
higher education stating that the student has filed an application to
legalize his or her immigration status, or will file such an application
as soon as he or she is eligible to do so.
 b. (i) Except as otherwise provided in subparagraph (ii) of this
paragraph, an applicant for an award at the graduate level of study must
either (a) have been a legal resident of the state for at least one year
immediately preceding the beginning of the semester, quarter or term of
attendance for which application for assistance is made, or (b) be a
legal resident of the state and have been a legal resident during his
last academic year of undergraduate study and have continued to be a
legal resident until matriculation in the graduate program.
 (ii) An applicant who is not a legal resident of the state eligible
pursuant to subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, but is a United States
citizen, a permanent lawful resident, an individual who is granted U or
T non-immigrant status pursuant to the Victims of Trafficking and
Violence Protection Act of 2000, a person granted temporary protected
status pursuant to the Federal Immigration Act of 1990, an individual of
a class of refugees paroled by the attorney general of the United States
under his or her parole authority pertaining to the admission of
noncitizens to the United States, or an applicant without lawful
immigration status shall be eligible for an award at the graduate level
of study provided that the student:
 (a) attended a registered approved New York state high school for two
or more years, graduated from a registered New York state high school
and applied for attendance at the institution of higher education for
the graduate study for which an award is sought within ten years of
receiving a New York state high school diploma; or
 (b) attended an approved New York state program for a state high
school equivalency diploma, received a state high school equivalency
diploma and applied for attendance at the institution of higher
education for the graduate study for which an award is sought within ten
years of receiving a state high school equivalency diploma; or
 (c) is otherwise eligible for the payment of tuition and fees at a
rate no greater than that imposed for resident students of the state
university of New York, the city university of New York or community
colleges as prescribed in subparagraph eight of paragraph h of
subdivision two of section three hundred fifty-five or paragraph (a) of
subdivision seven of section sixty-two hundred six of this chapter.
 Provided, further, that a student without lawful immigration status
shall also be required to file an affidavit with such institution of
higher education stating that the student has filed an application to
legalize his or her immigration status, or will file such an application
as soon as he or she is eligible to do so.
 c. A student, during any period for which he receives financial
support or assistance from a parent or stepparent, or is claimed by a
parent or stepparent as a dependent for income tax purposes shall, for
the purposes of this article, be considered to reside at the residence
of such parent or stepparent, unless the student submits evidence
satisfactory to the president that the student's residence is elsewhere.
 d. If an applicant for an award allocated on a geographic basis has
more than one residence in this state, his or her residence for the
purpose of this article shall be his or her place of actual residence
during the major part of the year while attending school, as determined
by the commissioner; and further provided that an applicant who does not
have a residence in this state and is eligible for an award pursuant to
subparagraph (ii) of paragraph a or subparagraph (ii) of paragraph b of
this subdivision shall be deemed to reside in the geographic area of the
institution of higher education in which he or she attends for purposes
of an award allocated on a geographic basis.
 e. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the
contrary, the New York state eligibility requirements for receipt of
awards set forth in paragraphs a and b of this subdivision are waived
for a member, or the spouse or dependent of a member, of the armed
forces of the United States on full-time active duty and stationed in
this state.
 6. Restrictions. a. All general and academic performance awards shall
only be used in the manner prescribed by the commissioner pursuant to
article thirteen of this chapter, for the specific purpose for which the
awards are made, and no such awards shall be used to obtain professional
instruction in theology.
 b. A student who is in default on a student loan made under any
statutory New York state or federal education loan program shall be
ineligible to receive any award or loan pursuant to this article until
the student cures the default status pursuant to applicable law and
regulation.
 c. A student who has failed to comply with the terms of any service
condition imposed by an award made pursuant to this article or has
failed to repay an award made pursuant to this article, as required by
paragraph a of subdivision four of section six hundred sixty-five of
this subpart, shall be ineligible to receive any award or loan pursuant
to this article so long as such failure to comply or repay continues.
 7. Awards of student financial aid. Whenever the corporation gives
written notification to a student of the amount of student financial aid
such student will receive under the provisions of this article, such
written notification shall be accepted by the institution as a deferment
against tuition charges pending the issuance of such moneys by the
corporation, unless: (a) the institution has more current or accurate
information on file indicating the student will receive a different
amount from that calculated by the corporation, in which event the
institution's calculated amount shall be accepted as a deferment against
tuition charges pending the issuance of such moneys by the corporation,
or
 (b) the institution is waiting for corrections of financial aid forms
or income verification which the student has not yet completed, or
supplied, in which case deferment will not take place until such time as
the student has completed his or her responsibilities.
 § 662. Revocations. 1. If at any time the president determines that
the recipient of an academic performance award has failed to comply with
the regulations of the commissioner in respect to the use of such award,
or to observe the rules, regulations or conditions prescribed or imposed
by the institution attended, or that an award was made through error, or
contrary to law, he may suspend or revoke such award. In the event of a
violation of law he shall take such action as shall be required by such
law.
 2. Disposition of relinquished or revoked awards. An academic
performance award relinquished by the holder or revoked by the president
shall be issued to the next alternate in the year in which such academic
performance award was issued. However, an academic performance award
relinquished by the holder or revoked after the holder was matriculated
shall not be reawarded, nor shall any academic performance award be
awarded or reawarded after the first semester, quarter or term of
attendance following the effective date of the academic performance
award series.
 § 663. Income, a determinant of amount of awards. 1. Income defined.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, "income" shall be the
total of the combined net taxable income and income from pensions of New
York state, local governments, the federal government and any private
employer of the applicant, the applicant's spouse, and the applicant's
parents, including any pension and annuity income excluded for purposes
of taxation pursuant to paragraph three-a of subsection (c) of section
six hundred twelve of the tax law, as reported in New York state income
tax returns for the calendar year coinciding with the tax year
established by the U.S. department of education to qualify applicants
for federal student financial aid programs authorized by title IV of the
Higher Education Act of 1965, as amended, for the school year in which
application for assistance is made, except that any amount received by
an applicant as a scholarship at an educational institution or as a
fellowship grant, including the value of contributed services and
accommodations, shall not be included within the definition of "income"
for the purposes of this article. The term "parent" shall include birth
parents, stepparents, adoptive parents and the spouse of an adoptive
parent. Income, if not a whole dollar amount, shall be assumed to be
equal to the next lowest whole dollar amount. Any change in the status
of an applicant with regard to the persons responsible for the
applicant's support occurring after the beginning of any semester shall
not be considered to change the applicant's award for that semester.
 2. Separation of parents. If the parents of an applicant are living
apart, the income of the applicant shall be based upon the income of
that parent with whom the applicant is living; or who exercises custody
if the applicant is a minor, or would exercise custody if the applicant
were a minor, and any appropriate payments for the support of the
applicant from the other parent.
 3. Exclusion of parental income in the determination of the amount of
an award. a. In determining the amount of an award for students, the
income of the parents shall be excluded if the student has been
emancipated from his parents.
 b. A student shall be considered emancipated if:
 (1) The applicant is a student who was married on or before December
thirty-first of the calendar year prior to the beginning of the academic
year for which application is made or is an undergraduate student who
has reached the age of twenty-two on or before June thirtieth prior to
the academic year for which application is made and who, during the
calendar year next preceding the semester, quarter or term of attendance
for which application is made and at all times subsequent thereto up to
and including the entire period for which application is made:
 (i) has not resided and will not reside with his or her parents for
more than six weeks; and
 (ii) has not and will not receive financial assistance or support
valued in excess of seven hundred fifty dollars from his or her parents;
and
 (iii) has not and will not be claimed as a dependent by either parent
for purposes of either federal or state income tax; or
 (2) The applicant has reached the age of thirty-five on or before June
thirtieth prior to the academic year for which application is made; or
 (3) The applicant was enlisted in full time active military service in
the armed forces of the United States and (i) has been honorably
discharged from such service, or (ii) has a qualifying condition, as
defined in section one of the veterans' services law, and has received a
discharge other than bad conduct or dishonorable from such service, or
(iii) is a discharged LGBT veteran, as defined in section one of the
veterans' services law, and has received a discharge other than bad
conduct or dishonorable from such service, and, provided, however, that
the applicant has not and will not be claimed as a dependent by either
parent for purposes of either federal or state income tax.
 c. In making a determination of where a student resides for the
purposes of item (i) of subparagraph one hereof, the president may
consider such criteria as he deems appropriate. Residence by the student
in an apartment, building, or other premises owned by a parent shall be
considered residence with that parent, for the purposes of this section,
even if the student makes payment therefor in the form of rent or other
considerations.
 d. Any undergraduate student who was allowed to exclude parental
income pursuant to the provisions of subdivision three of section six
hundred three of this chapter as they existed prior to July first,
nineteen hundred seventy-four may continue to exclude such income for so
long as he continues to comply with such provisions.
 e. In making a determination of whether a student has been claimed by
a parent as a dependent for purpose of either federal or state income
tax, the president may require the student to submit a copy of that
portion of the parents' federal income tax return which includes the
parents' signature and the list of claimed dependents.
 4. Relinquishing of parental control. In determining the amount of an
award, the president may, in cases of unusual and exceptional family
circumstances warranting such action, recognize an existing condition
wherein parental control has in effect been relinquished by the parents
or others responsible for the applicant, and notwithstanding the
provisions of subdivision three of this section, the applicant has in
effect been emancipated. Provided, however, that students who have
qualified as an orphan, foster child, or ward of the court for the
purposes of federal student financial aid programs authorized by Title
IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965, as amended, shall not be
considered emancipated for the purposes of determining an award pursuant
to section six hundred sixty-seven of this article. The criteria used in
determining these cases of unusual and exceptional family circumstances
shall be established by the president with the approval of the board of
trustees and the director of the division of the budget.
 5. Adjustments of income. In the determination of income for purposes
of paragraphs a and b of subdivision three of section six hundred
sixty-seven of this part if, during the academic year in which the
applicant will receive an award, one of either the parents of the
applicant or other dependent child of such parents, the spouse of the
applicant, or one or more dependent children of the applicant, in
addition to the applicant, will be in full-time attendance in an
approved program, the combined net taxable income determined under
subdivision one of this section shall be reduced by three thousand
dollars and an additional two thousand dollars for each other such
person additional to the aforesaid persons (including the applicant) who
will be in such attendance, and the resulting amount shall be deemed the
applicable income in determining the applicant's award for the academic
year.
 6. Income tax return not filed or not including income outside New
York state. If a person required to report income to the corporation did
not file an appropriate New York state income tax return, or if the
return did not include income outside New York state, such person shall
report to the corporation what his income would have been had his total
income been subject to New York state income tax and had such income tax
return been filed.
 7. Statement of income. An applicant, the applicant's spouse, and the
applicant's parents, if their income is included in "income" for
purposes of this article, shall file annually with the corporation, in a
manner prescribed by the president, a statement of their income, signed
and affirmed as true under penalties of perjury.
 8. Verification of financial report. The state tax commission shall,
upon request by the president, compare any statement filed with the
corporation pursuant to this article or any information derived
therefrom with the state income tax returns filed by the persons making
such statement and shall report any discrepancies to the president.
 9. Confidentiality of financial reports. All statements filed with the
corporation and all reports made by the state tax commission pursuant to
this section shall be deemed confidential.
 § 664. Concurrent awards. 1. a. No person shall receive benefits
concurrently from more than one academic performance award under this
chapter, except for the regents scholarship in Cornell university. Nor
shall any person receive benefits from an academic performance award
under this chapter concurrently with any scholarship, grant, or
educational assistance under federal law that, in the judgment of the
commissioner would duplicate the purpose of such academic performance
award, except United States war orphan educational benefits or benefits
under the veterans' readjustment benefits act of nineteen hundred
sixty-six.
 b. A person may receive concurrently a tuition assistance program
award, a regents award for children of deceased and disabled veterans
and a regents award for children of deceased police officers,
firefighters and volunteer firefighters, and correction officers of the
state or any political subdivision thereof, and may also receive
benefits under one or all of these awards concurrently with an academic
performance award or federal or other awards. However, in the case of
the regents awards for children of deceased state correction officers
and state civilian employees of a correctional facility received
pursuant to the provisions of section six hundred sixty-nine of this
article, no person shall receive benefits under this award concurrently
with any other general or academic performance award under this chapter,
or with any scholarship, grant, or educational assistance under federal
law that, in the judgment of the commissioner would duplicate the
purposes of such award.
 c. A person may receive concurrently a tuition assistance award and a
scholarship for academic achievement pursuant to subdivision eighteen of
section three hundred fifty-five of this chapter.
 2. Where concurrent use of two or more awards is not permitted under
this section, a student qualifying for two or more awards must choose
which award he wishes to accept.
 3. The board shall promulgate, subject to the approval of the regents,
rules and regulations which shall govern the use of state awards and
loans concurrently with awards and loans granted to a student by any
other political entity or subdivision, institute, corporation, agency,
or foundation.
 § 665. Payment. 1. Semester payment. The annual award to each
recipient shall be paid in separate installments on a prorated basis,
for each semester, quarter, or other term of attendance during the
academic year. For an approved two-year program of study conducted on a
clock hour basis at a registered private business school, the award
shall be paid in installments by payment term as such period is defined
by the rules of the board. The board shall take into consideration in
promulgating such rules an appropriate proration of the regular program
of study provided during an academic year and the periods at which
student progress and academic standing are evaluated. In no event shall
there be less than two, nor more than four, payment terms in an academic
year, including when such year contains a semester, quarter or other
term of accelerated study, provided however, that up to thirty percent
of payments may be paid in the following academic year but no later than
August first.
 2. Payment for accelerated study. a. If the student enrolls for a term
of study which shall be beyond the regular program of study for the
academic year, an additional award shall be made for each such term of
study on the basis of an equivalent full semester, quarter, or term of
attendance during the regular academic year.
 b. If the student enrolls in a term of accelerated study as described
in paragraph a of this subdivision constituting less than the equivalent
of a full semester, quarter, or term of attendance, but at least half of
the minimum of such a full-time program, as defined by the commissioner
pursuant to article thirteen, the award for such term of study shall be
one-half of the award that would otherwise have been received for
full-time study. The total period of study for which payment may be made
shall not exceed the equivalent of the maximum period authorized for
that award. In the case of awards under subdivision four of section six
hundred sixty-seven, the base award shall be the lesser of (i) one-half
of the amount of the award provided for or (ii) the amount of tuition,
and the deduction shall be at one-half the rate that would otherwise
apply to full-time study.
 c. A student shall qualify for accelerated study upon the completion
of twenty-four credit hours, or its equivalent, from such institution in
the preceding two semesters, or the equivalent, prior to the term of the
application provided however, that the equivalent of three credits per
semester may be remedial courses and therefore such student shall be
eligible for an accelerated award after having earned a total of
eighteen degree credits in the preceding two semesters.
 3. Institutional certification, audit and payment procedure.
 a. Each institution of post-secondary education shall certify to the
corporation that each student in attendance at that institution who has
applied for a general award or academic performance award under this
article is eligible for such award in accordance with all criteria
established for such award by statute and regulation. Such certification
shall be made on forms provided by the president within such time as
required by the president and shall state that, as of the date
established by the institution in accordance with its refund policy and
the regulations of the commissioner, the student (i) has incurred a full
tuition liability for that term of attendance, (ii) was no longer
eligible for a refund upon withdrawal from study, (iii) was in full-time
attendance and (iv) satisfied all other eligibility requirements for
such award. If any student does not satisfy the necessary eligibility
requirements on that date, it shall be the responsibility of the
institution to so state, to specify whether such student was eligible
prior to that date and the amount of tuition liability incurred.
 b. The comptroller shall audit institutional adherence to the
statutes, rules and regulations governing general and academic
performance awards and shall be responsible for determining the amount,
if any, owed to the state by an institution which amount represents
overpayment to the institution on a student's behalf. The comptroller
shall report cases of suspected willful and knowing institutional
violation of such statutes, rules or regulations to the district
attorney in the county in which such institution is located.
 c. (i) Payments under this article shall be made by the comptroller
upon the certificate of the president to or for the benefit of the
recipient of each award. Such certificate shall be given upon vouchers
or other evidence provided by the student and by the institution of
attendance showing that the person named therein is entitled to receive
the sum specified, either directly or for his benefit. Payments may be
made directly to the school attended by the person named in such
certificate, on behalf of and for the benefit of such person. The
president may establish such methods of payment, including prepayment,
of awards to students or to schools on behalf of students as may effect
the orderly administration of the program as he may deem appropriate.
Selection of the method of payment shall be at the option of the
institution, provided, however, that the president may limit
participation in such alternative methods of payment to schools
fulfilling criteria established by the president to assure the
appropriate receipt and handling of funds.
 (ii) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and in accordance
with rules adopted by the board for these purposes, the president may
suspend, limit or terminate an institution's participation in the
general, academic and other award programs administered by the
corporation in the event it shall be determined after a hearing
conducted in accordance with the state administrative procedure act that
the institution has violated any statute, rule or regulation applicable
to such award programs. If the president shall determine that immediate
action is necessary in order to prevent an unreasonable risk of
substantial loss of funds administered by the corporation, the president
may, in accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the board for
this purpose, withhold payments and prepayments of awards upon the
initiation of the suspension, limitation and termination proceeding as
an emergency measure. Upon receipt of a report or other information
indicating a violation by an institution of any law or rule applicable
to the award programs affecting the eligibility of a substantial number
of students attending the institution and receiving awards, or
indicating the institution may terminate its program prior to the
completion of the term or semester or may fail to repay refunds due, the
president, in accordance with rules adopted by the board for this
purpose, may make payments and prepayments to the institution in
installments, in trust, or under such other terms and conditions as the
president may deem necessary to assure such payments shall be expended
consistent with statutory and regulatory requirements or shall be
available for application to the payment of refunds due.
 (iii) During the initial year a school shall offer approved programs,
the president may make payments and prepayments to the school in
installments, in trust, or under such other terms and conditions as the
president may deem necessary to assure such payments shall be expended
consistent with statutory and regulatory requirements or shall be
available for application to the payment of refunds due.
 d. A registered business school shall submit to the president at such
time as the rules of the board may provide a statement of such school's
financial operations and condition as of the end of the school's most
recent fiscal period prepared by an independent public auditor in
conformity with generally accepted auditing standards. Submission of
such a statement may be made a condition of further participation in the
awards program.
 4. a. Student refunds. If a student receives payment as a result of
administrative error by the institution or the corporation or a false or
erroneous statement on his application or financial form, or any other
act of omission or commission on the part of the student, his spouse, or
his parents, such that the recipient would otherwise have been
considered by the president ineligible to receive such payment, the
recipient shall be required to refund the improper payment to the state.
 b. Institutional refunds. The president shall require institutions to
refund payment to the state, and the student shall not be required to
refund such payments, when (i) the president has determined that
inadequate administrative procedures or practices of the institution
resulted in the incorrect certification of the eligibility of a program
or student, or (ii) the commissioner has determined that the institution
failed to conduct an approved program in accordance with the regulations
of the commissioner in effect when such program was conducted.
 c. The president shall be empowered to: (i) require such payment
immediately, (ii) accept a repayment schedule or installment payments
over a reasonable period of time, (iii) reduce any future award received
by such student by the amount of the refund due, or (iv) reduce any
future payments receivable by the institution on behalf of currently
eligible students by the amount of refund due with a direction to the
institution to consider each eligible student's account to have been
credited with the amount of his award eligibility for that term of
attendance. The board of trustees shall promulgate regulations governing
procedures for the assertion, appeal and recovery of a refund claimed by
the corporation against a student or an institution.
 d. If the recipient or the institution, as the case may be, without
reasonable cause, fails to promptly comply with the president's demand
for such refund, the attorney general of the state shall, upon request
of the president, bring suit to obtain such refund.
 5. Payment for prior study. If the recipient of an award under section
six hundred five of this chapter, except subdivision four thereof, has
enrolled in an approved program during the academic year prior to the
normal effective date of such aid, his scholarship shall become
effective at the time he began his regular college course and he shall
be entitled to receive payment of awards under such scholarship for such
prior study.
 6. Loss of good academic standing. a. If the recipient of an award
fails to maintain good academic standing as defined by the commissioner
pursuant to article thirteen of this chapter, which definition shall
include direction to institutions to establish standards of reasonable
progress toward completion of the program in which a student is
enrolled, the president shall suspend further payments under the award
until and unless the student shall establish, to the satisfaction of the
commissioner, promise of successful completion of the program for which
the award is made, and the president may revoke the award if the
recipient is not reinstated in good academic standing within a
reasonable time to be set by the commissioner.
 b. Students who receive their first state award during the nineteen
hundred eighty-one--nineteen hundred eighty-two academic year through
and including the two thousand five--two thousand six academic year,
shall maintain good academic standing as defined by the commissioner,
except that such standard shall not apply to students receiving aid
under section six hundred sixty-seven-a of this part.
 c. Students who receive their first state award during the two
thousand six--two thousand seven academic year and thereafter shall make
satisfactory progress toward the completion of the program's academic
requirements as provided in this paragraph. For purposes of this
subdivision, "reasonable progress toward completion of the program"
shall mean a student must complete, at a minimum, the following
requirements at the time of certification; provided that nothing shall
prevent a college from developing stricter standards to measure
reasonable progress:
 (i) For students first receiving aid in two thousand seven--two
thousand eight, through and including two thousand nine--two thousand
ten, and for students enrolled in a program of remedial study as defined
in paragraph d of this subdivision who first received aid in two
thousand seven--two thousand eight, and thereafter, and enrolled in
four-year or five-year undergraduate programs whose terms are organized
in semesters:
 Before Being 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th
 Certified
 for This
 Payment
 A Student Must 0 3 9 21 33 45 60 75 90 105
 Have Accrued at
 Least This
 Many Credits
 With At Least 0 1.1 1.2 1.3 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0
 This Grade
 Point Average
 (ii) For students first receiving aid in two thousand seven--two
thousand eight, through and including two thousand nine--two thousand
ten, and for students enrolled in a program of remedial study as defined
in paragraph d of this subdivision who first received aid in two
thousand seven--two thousand eight, and thereafter, and enrolled in
two-year undergraduate programs whose terms are organized in semesters:
 Before Being 1 2 3 4 5 6
 Certified
 for This
 Payment
 A Student 0 3 9 18 30 45
 Must Have
 Accrued at
 Least This
 Many Credits
 With at Least 0 .5 .75 1.3 2.0 2.0
 This Grade
 Point Average
 (iii) For students first receiving aid in two thousand seven--two
thousand eight, through and including two thousand nine--two thousand
ten, and for students enrolled in a program of remedial study as defined
in paragraph d of this subdivision who first received aid in two
thousand seven--two thousand eight, and thereafter, and enrolled in
four-year or five-year undergraduate programs whose terms are organized
on a trimester basis:
 Before Being 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
 Certified
 for This
 Payment
 A Student 0 2 4 9 17 25 33 40
 Must Have
 Accrued at
 Least This
 Many Credits
 With At Least 0 1.1 1.1 1.2 1.2 1.3 2.0 2.0
 This Grade
 Point Average
and,
 Before Being 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
 Certified
 for This
 Payment
 A Student 50 60 70 80 90 100 110
 Must Have
 Accrued at
 Least This
 Many Credits
 With At Least 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0
 This Grade
 Point Average
 (iv) For students first receiving aid in two thousand seven--two
thousand eight, through and including two thousand nine--two thousand
ten, and for students enrolled in a program of remedial study as defined
in paragraph d of this subdivision who first received aid in two
thousand seven--two thousand eight, and thereafter, and enrolled in
two-year undergraduate programs whose terms are organized on a trimester
basis:
 Before Being 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
 Certified
 for This
 Payment
 A Student 0 2 4 9 15 21 30 37 45
 Must Have
 Accrued at
 Least This
 Many Credits
 With At Least 0 .5 .5 .75 .75 1.3 2.0 2.0 2.0
 This Grade
 Point Average
 (v) For students first receiving aid in two thousand ten--two thousand
eleven and thereafter, who do not meet the definition of a student
enrolled in a program of remedial study as defined in paragraph d of
this subdivision, and are enrolled in a four-year or five-year
undergraduate program whose terms are organized in semesters:
 Before Being 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th
 Certified
 for This
 Payment
 A Student 0 6 15 27 39 51 66 81 96 111
 Must Have
 Accrued at
 Least This
 Many Credits
 With At Least 0 1.5 1.8 1.8 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0
 This Grade
 Point Average
 (vi) For students first receiving aid in two thousand ten--two
thousand eleven and thereafter, who do not meet the definition of a
student enrolled in a program of remedial study as defined in paragraph
d of this subdivision, and are enrolled in a two-year undergraduate
program whose terms are organized in semesters:
 Before Being 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th
 Certified
 for This
 Payment
 A Student 0 6 15 27 39 51
 Must Have
 Accrued at
 Least This
 Many Credits
 With At Least 0 1.3 1.5 1.8 2.0 2.0
 This Grade
 Point Average
 (vii) For students first receiving aid in two thousand ten--two
thousand eleven and thereafter, who do not meet the definition of a
student enrolled in a program of remedial study as defined in paragraph
d of this subdivision, and are enrolled in a four-year or five-year
undergraduate program whose terms are organized on a trimester basis:
 Before Being 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th
 Certified
 for This
 Payment
 A Student 0 4 8 14 22 30 38 46
 Must Have
 Accrued at
 Least This
 Many Credits
 With At Least 0 1.1 1.5 1.5 1.8 2.0 2.0 2.0
 This Grade
 Point Average
 and,
 Before Being 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th
 Certified
 for This
 Payment
 A Student 56 66 76 86 96 106 116
 Must Have
 Accrued at
 Least This
 Many Credits
 With At Least 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0
 This Grade
 Point Average
 (viii) For students first receiving aid in two thousand ten--two
thousand eleven and thereafter, who do not meet the definition of a
student enrolled in a program of remedial study as defined in paragraph
d of this subdivision, and are enrolled in a two-year undergraduate
program whose terms are organized on a trimester basis:
 Before Being 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th
 Certified
 for This
 Payment
 A Student 0 2 6 14 22 30 38 46 54
 Must Have
 Accrued at
 Least This
 Many Credits
 With At Least 0 1.0 1.3 1.5 1.5 1.8 2.0 2.0 2.0
 This Grade
 Point Average
 d. For purposes of paragraph c of this subdivision, a student enrolled
in a program of remedial study shall mean a student: (a) whose scores on
a recognized college placement exam or nationally recognized
standardized exam indicated the need for remediation for at least two
semesters, as certified by the appropriate college official and approved
by the commissioner; or (b) who was enrolled in at least six semester
hours of non-credit remedial courses, as approved by the commissioner,
in the first term they received a tuition assistance program award in an
approved program; or (c) who is or was enrolled in the higher education
opportunity program (HEOP), the educational opportunity program (EOP),
the search for education, elevation and knowledge (SEEK) program, or the
college discovery (CD) program.
 e. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph c of this subdivision,
for students who are disabled as defined by the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 USC 12101, and who receive their first
state award during the two thousand ten--two thousand eleven academic
year and thereafter shall make satisfactory progress toward completion
of the program's academic requirements as provided in this paragraph.
For purposes of this subdivision, "reasonable progress toward the
completion of the program" shall mean a student must complete, at a
minimum, the following requirements at the time of certification;
provided that nothing shall prevent a college from developing stricter
standards to measure reasonable progress:
 (i) For students who are disabled as defined by the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 USC 12101, first receiving aid in two
thousand ten--two thousand eleven and thereafter, and enrolled in
four-year or five-year undergraduate programs whose terms are organized
in semesters:
 Before Being 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th
 Certified
 for This
 Payment
 A Student Must 0 3 9 21 33 45 60 75 90 105
 Have Accrued
 at Least This
 Many Credits
 With At Least 0 1.5 1.8 1.8 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0
 This Grade
 Point Average
 (ii) For students who are disabled as defined by the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 USC 12101, first receiving aid in two
thousand ten--two thousand eleven and thereafter, and enrolled in
two-year undergraduate programs whose terms are organized in semesters:
 Before Being 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th
 Certified
 for This
 Payment
 A Student 0 3 9 18 30 42 51 60
 Must Have
 Accrued at
 Least This
 Many Credits
 With At Least 0 1.3 1.5 1.8 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0
 This Grade
 Point Average
 (iii) For students who are disabled as defined by the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 USC 12101, first receiving aid in two
thousand ten--two thousand eleven and thereafter, and enrolled in
four-year or five-year undergraduate programs whose terms are organized
on a trimester basis:
 Before Being 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th
 Certified
 for This
 Payment
 A Student 0 2 4 9 17 25 33 40
 Must Have
 Accrued at
 Least This
 Many Credits
 With At Least 0 1.1 1.5 1.5 1.8 2.0 2.0 2.0
 This Grade
 Point Average
and,
 Before Being 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th
 Certified
 for This
 Payment
 A Student 50 60 70 80 90 100 110
 Must Have
 Accrued at
 Least This
 Many Credits
 With At Least 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0
 This Grade
 Point Average
 (iv) For students who are disabled as defined by the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 USC 12101, first receiving aid in two
thousand ten--two thousand eleven and thereafter, and enrolled in
two-year undergraduate programs whose terms are organized on a trimester
basis:
 Before Being 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th
 Certified
 for This
 Payment
 A Student 0 2 4 9 15 21 30 37
 Must Have
 Accrued at
 Least This
 Many Credits
 With At Least 0 1.0 1.3 1.5 1.5 1.8 2.0 2.0
 This Grade
 Point Average
and,
 Before Being 9th 10th 11th 12th
 Certified
 for This
 Payment
 A Student 45 50 55 60
 Must Have
 Accrued at
 Least This
 Many Credits
 With At Least 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0
 This Grade
 Point Average
 (v) Notwithstanding any other provision of law or regulation to the
contrary, upon each certification, payment eligibility shall be
determined and measured proportionally in equivalence with full time
study for students who are disabled as defined by the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 USC 12101.
 7. Availability of academic performance awards. Except as provided
herein, payment of academic awards may be made for a period of seven
years beginning with the academic year in which payment is first
available. In the event that a person entitled to such an award is
engaged in active service in the armed forces of the United States or
active service in the national welfare in a program such as the peace
corps, an extension of the seven year period equivalent to the period of
such active service but not in excess of three years may be granted upon
application to the corporation. A recipient who is ineligible for
payment of an award in the first academic year of eligibility due to
attendance in an ineligible out of state school shall not be thereafter
eligible for any other payments of such award. Recipients of an award
which may be reawarded who are temporarily unable to avail themselves of
the benefits of the award due to illness or other cause established by
the board of regents prior to receipt and utilization of the first
payment of such award, may apply for a temporary leave of absence
pursuant to the regulations of the corporation. The provisions of this
subdivision shall not be considered to increase or in any way alter the
number, amount or methods of payments made under an academic performance
award.
 § 665-a. Institutional participation in award programs. 1.
Participation agreement. No institution may participate in the general,
academic or other award programs described in this article unless it
shall have entered into a written agreement with the corporation under
which it shall be bound to comply with all laws and rules applicable to
such programs. The participation agreement may contain such other terms
and conditions, consistent with such applicable laws, rules and
procedures, as the president may require in accordance with rules
adopted for this purpose by the board and shall be developed in
consultation with the commissioner of education.
 In accordance with rules adopted by the board for this purpose, the
president, may suspend, limit or terminate an institution's
participation in these programs in the event it shall be determined
after a hearing conducted in accordance with the state administrative
procedure act that the institution has violated any applicable laws,
rules or procedures provided for under the agreement in accordance with
law and the rules of the board.
 2. Reports. In accordance with rules adopted by the board for this
purpose, the president may require an institution participating in the
general, academic and other award programs to certify on such forms as
the president may prescribe at the commencement of its semester, term or
other period of attendance, or at such other times as the president may
direct, the manner in which the records are being maintained to
demonstrate the eligibility of the students the institution certifies as
eligible for the receipt of awards under the provisions of subdivision
three of section six hundred sixty-five of this article during such
semester, term or period of attendance. The president may suspend, limit
or terminate an institution's participation in the general, academic and
other award programs administered by the corporation in the event it
shall be determined after a hearing conducted in accordance with the
state administrative procedure act that the institution has failed or
refused to submit such certified report after written demand therefor,
or shall have willfully submitted a materially false report.
 3. Contingencies on the receipt of state funding. (a) An institution
shall not, as a condition of any award or loan pursuant to this article,
require any student to:
 (i) submit to mandatory arbitration to resolve any matter relating to
such award or loan prior to the commencement of any legal action to
enforce an entitlement thereto;
 (ii) resolve a complaint relating to any award or loan through an
internal dispute process;
 (iii) waive any right, forum, or procedure for a violation of any
provision of this chapter, including the right to file and pursue a
civil action, class action or a complaint with, or otherwise notify, any
state agency, other public prosecutor, law enforcement agency, or any
court or other governmental entity of any alleged violation; or
 (iv) be prohibited from disclosing, discussing, describing or
commenting upon the terms of the agreement or any violation thereof.
 (b) An institution shall not threaten, retaliate or discriminate
against any student eligible for such award or loan because of the
refusal by such student to consent to mandatory arbitration, to resolve
a complaint through an internal dispute process, to waive any right,
forum, or procedure for a violation of this chapter, including the right
to file and pursue a civil action, class action or a complaint with, or
otherwise notify, any state agency, other public prosecutor, law
enforcement agency, or any court or other governmental entity of any
alleged violation, or not to disclose, discuss, describe or comment upon
the terms of the agreement or any violation thereof.
 (c) For purposes of this subdivision, an agreement that requires a
student to opt out of a waiver or take any affirmative action in order
to preserve their rights is deemed a condition that violates paragraph
(a) of this subdivision.
 (d) In addition to injunctive relief and any other remedies available,
a court may award a prevailing plaintiff enforcing their rights under
this subdivision reasonable attorneys' fees.
 (e) Nothing in this subdivision is intended to invalidate a written
arbitration agreement that is otherwise enforceable under the Federal
Arbitration Act.
 SUBPART II
 GENERAL AWARDS
Section 667. Tuition assistance program awards.
 667-a. Supplemental tuition assistance program.
 667-c. Part-time tuition assistance program awards.
 667-d. Enhanced tuition awards.
 668. Regents awards for children of deceased and disabled
 veterans.
 668-a. Regents awards for children of deceased police
 officers, peace officers, firefighters and volunteer
 firefighters.
 668-b. Memorial scholarships for children, spouses and
 financial dependents of deceased firefighters,
 volunteer firefighters, police officers, peace
 officers, and emergency medical service workers.
 668-c. Awards for Vietnam veterans' children born with Spina
 Bifida enrolled in approved undergraduate or graduate
 programs at degree granting institutions.
 668-d. World trade center memorial scholarships.
 668-e. Military enhanced recognition, incentive and tribute
 ("MERIT") scholarships.
 668-f. American Airlines flight 587 memorial scholarships.
 668-g. Continental Airlines flight 3407 memorial scholarships.
 669. Regents awards for children of deceased state
 correction officers and state civilian employees of a
 correction facility.
 669-a. Veterans tuition awards program.
 669-b. Recruitment incentive and retention program for members
 of the New York state organized militia.
 669-d. New York state math and science teaching incentive
 program.
 669-e. New York state science, technology, engineering and
 mathematics incentive program.
 669-f. New York state masters-in-education teacher incentive
 scholarship program.
 669-g. The New York state achievement and investment in merit
 scholarship (NY-AIMS).
 669-h. Excelsior scholarship.
 § 667. Tuition assistance program awards. 1. Recipient
qualifications. Tuition assistance program awards are available for all
students who are enrolled in approved programs and who demonstrate the
ability to complete such courses, in accordance with standards
established by the commissioner provided, however, that no award shall
be made unless tuition (exclusive of educational fees) and, if
applicable, the college fee levied by the state university of New York
pursuant to the April first, nineteen hundred sixty-four financing
agreements with the New York state dormitory authority charged for the
program in which the student is enrolled total at least two hundred
dollars a year, and provided further that, no award can exceed one
hundred percent of the amount of tuition charged.
 2. Duration. No undergraduate shall be eligible for more than four
academic years of study, or five academic years if the program of study
normally requires five years. Students enrolled in a program of remedial
study, approved by the commissioner in an institution of higher
education and intended to culminate in a degree in undergraduate study
shall, for purposes of this section, be considered as enrolled in a
program of study normally requiring five years. An undergraduate student
enrolled in an eligible two year program of study approved by the
commissioner shall be eligible for no more than three academic years of
study. An undergraduate student enrolled in an approved two or four-year
program of study approved by the commissioner who must transfer to
another institution as a result of permanent college closure shall be
eligible for up to two additional semesters, or their equivalent, to the
extent credits necessary to complete the student's program of study were
deemed non-transferable from the closed institution or were deemed not
applicable to such student's program of study by the new institution.
Any semester, quarter, or term of attendance during which a student
receives any award under this article, after the effective date of the
former scholar incentive program and prior to academic year nineteen
hundred eighty-nine--nineteen hundred ninety, shall be counted toward
the maximum term of eligibility for tuition assistance under this
section, except that any semester, quarter or term of attendance during
which a student received an award pursuant to section six hundred
sixty-six of this subpart shall be counted as one-half of a semester,
quarter or term, as the case may be, toward the maximum term of
eligibility under this section. Any semester, quarter or term of
attendance during which a student received an award pursuant to section
six hundred sixty-seven-a of this subpart shall not be counted toward
the maximum term of eligibility under this section.
 3. Tuition assistance program awards.
 a. Amount. The president shall make awards to students enrolled in
degree-granting institutions or registered not-for-profit business
schools qualified for tax exemption under § 501(c)(3) of the internal
revenue code for federal income tax purposes in the following amounts:
 (i) For each year of undergraduate study, assistance shall be provided
as computed on the basis of the amount which is the lesser of the
following:
 (A) (1) In the case of students who have not been granted an exclusion
of parental income, who have qualified as an orphan, foster child, or
ward of the court for the purposes of federal student financial aid
programs authorized by Title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965, as
amended, or had a dependent for income tax purposes during the tax year
next preceding the academic year for which application is made, except
for those students who have been granted exclusion of parental income
who have a spouse but no other dependent:
 (a) Five thousand dollars, except starting in two thousand
fourteen-two thousand fifteen such students shall receive five thousand
one hundred sixty-five dollars, and except starting in two thousand
twenty-one--two thousand twenty-two and thereafter such students shall
receive five thousand six hundred sixty-five dollars, provided however
that nothing herein shall be construed as increasing any award made
pursuant to this section for an academic year prior to two thousand
twenty-one--two thousand twenty-two; or
 (b) For undergraduate students enrolled in a program of study at a
non-public degree-granting institution that does not offer a program of
study that leads to a baccalaureate degree, or at a registered
not-for-profit business school qualified for tax exemption under section
501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code for federal income tax purposes
that does not offer a program of study that leads to a baccalaureate
degree, four thousand dollars, except starting in two thousand
twenty-one--two thousand twenty-two and thereafter such students shall
receive four thousand five hundred dollars. Provided, however, that this
subitem shall not apply to students enrolled in a program of study
leading to a certificate or degree in nursing.
 (2) In the case of students receiving awards pursuant to subparagraph
(iii) of this paragraph and those students who have been granted
exclusion of parental income who have a spouse but no other dependent
beginning in the two thousand twenty-one--two thousand twenty-two
academic year and thereafter, three thousand five hundred twenty-five
dollars, provided that nothing herein shall be construed as increasing
any award made for any prior academic year; or
 (B) (1) Ninety-five percent of the amount of tuition (exclusive of
educational fees) charged and, if applicable, the college fee levied by
the state university of New York pursuant to the April first, nineteen
hundred sixty-four financing agreement with the New York state dormitory
authority.
 (2) For the two thousand one--two thousand two academic year and
thereafter one hundred percent of the amount of tuition (exclusive of
educational fees) charged and, if applicable, the college fee levied by
the state university of New York pursuant to the April first, nineteen
hundred sixty-four financing agreement with the New York state dormitory
authority.
 (ii) Except for students as noted in subparagraph (iii) of this
paragraph, the base amount as determined from subparagraph (i) of this
paragraph, shall be reduced in relation to income as follows:
Amount of income Schedule of reduction
 of base amount
(A) Less than seven thousand None
 dollars
(B) Seven thousand dollars or Seven per centum of excess
 more, but less than eleven over seven thousand dollars
 thousand dollars
(C) Eleven thousand dollars or Two hundred eighty dollars
 more, but less than eighteen plus ten per centum of excess
 thousand dollars over eleven thousand dollars
(D) Eighteen thousand dollars or Nine hundred eighty dollars
 more, but not more than one plus twelve per centum of
 hundred twenty-five excess over eighteen
 thousand dollars thousand dollars
 (iii) (A) For students who have been granted exclusion of parental
income and were single with no dependent for income tax purposes during
the tax year next preceding the academic year for which application is
made, the base amount, as determined in subparagraph (i) of this
paragraph, shall be reduced in relation to income as follows:
Amount of income Schedule of reduction
 of base amount
(1) Less than three thousand None
 dollars
(2) Three thousand dollars or Thirty-one per centum of
 more, but not more than thirty amount in excess of three
 thousand dollars thousand dollars
(B) For those students who have been granted exclusion of parental
income who have a spouse but no other dependent, for income tax purposes
during the tax year next preceding the academic year for which
application is made, the base amount, as determined in subparagraph (i)
of this paragraph, shall be reduced in relation to income as follows:
Amount of income Schedule of reduction
 of base amount
(1) Less than seven thousand None
 dollars
(2) Seven thousand dollars or Seven per centum of excess
 more, but less than eleven over seven thousand dollars
 thousand dollars
(3) Eleven thousand dollars or Two hundred eighty dollars
 more, but less than eighteen plus ten per centum of excess
 thousand dollars over eleven thousand dollars
(4) Eighteen thousand dollars or Nine hundred eighty dollars
 more, but not more than sixty plus twelve per centum of
 thousand dollars excess over eighteen
 thousand dollars
 (iv) If the amount of reduction is not a whole dollar, it shall be
reduced to the next lowest whole dollar. In the case of any student who
has received four or more payments pursuant to any and all awards
provided for in this subdivision, for the two thousand--two thousand one
academic year the base amount shall be reduced by an additional one
hundred fifty dollars for the two thousand one--two thousand two
academic year and thereafter the base amount shall be reduced by an
additional one hundred dollars.
 (v) The award shall be the net amount of the base amount determined
pursuant to subparagraph (i) of this paragraph reduced pursuant to
subparagraph (ii) or (iii) of this paragraph but the award shall not be
reduced for the two thousand--two thousand one and two thousand one--two
thousand two academic years below two hundred seventy-five dollars if
the amount of income is eighty thousand dollars or less and more than
seventy thousand dollars, three hundred twenty-five dollars if the
amount of income is seventy thousand dollars or less and more than sixty
thousand dollars and four hundred twenty-five dollars if the amount of
income is sixty thousand dollars or less.
 (vi) For the two thousand two--two thousand three through two thousand
twenty-three--twenty-four academic years, the award shall be the net
amount of the base amount determined pursuant to subparagraph (i) of
this paragraph reduced pursuant to subparagraph (ii) or (iii) of this
paragraph but the award shall not be reduced below five hundred dollars.
 (vii) For the two thousand twenty-four--two thousand twenty-five
academic year and thereafter, the award shall be the net amount of the
base amount determined pursuant to subparagraph (i) of this paragraph
reduced pursuant to subparagraph (ii) or (iii) of this paragraph but the
award shall not be reduced below one thousand dollars.
 b. Amount. The president shall make awards to students enrolled in two
year programs offered in registered private business schools except for
registered not-for-profit business schools qualified for tax exemption
under section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code for federal income
tax purposes in the following amounts:
 (i) For each year of study, assistance shall be provided as computed
on the basis of the amount which is the lesser of the following:
 (A) (1) one thousand three hundred dollars, or
 (2) for students receiving awards pursuant to subparagraph (iii) of
this paragraph, one thousand one hundred forty dollars; or
 (B) (1) Ninety-five percent of the amount of tuition (exclusive of
educational fees) charged.
 (2) For the two thousand one--two thousand two academic year and
thereafter one hundred percent of the amount of tuition (exclusive of
educational fees).
 (ii) Except for students as noted in subparagraph (iii) of this
paragraph, the base amount as determined in subparagraph (i) of this
paragraph, shall be reduced in relation to income as follows:
Amount of income Schedule of reduction
 of base amount
(A) Less than seven thousand None
 dollars
(B) Seven thousand dollars or Seven per centum of the excess
 more, but less than eleven over seven thousand dollars
 thousand dollars
 (iii) For students who have been granted exclusion of parental income
and were single with no dependent for income tax purposes during the tax
year next preceding the academic year for which application is made, the
base amount, as determined in subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, shall
be reduced in relation to income as follows:
Amount of income Schedule of reduction of
 base amount
(A) Less than three thousand None
 dollars
(B) Three thousand dollars or Thirty-one per centum of the ex-
 more, but not more than ten cess over three thousand dollars
 thousand dollars
 (iv) If the amount of reduction is not a whole dollar, it shall be
reduced to the next lowest whole dollar. In the case of any student who
has received four or more payments pursuant to any and all awards
provided for in this subdivision, for the two thousand--two thousand one
academic year the base amount shall be reduced by an additional one
hundred fifty dollars for the two thousand one--two thousand two
academic year and thereafter the base amount shall be reduced by an
additional one hundred dollars.
 (v) The award shall be the net amount of the base amount determined
pursuant to subparagraph (i) of this paragraph reduced pursuant to
subparagraph (ii) or (iii) of this paragraph but the award shall not be
reduced below one hundred dollars. If the income exceeds the maximum
amount of income allowable under subparagraph (ii) or (iii) of this
paragraph, no award shall be made.
 c. Restrictions. In no even shall shall any award:
 (i) be made unless the annual tuition (exclusive of educational fees)
and, if applicable, the college fee levied by the state university of
New York pursuant to the April first, nineteen hundred sixty-four
financing agreement with the New York state dormitory authority charged
for the program in which the student is enrolled total at least two
hundred dollars; or
 (ii) exceed the amount by which such annual tuition (exclusive of
educational fees) and, if applicable, the college fee levied by the
state university of New York pursuant to the April first, nineteen
hundred sixty-four financing agreement with the New York state dormitory
authority exceed the total of all other state, federal, or other
educational aid that is received or receivable by such student during
the school year for which such award is applicable and that, in the
judgment of the commissioner, would duplicate the purposes of the award;
or
 (iii) be made when income exceeds the maximum income set forth in this
subdivision. The commissioner shall list in his regulations all major
state and federal financial aid available to New York state students and
identify any forms of aid that are duplicative of the purposes of the
tuition assistance program. For the purposes of this subdivision,
neither United States war orphan educational benefits nor benefits under
the veterans' readjustment act of nineteen hundred sixty-six shall be
considered as federal or other educational aid.
 § 667-a. Supplemental tuition assistance program. 1. Legislative
intent. The legislature hereby finds that to further the goal of equal
opportunity it is necessary to assure the availability of supplemental
assistance for the successful remediation of educationally disadvantaged
students in addition to assistance currently available under existing
statute for students with financial need. Accordingly, tuition
assistance shall be extended to students whose need for remediation
precludes them from fulfilling the program pursuit and academic progress
requirements of the tuition assistance program.
 2. Operation. (a) The supplemental tuition assistance program shall
be governed by all law, rules and regulations pertaining to the tuition
assistance program provided however that, notwithstanding any law, rule
and regulation to the contrary, eligibility for supplemental tuition
assistance program awards shall be limited to any undergraduate student
receiving aid under this article for the first time during school year
nineteen hundred ninety-five--nineteen hundred ninety-six or thereafter
who meets both of the following conditions:
 (i) The student shall not be enrolled in the higher education
opportunity program, educational opportunity program, the Percy Ellis
Sutton search for education, elevation and knowledge program or the
college discovery program.
 (ii) The student must be accepted into an institution of higher
education and be enrolled in an approved non-credit bearing remediation
program in the summer immediately preceding and/or immediately following
the initial year of matriculated study.
 (b) Students who meet the conditions described in paragraph (a) of
this subdivision shall be eligible to receive up to one quarter of the
annual tuition assistance program award for each session, up to two
sessions, of summer remediation in addition to those tuition assistance
program awards specified in subdivision two of section six hundred
sixty-seven of this article.
 § 667-c. Part-time tuition assistance program awards. 1.
Notwithstanding any law, rule or regulation to the contrary, the
president of the higher education services corporation is authorized to
make tuition assistance program awards to:
 a. part-time students enrolled at a degree granting institution of
higher education incorporated by the regents or by the legislature who
meet all requirements for tuition assistance program awards except for
the students' part-time attendance; or
 b. part-time students enrolled at a community college or a public
agricultural and technical college in a non-degree workforce credential
program directly leading to the employment or advancement of a student
in a "significant industry" as identified by the department of labor in
its three most recent statewide significant industries reports published
preceding the student's enrollment in such non-degree workforce
credential program. The state university of New York and the city
university of New York shall publish and maintain a master list of all
eligible non-degree workforce credential program courses and update such
list every semester. Eligible non-degree workforce credential programs
shall include those programs less than twelve semester hours, or the
equivalent, per semester. A student who successfully completes a
non-degree workforce credential program and receives part-time tuition
assistance program awards pursuant to this paragraph shall be awarded
academic credit by the state university of New York or city university
of New York upon matriculation into a degree program at such
institution, provided that such credit shall be equal to the
corresponding credit hours earned in the non-degree workforce credential
program.
 2. For purposes of this section:
 a. for students defined in paragraph a of subdivision one of this
section, a part-time student is one who: (i) is enrolled at a college or
university within the state university, including a statutory or
contract college, a community college established pursuant to article
one hundred twenty-six of this chapter, the city university of New York,
or a non-profit college or university incorporated by the regents or by
the legislature;
 (ii) is enrolled for at least three but less than twelve semester
hours, or the equivalent, per semester in an approved undergraduate
degree program; and
 (iii) has a cumulative grade-point average of at least 2.00.
 b. for students defined in paragraph b of subdivision one of this
section, a part-time student is one who: (i) meets all requirements for
tuition assistance program awards except for the student's part-time
attendance and any other requirements that are inconsistent with the
student's enrollment in a non-degree workforce credential program; and
 (ii) is enrolled in an approved non-degree workforce credential
program at a community college or a public agricultural and technical
college pursuant to paragraph b of subdivision one of this section.
 3. a. For part-time students defined in this section, the award shall
be calculated as provided in section six hundred sixty-seven of this
article and shall be in an amount equal to the enrollment factor percent
of the award the student would have been eligible for if the student
were enrolled full-time. For part-time students defined in paragraph a
of subdivision one of this section, the enrollment factor percent is the
percentage obtained by dividing the number of credits the student is
enrolled in, as certified by the school, by the number of credits
required for full-time study in the semester, quarter or term as defined
by the commissioner. For part-time students defined in paragraph b of
subdivision one of this section, the enrollment factor shall be
calculated pursuant to regulations established by the higher education
services corporation.
 b. (i) For part-time students defined in paragraph a of subdivision
one of this section, any semester, quarter or term of attendance during
which a student receives an award pursuant to this section shall be
counted as the enrollment factor percent of a semester, quarter or term
toward the maximum term of eligibility for tuition assistance awards
pursuant to section six hundred sixty-seven of this article. The total
period of study for which payment may be made shall not exceed the
equivalent of the maximum period authorized for that award.
 (ii) For part-time students defined in paragraph b of subdivision one
of this section, the total period of study for which payment may be made
shall not exceed the equivalent of the maximum period authorized for the
non-degree workforce credential program pursuant to paragraph b of
subdivision one of this section.
 § 667-d. Enhanced tuition awards. 1. Recipient qualifications. a.
Establishment. Enhanced tuition awards are available for students who
are enrolled in approved programs in private degree granting
institutions of higher education except those institutions set forth in
paragraph b of subdivision four of section six hundred sixty-one of this
part and who demonstrate the ability to complete such courses, in
accordance with standards established by the commissioner; provided,
that, no award shall exceed one hundred percent of the amount of tuition
charged.
 b. Application for other awards. A student who would be eligible for a
tuition assistance program award pursuant to section six hundred
sixty-seven of this subpart and/or a federal Pell grant pursuant to
section one thousand seventy of title twenty of the United States code,
et. seq., is required to apply for each such award. Any award shall be
applied to tuition after the application of payments received under the
tuition assistance program pursuant to section six hundred sixty-seven
of this subpart.
 c. GPA requirements. Notwithstanding paragraph c of subdivision four
of section six hundred sixty-one of this part, a school shall certify
that a recipient has achieved a grade point average necessary for
successful completion of his or her coursework to receive payment under
the award.
 d. Credit requirements. An award shall be made to an applicant who:
(i) if enrolled in (A) a private degree granting institution of higher
education prior to application, has completed at least thirty combined
credits per year following the student's start date, or its equivalent,
applicable to his or her program or programs of study or (B) a public
degree granting institution of higher education prior to application,
has completed at least thirty combined credits per year following the
student's start date, or its equivalent, applicable to his or her
program or programs of study and which were accepted upon transfer to a
private degree granting institution of higher education; (ii) enrolls in
at least twelve credits per semester and completes at least thirty
combined credits per year following the student's start date, or its
equivalent, applicable to his or her program or programs of study except
in limited circumstances as prescribed by the corporation in regulation.
Notwithstanding, in the student's last semester, the student may take at
least one course needed to meet his or her graduation requirements and
enroll in and complete at least twelve credit hours or its equivalent.
For students who are disabled as defined by the Americans With
Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 USC 12101, the corporation shall prescribe
rules and regulations that allow applicants who are disabled to be
eligible for an award pursuant to this section based on modified
criteria.
 e. Notwithstanding paragraph d of this subdivision, a student who
otherwise satisfies all of the requirements under this section but fails
to complete at least thirty combined credits, or its equivalent,
applicable to his or her program or programs of study in any year shall
be eligible to receive an award payment for the first semester of such
year, provided however, the student shall be ineligible for any further
payments under this section.
 f. Additional requirements. A recipient shall agree to reside
exclusively in New York state, and shall not be employed in any other
state, for a continuous number of years equal to the duration of the
award received within six months of receipt of his or her final award
payment, and sign a contract with the corporation to have his or her
full award converted to a student loan according to a schedule to be
determined by the corporation if such student fails to fulfill this
requirement. The terms and conditions of this paragraph may, as
established by the rules and regulations of the corporation, be
deferred: (i) to complete undergraduate study; or (ii) to attend
graduate school on at least a half-time basis. Any obligation to comply
with such provisions as outlined in this paragraph may be cancelled upon
the death of the recipient. Notwithstanding any provisions of this
paragraph to the contrary, the corporation is authorized to promulgate
rules and regulations to provide for the waiver or suspension of any
financial obligation which would involve extreme hardship.
 g. Failure to meet the conditions of the award shall not otherwise
disqualify a student's eligibility to receive an award under section six
hundred sixty-seven of this subpart.
 2. Duration. No undergraduate shall be eligible for more than four
academic years of study, or five academic years if the program of study
normally requires five years. An undergraduate student enrolled in an
eligible two-year program approved by the commissioner shall be eligible
for no more than two academic years. Under no circumstances shall a
student receive an award for a two-year program for more than two
consecutive years of academic study or four consecutive semesters of
academic study; or at a four or five-year program, for more than four
consecutive years or eight consecutive semesters of academic study or
five consecutive years, or ten consecutive semesters of study if the
program normally requires five years. Notwithstanding, such duration may
be extended for an allowable interruption of study including, but not
limited to, death of a family member, medical leave, military service,
and parental leave, as established by the corporation in regulation.
 3. Income. An award shall be made to an applicant who has an adjusted
gross income for the qualifying year, as such terms are defined in this
subdivision, equal to or less than: (i) one hundred thousand dollars for
recipients receiving an award in the two thousand seventeen--two
thousand eighteen academic year; (ii) one hundred ten thousand dollars
for recipients receiving an award in the two thousand eighteen--two
thousand nineteen academic year; and (iii) one hundred twenty-five
thousand dollars for recipients receiving an award in the two thousand
nineteen--two thousand twenty academic year and thereafter. Adjusted
gross income shall be the total of the combined adjusted gross income of
the applicant and the applicant's parents or the applicant and the
applicant's spouse, if married. Qualifying year shall be the adjusted
gross income as reported on the federal income tax return, or as
otherwise obtained by the corporation, for the calendar year coinciding
with the tax year established by the U.S. department of education to
qualify applicants for federal student financial aid programs authorized
by Title IV of the Higher Education Act of nineteen hundred sixty-five,
as amended, for the school year in which application for assistance is
made. Provided, however, if an applicant demonstrates to the corporation
that there has been a change in such applicant's adjusted gross income
in the year or years subsequent to the qualifying year which would
qualify such applicant for an award, the corporation shall review and
make a determination as to whether such applicant meets the requirement
set forth in this subdivision based on such year. Provided, further that
such change was caused by the death, permanent and total physical or
mental disability, divorce, or separation by judicial decree or pursuant
to an agreement of separation which is filed with a court of competent
jurisdiction of any person whose income was required to be used to
compute the applicant's total adjusted gross income.
 4. Amount. Within the amounts appropriated therefor and based on
availability of funds, awards shall be granted beginning with the two
thousand seventeen--two thousand eighteen academic year and thereafter
to applicants that the corporation has determined are eligible to
receive such awards. Recipients of an award under this program shall
receive six thousand dollars through a combination of the enhanced
tuition award plus a student's tuition assistance program award pursuant
to section six hundred sixty-seven of this subpart plus the
institution's matching award pursuant to subdivision five of this
section. Provided, however, any institution that charges tuition that is
reduced by greater than fifteen percent from the level of tuition
charged six years prior to the academic year in which the award is to be
applied shall be exempt from the requirement to provide such match and
students attending such institutions shall receive an enhanced tuition
award without such institutional match.
 5. Matching awards. Commencing with the two thousand seventeen--two
thousand eighteen academic year and thereafter, participating
institutions shall credit each recipient's remaining tuition expenses in
an amount equal to the recipient's award under this section. Provided,
however that any institution that charges tuition that is reduced by
greater than fifteen percent from the level of tuition charged six years
prior to the academic year in which the award is to be applied shall be
exempt from the requirement to provide such match, and shall remain
exempt from providing such match to such recipient in any academic year
in which such recipient receives an award under this section.
 6. Tuition. The rate of tuition charged to an individual receiving an
award shall not be increased for the duration of time that such
individual receives an award.
 7. College option. An institution may choose not to participate in the
program and students attending any non-participating college may still
be eligible to receive an award pursuant to section six hundred
sixty-seven of this subpart.
 8. Recipient selection. The president may establish: a. an application
deadline and b. a method of selecting recipients if in any given year
there are insufficient funds to cover the needs of all the applicants
provided that priority shall be given to eligible applicants who are
currently in attendance at an institution of higher education.
 9. Rules and regulations. The corporation is authorized to promulgate
rules and regulations, and may promulgate emergency regulations,
necessary for the implementation of the provisions of this section
including, but not limited to, the criteria for distributing the awards,
which may include a lottery or other form of random selection.
 § 668. Regents awards for children of deceased and disabled veterans.
1. Period of military service. For a student to be eligible, the
parent, or step-parent where the student is the dependent of the
step-parent, (i) must have been a recipient of the armed forces
expeditionary medal, the navy expeditionary medal or the marine corps
expeditionary medal for participation in operations in Lebanon from June
first, nineteen hundred eighty-three to December first, nineteen hundred
eighty-seven, in Grenada from October twenty-third, nineteen hundred
eighty-three to November twenty-first, nineteen hundred eighty-three, or
in Panama from December twentieth, nineteen hundred eighty-nine to
January thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety, or (ii) must have served
on regular active duty (other than for training) in the armed forces of
the United States during part of one of the following periods:
 (a) April sixth, nineteen hundred seventeen to November eleven,
nineteen hundred eighteen.
 (b) December seven, nineteen hundred forty-one to December thirty-one,
nineteen hundred forty-six, or have been employed by the War Shipping
Administration or Office of Defense Transportation or their agents as a
merchant seaman documented by the United States Coast Guard or
Department of Commerce, or as a civil servant employed by the United
States Army Transport Service (later redesignated as the United States
Army Transportation Corps, Water Division) or the Naval Transportation
Service; and who served satisfactorily as a crew member during the
period of armed conflict, December seventh, nineteen hundred forty-one,
to August fifteenth, nineteen hundred forty-five, aboard merchant
vessels in oceangoing, i.e., foreign, intercoastal, or coastwise service
as such terms are defined under federal law (46 USCA 10301 & 10501) and
further to include "near foreign" voyages between the United States and
Canada, Mexico, or the West Indies via ocean routes, or public vessels
in oceangoing service or foreign waters and who has received a
Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty and a discharge
certificate, or an Honorable Service Certificate/Report of Casualty,
from the Department of Defense or have served as a United States
civilian employed by the American Field Service and served overseas
under United States Armies and United States Army Groups in world war II
during the period of armed conflict, December seventh, nineteen hundred
forty-one through May eighth, nineteen hundred forty-five, and who (i)
was discharged or released therefrom under honorable conditions, or (ii)
has a qualifying condition, as defined in section one of the veterans'
services law, and has received a discharge other than bad conduct or
dishonorable from such service, or (iii) is a discharged LGBT veteran,
as defined in section one of the veterans' services law, and has
received a discharge other than bad conduct or dishonorable from such
service, or have served as a United States civilian Flight Crew and
Aviation Ground Support Employee of Pan American World Airways or one of
its subsidiaries or its affiliates and served overseas as a result of
Pan American's contract with Air Transport Command or Naval Air
Transport Service during the period of armed conflict, December
fourteenth, nineteen hundred forty-one through August fourteenth,
nineteen hundred forty-five, and who (iv) was discharged or released
therefrom under honorable conditions, or (v) has a qualifying condition,
as defined in section one of the veterans' services law, and has
received a discharge other than bad conduct or dishonorable from such
service, or (vi) is a discharged LGBT veteran, as defined in section one
of the veterans' services law, and has received a discharge other than
bad conduct or dishonorable from such service.
 (c) June twenty-seven, nineteen hundred fifty to January thirty-one,
nineteen hundred fifty-five.
 (d) November first, nineteen hundred fifty-five to May seventh,
nineteen hundred seventy-five.
 (e) August two, nineteen hundred ninety to the end of hostilities in
the Persian Gulf conflict.
 (f) From September eighteenth, two thousand one until the end of the
United States military efforts in Afghanistan.
 (g) From October sixteenth, two thousand two until the end of the
United States military efforts in Iraq.
 2. Eligible groups. Awards shall be made to students each of whom has
a parent with such service, or a step-parent with such service where the
student is the dependent of the step-parent even if the student's
biological parent is still living, who:
 (a) was a legal resident of New York state at the time of his or her
demise and who died or die while so serving, or as a result of injury or
illness suffered or incurred during such military service; or
 (b) (i) is an honorably discharged veteran of the United States or
member of the armed forces of the United States, or (ii) has a
qualifying condition, as defined in section one of the veterans'
services law, and has received a discharge other than bad conduct or
dishonorable from such service, or (iii) is a discharged LGBT veteran,
as defined in section one of the veterans' services law, and has
received a discharge other than bad conduct or dishonorable from such
service, who is a resident of the state of New York, and who has a
current disability of forty percent or more as a result of an injury or
illness which is incurred or was incurred during such military service;
or
 (c) is now deceased, who was a resident of this state at the time of
his or her demise, and who at the time of his or her demise had a
disability to a degree of forty percent or more as a result of an injury
or illness which was incurred during such military service; or
 (d) is classified as a former prisoner of war, or as missing in
action, who has been so classified by the United States department of
defense, and who is a resident of the state of New York if a former
prisoner of war or was a resident of the state of New York when
classified as missing in action.
 3. Determinations of disability. Determinations concerning disability
or death by the United States Administrator of Veterans Affairs or the
separate branches of the armed forces of the United States shall be
conclusive.
 4. Amount and duration. Every recipient shall receive an annual award
of four hundred fifty dollars for each of not more than four academic
years, or five academic years if the recipient is enrolled in a program
normally requiring five years, as defined by the commissioner, pursuant
to article thirteen.
 § 668-a. Regents awards for children of deceased police officers,
peace officers, firefighters and volunteer firefighters. 1. Eligible
students. Awards shall be made to resident children of police officers
and peace officers as defined in the criminal procedure law,
firefighters and volunteer firefighters and correction officers of the
state or any political subdivision thereof, or volunteer firefighters of
fire departments or companies under contract to provide fire protection
to a municipality or fire district who have died as a result of an
injury sustained in the line of duty.
 2. Amount and duration. Every recipient shall receive an annual award
of four hundred fifty dollars for each of not more than four academic
years of undergraduate study or five academic years if a program
normally requires five years, as defined by the commissioner pursuant to
article thirteen of this chapter.
 3. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this chapter, no
child of a correction officer of the state who is receiving an award
under the provisions of section six hundred sixty-nine of this article
shall receive an award under the provisions of this section.
 § 668-b. Memorial scholarships for children, spouses and financial
dependents of deceased firefighters, volunteer firefighters, police
officers, peace officers, and emergency medical service workers. 1.
Notwithstanding subdivision five of section six hundred sixty-one of
this article, children, spouses or the financial dependents of
firefighters, volunteer firefighters, police officers, peace officers,
and emergency medical service workers who have died as a result of an
injury sustained in the line of duty, in service to the state of New
York shall be eligible to receive an annual amount determined pursuant
to subdivision two of section six hundred sixty-eight-d of this article.
Any award pursuant to this section shall be inclusive of any amount the
student would otherwise be eligible for pursuant to section six hundred
sixty-eight-a or six hundred sixty-eight-d of this article.
 2. Awards under this section shall be payable for each of not more
than four academic years of undergraduate study or five academic years
if a program normally requires five years, as defined by the
commissioner pursuant to article thirteen of this title.
 § 668-c. Awards for Vietnam veterans' children born with Spina Bifida
enrolled in approved undergraduate or graduate programs at degree
granting institutions. 1. Eligible students. Awards shall be made to
Vietnam veterans' resident children born with Spina Bifida enrolled in
approved undergraduate or graduate programs at degree granting
institutions. For the purpose of this section, "Vietnam veteran" shall
mean a person who served in Indochina at any time from the first day of
November, nineteen hundred fifty-five, to and including the seventh day
of May, nineteen hundred seventy-five and (a) was honorably discharged
from the armed forces of the United States, or (b) has a qualifying
condition, as defined in section one of the veterans' services law, and
has received a discharge other than bad conduct or dishonorable from the
armed forces of the United States, or (c) is a discharged LGBT veteran,
as defined in section one of the veterans' services law, and has
received a discharge other than bad conduct or dishonorable from the
armed forces of the United States; "born with Spina Bifida" shall mean a
diagnosis at birth of such disease inclusive of all forms,
manifestations, complications and associated medical conditions thereof,
but shall not include Spina Bifida Occulta. Such diagnosis shall be in
accordance with the provisions of the federal Spina Bifida program and
shall be documented by the United States Administration of Veterans'
Affairs.
 2. Amount and duration. Every recipient shall receive an annual award
of four hundred fifty dollars for each of not more than four academic
years of undergraduate study or five academic years if a program
normally requires five years, as defined by the commissioner pursuant to
article thirteen of this chapter.
 § 668-d. World trade center memorial scholarships. 1. Eligible groups.
Notwithstanding subdivisions three and five of section six hundred
sixty-one of this article, children, spouses and financial dependents of
innocent victims who have died or have been severely and permanently
disabled, or those innocent victims who have become severely and
permanently disabled as a direct result of an injury sustained in the
impact area of the September eleventh, two thousand one attack on the
United States of America, shall be eligible to receive a memorial
scholarship. The attack on the United States of America shall consist of
the attack on the world trade center, the attack on the Pentagon and the
hijackings and crashes of United Airlines flights 93 and 175 and
American Airlines flights 11 and 77.
 2. Amount. (a) The president shall grant annual scholarships in the
following amounts:
 (1) If the recipient attends an institution of the city university of
New York or an institution of the state university of New York other
than the statutory colleges at Cornell, the college of environmental
science and forestry at Syracuse and the college of ceramics at Alfred,
the annual award shall be an amount equal to: the tuition charged at
such institution provided that, notwithstanding any provision of law to
the contrary, the tuition charged to award recipients shall not exceed
that charged to state resident students attending such institution; the
mandatory fees charged at such institution; and the non-tuition cost of
attendance at such institution or college, provided that the scholarship
shall not exceed an amount that is equal to the total cost of attendance
determined for federal Title IV student financial aid purposes, less all
other scholarships and grants provided by New York state, other states,
the federal government, or other governments, and the amount of
educational benefits paid under any program that would duplicate the
purposes of this program, provided that any scholarships or grants
provided to a recipient by the institution which are intended to fund
any portion of the difference between the annual state award and the
actual costs of attendance at any such institution shall not be
considered to duplicate the purposes of this program; or
 (2) If the recipient attends any other approved program within New
York state, the annual award shall be based upon an amount equal to: the
tuition charged to state resident students attending a four-year college
of the state university of New York; the average mandatory fees charged
at four-year colleges of the state university of New York, or the actual
tuition and fees charged to the recipient, whichever is less; and the
average non-tuition cost of attendance, as determined by the president
and as approved by the director of the budget, for a student at the
state university of New York or actual non-tuition cost of attendance at
such institution, whichever is less, provided that the scholarship shall
not exceed an amount that is equal to the total cost of attendance
determined for federal Title IV student financial aid purposes, less all
other scholarships and grants provided by New York state, other states,
the federal government, or other governments, and the amount of
educational benefits paid under any program that would duplicate the
purposes of this program, provided that any scholarships or grants
provided to a recipient by the institution which are intended to fund
any portion of the difference between the annual state award and the
actual costs of attendance at any such institution shall not be
considered to duplicate the purposes of this program.
 (3) Notwithstanding paragraph a of subdivision four of section six
hundred sixty-one of this article, if the recipient is a New York state
resident and, on September eleventh, two thousand one, was matriculated
and in attendance in an institution of higher education that provides a
two-year or four-year program of instruction for which the institution
awards an associate or baccalaureate degree and which is eligible to
participate in a program under Title IV of the Higher Education Act of
1965, as amended or any successor statutes located outside of New York
state, the annual award shall be based upon an amount equal to: the
tuition charged to state resident students attending a four-year college
of the state university of New York; the average mandatory fees charged
at four-year colleges of the state university of New York or the actual
tuition and fees charged to the recipient, whichever is less; and the
average non-tuition cost of attendance, as determined, by the president
and as approved by the director of the budget, for a student at the
state university of New York or actual non-tuition cost of attendance at
such institution, whichever is less, provided that the scholarship shall
not exceed an amount that is equal to the total cost of attendance
determined for federal Title IV student financial aid proposes, less all
other scholarships and grants provided by New York state, other states,
the federal government, or other governments, and the amount of
educational benefits paid under any program that would duplicate the
purposes of this program, provided that any scholarships or grants
provided to a recipient by the institution which are intended to fund
any portion of the difference between the annual state award and the
actual annual costs of attendance at any such institution shall not be
considered to duplicate the purposes of this program.
 (4) "Non-tuition cost of attendance", as used in this subdivision,
shall mean: (i) the actual amount charged by the institution for room
and board, and (ii) an allowance for transportation, books and supplies
as determined by the president and as approved by the director of the
budget, provided that such determination shall be made no later than
December first of each year for use in the succeeding academic year. In
the event a student does not incur room or board charges at the
institution, "non-tuition cost of attendance" shall mean an allowance
for room and board as determined by the president and approved by the
director of the budget. In determining allowances pursuant to this
subparagraph, the president may take into consideration the allowances
provided for in the Pell grant program.
 (b) In no event shall the combination of all student financial aid
received by a student exceed a recipient's total cost of attendance at
the institution being attended.
 3. Duration. Awards under this section shall be payable for each of
not more than four academic years of undergraduate study or five
academic years if a program normally requires five years, as defined by
the commissioner pursuant to article thirteen of this title.
 § 668-e. Military enhanced recognition, incentive and tribute
("MERIT") scholarships. 1. Eligible persons. a. Notwithstanding
subdivisions three and five of section six hundred sixty-one of this
title, children, spouses and financial dependents of a member of the
armed forces of the United States or state organized militia who at any
time while in service in the armed forces of the United States, as
defined by subdivision eight of section one of the military law or in a
force of the state organized militia, as defined in subdivision nine of
section one of the military law: (i) while a legal resident of New York
state, died, became severely and permanently disabled or was classified
as missing in action, or died as a result of injury or illness suffered
or incurred during such military service; or (ii) while a legal resident
of New York state, died or became severely and permanently disabled as a
result of injury or illness suffered or incurred during military
training operations.
 b. A member of the armed forces of the United States who: (i) became
severely and permanently disabled as a result of service in the armed
forces of the United States, as defined by subdivision eight of section
one of the military law,; and (ii) was a legal resident of New York
state at the time of military service.
 c. A member of the armed forces of the United States who: (i) became
severely and permanently disabled as a result of injury or illness
suffered or incurred during military training operations; and (ii) was a
legal resident of New York state at the time of military service.
 d. A member of the state organized militia who: (i) became severely
and permanently disabled as a result of injury or illness suffered or
incurred during active military service, as defined in subdivision six
of section one of the military law; and (ii) was a legal resident of New
York state at the time of active military service.
 2. Amount. The president shall grant annual scholarships in amounts
determined in accordance with subdivisions two and three of section six
hundred sixty-eight-d of this subpart.
 § 668-f. American Airlines flight 587 memorial scholarships. 1.
Eligible groups. Notwithstanding subdivisions three and five of section
six hundred sixty-one of this part, children, spouses, and financial
dependents of persons who died as a direct result of the crash of
American Airlines flight 587, in Rockaway, Queens, on November twelfth,
two thousand one, shall be eligible to receive a memorial scholarship.
 2. Amount. The president shall grant annual scholarships in amounts
determined in accordance with subdivision two of section six hundred
sixty-eight-d of this subpart.
 3. Duration. Awards under this section shall be payable for each of
not more than four academic years of undergraduate study or five
academic years if a program normally requires five years, as defined by
the commissioner pursuant to article thirteen of this title.
 § 668-g. Continental Airlines flight 3407 memorial scholarships. 1.
Eligible groups. Notwithstanding subdivisions three and five of section
six hundred sixty-one of this part, children, spouses and financial
dependents of persons who died as a direct result of the crash of
Continental Airlines flight 3407, in Clarence, New York, on February
twelfth, two thousand nine, shall be eligible to receive a memorial
scholarship for their attendance at an institution located within New
York state.
 2. Amount. The president shall grant annual scholarships in amounts
determined in accordance with subdivision two of section six hundred
sixty-eight-d of this subpart.
 3. Duration. Awards under this section shall be payable for each of
not more than four academic years of undergraduate study or five
academic years if a program normally requires five years, as defined by
the commissioner pursuant to article thirteen of this title.
 § 669. Regents awards for children of deceased state correction
officers and state civilian employees of a correction facility. 1.
Eligible students. Awards shall be made to resident children of state
correction officers and state civilian employees of a correctional
facility who died as a result of an injury sustained in the line of duty
during the period from September ninth, nineteen hundred seventy-one
through September thirteenth, nineteen hundred seventy-one, inclusive.
 2. Amount and duration. The award shall not exceed the sum of
tuition, educational fees, room and board charged by the state
university of New York nor shall it be for more than four academic years
of undergraduate study or five academic years if a program of study
normally requires five years, as defined by the commissioner pursuant to
article thirteen.
 3. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this chapter, no
child of a state correction officer who is receiving an award under the
provisions of section six hundred sixty-eight-a of this article shall
receive an award under the provisions of this section.
 § 669-a. Veterans tuition awards program. 1. As used in this section,
the following terms shall have the following meanings:
 a. "Vietnam veteran" means (i) a person who is a resident of this
state, (ii) who served in the armed forces of the United States in
Indochina at any time from the first day of November, nineteen hundred
fifty-five, to and including the seventh day of May, nineteen hundred
seventy-five, and (iii) who was either discharged therefrom under
honorable conditions, including but not limited to honorable discharge,
discharge under honorable conditions, or general discharge, or has a
qualifying condition, as defined in section one of the veterans'
services law, and has received a discharge other than bad conduct or
dishonorable from such service, or is a discharged LGBT veteran, as
defined in section one of the veterans' services law, and has received a
discharge other than bad conduct or dishonorable from such service.
 b. "Persian Gulf veteran" means (i) a person who is a resident of this
state (ii) who served in the armed forces of the United States in the
hostilities that occurred in the Persian Gulf from the second day of
August, nineteen hundred ninety through the end of such hostilities, and
(iii) who was either discharged therefrom under honorable conditions,
including but not limited to honorable discharge, discharge under
honorable conditions, or general discharge, or has a qualifying
condition, as defined in section one of the veterans' services law, and
has received a discharge other than bad conduct or dishonorable from
such service, or is a discharged LGBT veteran, as defined in section one
of the veterans' services law, and has received a discharge other than
bad conduct or dishonorable from such service.
 c. "Afghanistan veteran" means (i) a person who is a resident of this
state (ii) who served in the armed forces of the United States in the
hostilities that occurred in Afghanistan from the eleventh day of
September, two thousand one, to the end of such hostilities, and (iii)
who was either discharged therefrom under honorable conditions,
including but not limited to honorable discharge, discharge under
honorable conditions, or general discharge, or has a qualifying
condition, as defined in section one of the veterans' services law, and
has received a discharge other than bad conduct or dishonorable from
such service, or is a discharged LGBT veteran, as defined in section one
of the veterans' services law, and has received a discharge other than
bad conduct or dishonorable from such service.
 d. "Other eligible veteran" means: an individual who (i) is a resident
of this state, (ii) served in the armed forces of the United States (1)
on active duty for at least four years, or (2) in hostilities that
occurred after February twenty-eighth, nineteen hundred sixty-one, as
evidenced by their receipt of an Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal, Navy
Expeditionary Medal, or Marine Corps Expeditionary Medal, and (iii) was
either discharged under honorable conditions, including but not limited
to honorable discharge, discharge under honorable conditions, or general
discharge, or has a qualifying condition, as defined in section one of
the veterans' services law, and has received a discharge other than bad
conduct or dishonorable from such service, or is a discharged LGBT
veteran, as defined in section one of the veterans' services law, and
has received a discharge other than bad conduct or dishonorable from
such service.
 e. "Part time study" means enrollment for at least three but less than
twelve semester hours per semester, or the equivalent, in an approved
undergraduate or graduate program.
 f. "Approved vocational training programs" means programs offered by
agencies approved by the commissioner for funding pursuant to this
section. The commissioner shall approve only such non-credit programs
which are at least three hundred twenty clock hours in length, and which
meet standards of instructional quality established in regulations by
the commissioner. These standards shall include, but not be limited to,
qualifications of administrative and instructional personnel, quality of
facilities and equipment, recordkeeping, admission, grading, attendance,
and record of placement of completers which meets standards of
acceptability as established by the commissioner.
 * g. "Eligible immediate family member" means a person who is the
spouse, child or financial dependent of a qualified veteran, and who
resides in this state.
 * NB Effective July 1, 2027
 * h. "Qualified veteran" means a veteran who satisfies the
requirements set forth in paragraph a, b, c, or d of subdivision one of
this section.
 * NB Effective July 1, 2027
 * i. "Survivor" means a person who: (i) was married to a qualified
veteran who died as a result of military service; or (ii) was married to
the qualified veteran within fifteen years of their discharge from
military service in which the cause of death, disease or injury started
or was aggravated; or (iii) was married to the veteran for at least one
year; or (iv) had a child with the qualified veteran and lived together
with the veteran continuously until the veteran's death or, if
separated, was not at fault for the separation.
 * NB Effective and Repealed July 1, 2027
 2. a. Tuition awards are available for all Vietnam, Persian Gulf,
Afghanistan and other eligible veterans, as defined in subdivision one
of this section, who are enrolled, pursuant to paragraph a of
subdivision four of section six hundred sixty-one of this part, in
approved undergraduate or graduate programs at degree granting
institutions or enrolled in approved vocational training programs and
who apply for a tuition assistance program award, for up to the
equivalent of eight full-time semesters, pursuant to section six hundred
sixty-seven of this subpart.
 b. Eligibility for awards under this section shall be established as
of the date the application is received by the corporation. All eligible
recipients shall receive an award in an amount as set forth in
subdivision four of this section.
 3. a. No recipient shall receive awards for more than eight semesters
of full time undergraduate study, or the equivalent of four academic
years, or, if an undergraduate program normally requires five academic
years of full time study, for more than ten semesters of full time
study, or the equivalent of five academic years. Recipients enrolled in
a program of remedial study conforming to the provisions of this
article, approved by the commissioner in a degree granting institution,
and intended to culminate in an undergraduate degree shall be considered
as enrolled in a program normally requiring five years. No recipient
enrolled in an approved vocational training program shall receive awards
for more than four semesters of full-time study or the equivalent of two
academic years of full-time study.
 b. No recipient shall receive awards for more than sixteen semesters
of part time undergraduate study as defined in subdivision one, or the
equivalent of eight academic years of part time study, or, if an
undergraduate program normally requires five academic years of full time
study, for more than twenty semesters of part time study, or the
equivalent of ten academic years. Recipients enrolled in a program of
remedial study conforming to the provisions of this chapter, approved by
the commissioner in a degree granting institution, and intended to
culminate in an undergraduate degree shall be considered as enrolled in
a program normally requiring five years. No recipient enrolled in an
approved vocational training program shall receive awards for more than
eight semesters of part-time study or the equivalent of four academic
years of part-time study.
 c. No recipient shall receive awards for more than six semesters of
full time study, or the equivalent of three academic years, for graduate
study. No recipient shall receive awards for more than twelve semesters
of part time graduate study as defined in subdivision one of this
section, or the equivalent of six academic years of part time graduate
study.
 4. Every recipient shall receive an award equal to the amount of
undergraduate tuition for residents of New York state charged by the
state university of New York or actual tuition charged, whichever is
less, for each semester, or the equivalent, of full time study, or a
pro-rated amount for part-time study; provided, however, that such award
shall not be reduced by any benefits available under the federal
Montgomery GI Bill act of 1984 or the federal Pell grant program
pursuant to section one thousand seventy-a of title twenty of the United
States code.
 * 5. a. A qualified veteran who has not utilized such tuition award,
may elect to transfer in a single instance all or any remaining tuition
award to one eligible immediate family member.
 b. A qualified veteran who elects to transfer their award shall
designate the eligible immediate family member to whom such award is
being transferred in the manner prescribed by the corporation.
 c. A child to whom a tuition award is transferred under this
subdivision shall be under twenty-six years of age.
 d. The tuition award transfers designated by a qualified veteran
pursuant to this subdivision shall not exceed the award available to
such veteran under this section.
 e. The total number of tuition award transfers under this subdivision
shall not exceed one hundred per year.
 * NB Effective July 1, 2027
 * 6. The president is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations
to implement the provisions of this section. The president may establish
a. an application deadline and b. a method of selecting which one
hundred tuition award transfers are to be granted if in any given year
there are more than one hundred eligible tuition award transfers
requested.
 * NB Effective July 1, 2027
 * § 669-b. Recruitment incentive and retention program for members of
the New York state organized militia. 1. The division of military and
naval affairs is authorized, within amounts appropriated or otherwise
lawfully available from any other source, to establish a recruitment
incentive and retention program.
 2. Definitions as used in this section:
 a. The term "active member" shall mean a member of a federally
recognized unit of the New York army national guard, New York air
national guard, or New York naval militia who meets the minimum
requirements for satisfactory active membership as set forth in the
regulations of the United States departments of the army, navy and air
force, as applicable, and the New York state division of military and
naval affairs.
 b. The term "degree producing curriculum" shall mean a series of
courses programmed to culminate in a specific post-secondary degree or
diploma when successfully completed.
 c. The term "tuition" shall mean the total semester, quarter, or
classroom hour cost of instruction to the student as periodically
published in the catalogue of the institution, specifically excluding
mandatory fees, book charges, and room and board.
 d. The term "tuition benefit" shall mean the payment of whatever cost
is attributable to the cost of tuition after the deduction of any other
available educational grant aid, including the Army Continuing Education
System (ACES) (AR-621-5 17 November 1993) and any successor Army
regulations, that could defray such cost; however, specifically
excluding the federal Montgomery GI Bill.
 e. The term "part-time study" shall mean enrollment in an approved
post-secondary degree program for at least six but less than twelve
semester hours, or the equivalent per semester, or at least four but
less than eight semester hours per quarter in an institution.
 f. The term "institution" shall mean any institution of higher
education recognized and approved by the regents or the university of
the state of New York which provides a course of study leading to the
granting of a post-secondary degree or diploma.
 g. The term "legal resident" shall mean a person whose principal
domicile is located within New York state in excess of one hundred
eighty-six days per year; excepting active federal military duty.
 3. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other general, special, or
local law, rule, or regulation, any active member who has successfully
completed advanced individual training or commissioning and other
requirements of the division of military and naval affairs for tuition
benefit eligibility shall be entitled to the tuition benefit provided by
this section upon his or her enrollment in a degree producing curriculum
in any institution.
 4. Unless otherwise provided for in this section, eligibility for the
tuition benefit provided by this section shall be determined by the
education services offices of the division of military and naval
affairs, which shall issue certificates of eligibility and promulgate
such administrative rules and procedures as are necessary to implement
the tuition benefit provided under this section. Such administrative
rules and procedures shall include in the factors for the determination
of eligibility for the tuition benefit provided by this section the
fulfillment of the contractual obligation and commitments for service in
the New York army national guard, New York air national guard and New
York naval militia.
 5. Any active member who currently possesses a baccalaureate degree or
higher is ineligible for participation in the recruitment incentive
program provided by this section.
 5-a. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision three of this
section, the adjutant general may, as defined in agency regulation, and
within appropriated amounts, allow active members who have not completed
basic or advanced individual training or commissioning to participate in
the recruitment incentive program.
 5-b. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other general, special or
local law, rule or regulation, a recipient who has failed to
successfully complete his or her term of enlistment, if such failure is
not due to causes beyond his or her control as determined by the
adjutant general or his designee, shall be ineligible to participate in
the tuition benefit provided by this section. Monies expended by the
administrating agency of such benefit shall be reimbursed to the state
in the full amount by the former recipient within one year of
termination of active membership.
 5-c. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other general, special or
local law, a recipient who has successfully completed his or her term of
enlistment due to having served in a combat theater or combat zone of
operations, shall be eligible to continue to participate in the tuition
benefit provided by this section, if such recipient was enrolled in said
benefit prior to deployment in a combat theater or combat zone of
operations.
 6. The tuition benefit provided by this section shall be restricted to
legal residents of the state. The benefit may be used for either
part-time or full-time study. No restriction as to sessions, student
status, or space availability which does not apply to all students shall
be placed by institutions upon recipients under this program.
 7. Upon the recipient's attainment of a baccalaureate degree or
cessation of status as an active member, whichever occurs first, the
benefit provided by this section shall be discontinued. The tuition
benefit provided by this section may be suspended at the direction of
the division of military and naval affairs for a recipient's failure to
maintain good military standing as an active member, for the failure to
maintain good academic progress and program pursuit, or for the failure
to maintain sufficient academic standing to retain eligibility for any
other financial assistance the recipient may be receiving.
 8. Unless otherwise provided for in this section, the tuition benefit
shall be on the terms and conditions set by the division of military and
naval affairs, provided that any such benefit shall not exceed an amount
equal to the actual annual tuition charged to the recipient or the
tuition charged by the state university of New York, whichever is less,
offset by any financial assistance and any other resources available
through the national guard or the division of military and naval affairs
on behalf of the recipient, including the Army Continuing Education
System (ACES) (AR-621-5 17 November 1993) and any successor Army
regulations, and the total of all other state, federal, or other
educational grant aid that is received or receivable by such student
during the school year for which such benefit is applicable. For the
purposes of this subdivision, benefits available under the federal
Montgomery GI Bill act of 1984 shall not be considered as federal or
other educational aid.
 9. Any active member who is eligible for the tuition benefit provided
by this section must apply for all other available state, federal,
including the Army Continuing Education System (ACES) (AR-621-5 17
November 1993) and any successor Army regulations, or other educational
grant aid at time of enrollment. The division of military and naval
affairs shall access all financial assistance available on behalf of all
such active members. Any grant aid or financial assistance received,
excluding that of the Montgomery GI Bill Act of 1984, shall be utilized
to offset the cost of tuition to the maximum extent possible, except
that nothing shall require that aid or assistance received which may be
used towards costs other than that of tuition shall be applied toward
the cost of tuition.
 10. The tuition benefit provided by this section shall be effective
beginning with the school semester or quarter following its enactment
into law.
 * NB Repealed September 1, 2026
 § 669-d. New York state math and science teaching incentive program.
1. Eligibility. Notwithstanding subdivision five of section six hundred
sixty-one of this part, undergraduate and/or graduate students who are
matriculated in an approved undergraduate or graduate program at degree
granting institutions leading to a career as a math or science teacher
in secondary education shall be eligible for an award under this
section, provided the applicant: (a) signs a contract with the
corporation agreeing to teach in the classroom on a full-time basis for
five years in the field of math or science in a school located within
New York state providing secondary education recognized by the board of
regents or the university of the state of New York; and (b) complies
with the applicable provisions of this article and all requirements
promulgated by the corporation for the administration of the program.
 2. Within amounts appropriated therefor, awards shall be granted to
applicants that the corporation has certified are eligible to receive
such awards. Up to five hundred awards may be made to new recipients
annually. Such awards shall be made to recipients after the successful
completion of each academic year, as defined by the corporation.
 3. An award shall entitle the recipient to annual payments for not
more than four academic years of full-time undergraduate study and one
academic year of full-time graduate study leading to certification as a
classroom teacher in mathematics or science.
 4. Recipients shall receive an annual payment for the successful
completion of an academic year, equal to the annual tuition charged to
state resident students attending an undergraduate program full-time at
the state university of New York, or actual tuition charged, whichever
is less.
 5. The corporation shall convert to a student loan the full amount of
the award given pursuant to this section, plus interest, according to a
schedule to be determined by the corporation if: (a) two years after the
completion of the degree program and receipt of initial certification it
is found that a recipient is not teaching in the field of math or
science in a school located within New York state providing secondary
education recognized by the board of regents or the university of the
state of New York; or (b) a recipient has not taught in the field of
math or science in a school located within New York state providing
secondary education recognized by the board of regents or the university
of the state of New York for five of the seven years after the
completion of the degree program and receipt of initial certification;
or (c) a recipient fails to complete their degree program or changes
majors to an undergraduate degree program other than in science or math;
or (d) a recipient fails to receive or maintain their teaching
certificate or license in New York state; or (e) a recipient fails to
respond to requests by the corporation for the status of his or her
academic or professional progress. The terms and conditions of this
subdivision shall be deferred for any interruption in undergraduate or
graduate study or employment as established by the rules and regulations
of the corporation. Any obligation to comply with such provisions as
outlined in this section shall be cancelled upon the death of the
recipient. Notwithstanding any provisions of this subdivision to the
contrary, the corporation is authorized to promulgate rules and
regulations to provide for the waiver or suspension of any financial
obligation which would involve extreme hardship.
 6. The corporation is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations
necessary for the implementation of the provisions of this section,
including the criteria for the provision of awards on a competitive
basis and the rate of interest charged for repayment of the student
loan.
 § 669-e. New York state science, technology, engineering and
mathematics incentive program. 1. Undergraduate students who are
matriculated in an approved undergraduate program leading to a career in
science, technology, engineering or mathematics at a New York state
public institution of higher education for the purpose of subdivision
two of this section, or a New York state private degree granting
institution of higher education for the purpose of subdivision two-a of
this section, shall be eligible for an award under this section,
provided the applicant: (a) graduates from a high school located in New
York state during or after the two thousand thirteen--fourteen school
year; and (b) graduates within the top ten percent of his or her high
school class; and (c) enrolls in full-time study each term beginning in
the fall term after his or her high school graduation in an approved
undergraduate program in science, technology, engineering or
mathematics, as defined by the corporation, at a New York state
institution of higher education; and (d) signs a contract with the
corporation agreeing that his or her award will be converted to a
student loan in the event the student fails to comply with the terms of
this program as set forth in subdivision four of this section; and (e)
complies with the applicable provisions of this article and all
requirements promulgated by the corporation for the administration of
the program.
 2. Awards shall be granted beginning with the two thousand
fourteen--two thousand fifteen academic year and thereafter to
applicants at New York state public institutions of higher education
that the corporation has determined are eligible to receive such awards.
The corporation shall grant such awards in an amount equal to the amount
of undergraduate tuition for residents of New York state charged by the
state university of New York or actual tuition charged, whichever is
less; provided, however, (i) a student who receives educational grants
and/or scholarships that cover the student's full cost of attendance
shall not be eligible for an award under this program; (ii) for a
student who receives educational grants and/or scholarships that cover
less than the student's full cost of attendance, such grants and/or
scholarships shall not be deemed duplicative of this program and may be
held concurrently with an award under this program, provided that the
combined benefits do not exceed the student's full cost of attendance;
and (iii) an award under this program shall be applied to tuition after
the application of all other educational grants and scholarships limited
to tuition and shall be reduced in an amount equal to such educational
grants and/or scholarships. Upon notification of an award under this
program, the institution shall defer the amount of tuition equal to the
award. No award shall be final until the recipient's successful
completion of a term has been certified by the institution.
 2-a. Within amounts appropriated therefor and based on availability of
funds, beginning with the two thousand eighteen--two thousand nineteen
academic year and thereafter, awards shall be granted to applicants at
New York state private degree granting institutions of higher education
that the corporation has determined are eligible to receive such awards.
The corporation shall grant such awards in an amount equal to the amount
of undergraduate tuition for residents of New York state charged by the
state university of New York or actual tuition charged, whichever is
less; provided, however, (i) a student who receives educational grants
and/or scholarships that cover the student's full cost of attendance
shall not be eligible for an award under this program; (ii) for a
student who receives educational grants and/or scholarships that cover
less than the student's full cost of attendance, such grants and/or
scholarships shall not be deemed duplicative of this program and may be
held concurrently with an award under this program, provided that the
combined benefits do not exceed the student's full cost of attendance;
and (iii) an award under this program shall be applied to tuition after
the application of all other educational grants and scholarships limited
to tuition and shall be reduced in an amount equal to such educational
grants and/or scholarships. Upon notification of an award under this
program, the institution shall defer the amount of tuition equal to the
award. No award shall be final until the recipient's successful
completion of a term has been certified by the institution.
 3. An eligible recipient shall not receive an award for more than four
academic years of full-time undergraduate study or five academic years
if the program of study normally requires five years, excluding any
allowable interruption of study.
 4. The corporation shall convert to a student loan the full amount of
the award given pursuant to this section, plus interest, according to a
schedule to be determined by the corporation if: (a) a recipient fails
to complete an approved undergraduate program in science, technology,
engineering or mathematics or changes majors to a program of
undergraduate study other than in science, technology, engineering or
mathematics; or (b) upon completion of such undergraduate degree program
a recipient fails to either (i) complete five years of continuous full
time employment in the science, technology, engineering or mathematics
field with a public or private entity located within New York state, or
(ii) maintain residency in New York state for such period of employment;
or (c) a recipient fails to respond to requests by the corporation for
the status of his or her academic or professional progress. The terms
and conditions of this subdivision shall be deferred for individuals who
graduate with a degree in an approved undergraduate program in science,
technology, engineering or mathematics and enroll on at least a
half-time basis in a graduate or higher degree program or other
professional licensure degree program until they are conferred a degree,
and shall also be deferred for any interruption in undergraduate study
or employment as established by the rules and regulations of the
corporation. The terms and conditions of this subdivision may also be
deferred for a grace period, to be established by the corporation,
following the completion of an approved undergraduate program in
science, technology, engineering or mathematics a graduate or higher
degree program or other professional licensure degree program. Any
obligation to comply with such provisions as outlined in this section
shall be cancelled upon the death of the recipient. Notwithstanding any
provisions of this subdivision to the contrary, the corporation is
authorized to promulgate rules and regulations to provide for the waiver
or suspension of any financial obligation which would involve extreme
hardship.
 5. The corporation is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations,
and may promulgate emergency regulations, necessary for the
implementation of the provisions of this section, including, but not
limited to, the rate of interest charged for repayment of the student
loan and the criteria for distributing the awards, which may include a
lottery or other form of random selection for awards distributed
pursuant to subdivision two-a of this section.
 § 669-f. New York state masters-in-education teacher incentive
scholarship program. 1. Eligibility. Students who are matriculated in an
approved master's degree in education program at a New York state
college, as defined in subdivision two of section six hundred one of
this title, leading to a career as a teacher in public elementary or
secondary education shall be eligible for an award under this section,
provided the applicant: (a) earned an undergraduate degree from a
college located in New York state; (b) was a New York state resident
while earning such undergraduate degree; (c) achieved academic
excellence as an undergraduate student, as defined by the corporation in
regulation; (d) enrolls in full-time study in an approved master's
degree in education program at a New York state college, as defined in
subdivision two of section six hundred one of this title, leading to a
career as a teacher in public elementary or secondary education; (e)
signs a contract with the corporation agreeing to teach in a classroom
setting on a full-time basis for five years in a school located within
New York state providing public elementary or secondary education
recognized by the board of regents or the university of the state of New
York, including charter schools authorized pursuant to article fifty-six
of this chapter; and (f) complies with the applicable provisions of this
article and all requirements promulgated by the corporation for the
administration of the program.
 1-a. Preference for scholarship awards. Preference for the award of
scholarships shall be given to eligible students matriculated at public
colleges, as defined in subdivision two of section six hundred one of
this title, in New York state. Remaining scholarships may be awarded to
other eligible students matriculated at private colleges, as defined in
subdivision two of section six hundred one of this title, in New York
state.
 2. Within amounts appropriated therefor, awards shall be granted to
applicants that the corporation has certified are eligible to receive
such awards. Up to five hundred awards may be granted to new recipients
annually. Such awards shall be granted upon successful completion of
each term, as defined by the corporation.
 3. An award shall entitle the recipient to annual payments for not
more than two academic years of full-time graduate study leading to
certification as an elementary or secondary classroom teacher.
 4. The corporation shall grant such awards in an amount equal to the
annual tuition charged to state resident students attending a graduate
program full-time at the state university of New York, or actual tuition
charged, whichever is less; provided, however, (i) a student who
receives educational grants and/or scholarships that cover the student's
full cost of attendance shall not be eligible for an award under this
program; (ii) for a student who receives educational grants and/or
scholarships that cover less than the student's full cost of attendance,
such grants and/or scholarships shall not be deemed duplicative of this
program and may be held concurrently with an award under this program,
provided that the combined benefits do not exceed the student's full
cost of attendance; and (iii) an award under this program shall be
applied to tuition after the application of all other educational grants
and scholarships limited to tuition and shall be reduced in an amount
equal to such educational grants and/or scholarships. Upon notification
of an award under this program, the institution shall defer the amount
of tuition equal to the award. No award shall be final until the
recipient's successful completion of a term has been certified by the
institution. A recipient of an award under this program shall not be
eligible for an award under the New York state math and science teaching
incentive program.
 5. The corporation shall convert to a student loan the full amount of
the award granted pursuant to this section, plus interest, according to
a schedule to be determined by the corporation if: (a) two years after
the completion of the degree program and receipt of initial
certification it is found that a recipient is not teaching in a public
school located within New York state providing elementary or secondary
education recognized by the board of regents or the university of the
state of New York, including charter schools authorized pursuant to
article fifty-six of this chapter; (b) a recipient has not taught in a
public school located within New York state providing elementary or
secondary education recognized by the board of regents or the university
of the state of New York, including charter schools authorized pursuant
to article fifty-six of this chapter, for five of the seven years after
the completion of the graduate degree program and receipt of initial
certification; (c) a recipient fails to complete his or her graduate
degree program in education; (d) a recipient fails to receive or
maintain his or her teaching certificate or license in New York state
for the required period; or (e) a recipient fails to respond to requests
by the corporation for the status of his or her academic or professional
progress. The terms and conditions of this subdivision shall be deferred
for any interruption in graduate study or employment as established by
the rules and regulations of the corporation. Any obligation to comply
with such provisions as outlined in this section shall be cancelled upon
the death of the recipient. Notwithstanding any provisions of this
subdivision to the contrary, the corporation is authorized to promulgate
rules and regulations to provide for the waiver or suspension of any
financial obligation which would involve extreme hardship.
 6. The corporation is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations,
and may promulgate emergency regulations, necessary for the
implementation of the provisions of this section including, but not
limited to, the criteria for the provision of awards on a competitive
basis, and the rate of interest charged for repayment of the student
loan.
 § 669-g. The New York state achievement and investment in merit
scholarship (NY-AIMS). 1. Purpose. The New York state achievement and
investment in merit scholarship (NY-AIMS) is hereby established for the
purpose of granting merit based scholarship awards to New York state
high school graduates who achieve academic excellence.
 2. Eligibility. To be eligible for such awards, an applicant must have
graduated from a New York state high school, enrolled in an approved
undergraduate program of study in a New York state post-secondary
institution beginning in the two thousand fifteen--two thousand sixteen
academic year or thereafter, and achieved at least two of the following
during high school:
 a. graduated with a grade point average of 3.3 or above;
 b. graduated with a "with honors" distinction on a New York state
regents diploma or received a score of 3 or higher on two or more
advanced placement examinations; or
 c. graduated within the top fifteen percent of their high school
class, provided that actual class rank may be taken into consideration.
 3. Priority. a. Such awards shall be made to eligible applicants in
the following priority:
 (i) first, to applicants who have received payment of an award
pursuant to this section in a prior year and remain in good academic
standing; and
 (ii) second, to applicants in descending order based on the unmet need
to reach the full cost of attendance as indicated on the financial aid
award letter.
 However, in the program's first year, first priority shall be in
accordance with subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph.
 b. In the event that there are more applicants who have the same
priority than there are remaining scholarships, the president shall
distribute the remaining number of such scholarships by means of a
lottery or other form of random selection.
 c. In each year, the awards made shall be proportionate to the total
applications received for students accepted for undergraduate study at
public and private not-for-profit degree granting institutions.
 4. Awards. Within amounts appropriated therefor, the president shall
grant an annual award to eligible applicants on a competitive basis
pursuant to subdivisions two and three of this section in the amount of
five hundred dollars for not more than four academic years of
undergraduate study, or five academic years, if the program of study
normally requires five years as defined by the commissioner pursuant to
article thirteen of this chapter. Up to five thousand awards may be
granted to new recipients annually.
 5. Offset. Such awards may be used to offset the applicant's total
cost of attendance determined for federal Title IV student financial aid
purposes.
 6. Rules. The corporation is authorized to promulgate rules and
regulations, and may promulgate emergency regulations, necessary for the
implementation of the provisions of this section.
 § 669-h. Excelsior scholarship. 1. Eligibility. An excelsior
scholarship award shall be made to an applicant who: (a) is matriculated
in an approved program leading to an undergraduate degree at a New York
state public institution of higher education; (b) if enrolled in (i) a
public institution of higher education prior to application, has
completed at least thirty combined credits per year following the
student's start date, or its equivalent, applicable to his or her
program or programs of study or (ii) an institution of higher education
prior to application, has completed at least thirty combined credits per
year following the student's start date, or its equivalent, applicable
to his or her program or programs of study and which were accepted upon
transfer to a public institution of higher education; (c) enrolls in at
least twelve credits per semester and completes at least thirty combined
credits per year following the student's start date, or its equivalent,
applicable to his or her program or programs of study except in limited
circumstances as prescribed by the corporation in regulation.
Notwithstanding, in the student's last semester, the student may take at
least one course needed to meet his or her graduation requirements and
enroll in and complete at least twelve credit hours or its equivalent.
For students who are disabled as defined by the Americans With
Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 USC 12101, the corporation shall prescribe
rules and regulations that allow applicants who are disabled to be
eligible for an award pursuant to this section based on modified
criteria; (d) has an adjusted gross income for the qualifying year, as
such terms are defined in this subdivision, equal to or less than: (i)
one hundred thousand dollars for recipients receiving an award in the
two thousand seventeen--two thousand eighteen academic year; (ii) one
hundred ten thousand dollars for recipients receiving an award in the
two thousand eighteen--two thousand nineteen academic year; and (iii)
one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars for recipients receiving an
award in the two thousand nineteen--two thousand twenty academic year
and thereafter; and (e) complies with the applicable provisions of this
article and all requirements promulgated by the corporation for the
administration of the program. Adjusted gross income shall be the total
of the combined adjusted gross income of the applicant and the
applicant's parents or the applicant and the applicant's spouse, if
married. Qualifying year shall be the adjusted gross income as reported
on the federal income tax return, or as otherwise obtained by the
corporation, for the calendar year coinciding with the tax year
established by the U.S. department of education to qualify applicants
for federal student financial aid programs authorized by Title IV of the
Higher Education Act of nineteen hundred sixty-five, as amended, for the
school year in which application for assistance is made. Provided,
however, if an applicant demonstrates to the corporation that there has
been a change in such applicant's adjusted gross income in the year(s)
subsequent to the qualifying year which would qualify such applicant for
an award, the corporation shall review and make a determination as to
whether such applicant meets the requirement set forth in paragraph (d)
of this subdivision based on such year. Provided, further that such
change was caused by the death, permanent and total physical or mental
disability, divorce, or separation by judicial decree or pursuant to an
agreement of separation which is filed with a court of competent
jurisdiction of any person whose income was required to be used to
compute the applicant's total adjusted gross income.
 2. Amount. Within amounts appropriated therefor and based on
availability of funds, awards shall be granted to applicants that the
corporation has determined are eligible to receive such awards. The
corporation shall grant such awards in an amount up to actual tuition;
provided, however, (a) a student who receives educational grants and/or
scholarships that cover the student's full cost of attendance shall not
be eligible for an award under this program; and (b) an award under this
program shall be applied to tuition after the application of payments
received under the tuition assistance program pursuant to section six
hundred sixty-seven of this subpart, tuition credits pursuant to section
six hundred eighty-nine-a of this article, federal Pell grant pursuant
to section one thousand seventy of title twenty of the United States
code, et seq., and any other program that covers the cost of attendance
unless exclusively for non-tuition expenses, and the award under this
program shall be reduced in the amount equal to such payments, provided
that the combined benefits do not exceed the resident undergraduate
tuition charged by the state university of New York.
 3. Duration. An eligible recipient shall not receive an award for more
than four academic years of full-time undergraduate study or five
academic years if the program of study normally requires five years. An
eligible recipient enrolled in an eligible two year program of study
shall not receive an award for more than two academic years.
Notwithstanding, such duration may be extended for an allowable
interruption of study including, but not limited to, death of a family
member, medical leave, military service, and parental leave, as
established by the corporation in regulation.
 4. Conditions. (a) An applicant who would be eligible for a New York
state tuition assistance program award pursuant to section six hundred
sixty-seven of this subpart and/or a federal Pell grant pursuant to
section one thousand seventy of title twenty of the United States code,
et. seq., is required to apply for each such award.
 (b) An applicant who has earned a bachelor's degree is ineligible to
receive an award pursuant to this section.
 (c) An applicant who has earned an associate's degree is ineligible to
receive an award for a two year program of study pursuant to this
section.
 (d) Notwithstanding paragraph c of subdivision four of section six
hundred sixty-one of this part, a school shall certify that a recipient
has achieved a grade point average necessary for successful completion
of his or her coursework to receive payment under the award.
 (e) A recipient shall agree to reside exclusively in New York state,
and shall not be employed in any other state, for a continuous number of
years equal to the duration of the award received within six months of
receipt of his or her final award payment, and sign a contract with the
corporation to have his or her full award converted to a student loan
according to a schedule to be determined by the corporation if such
student fails to fulfill this requirement. The terms and conditions of
this paragraph may, as established by the rules and regulations of the
corporation, be deferred: (i) to complete undergraduate study; or (ii)
to attend graduate school on at least a half-time basis. Any obligation
to comply with such provisions as outlined in this paragraph may be
cancelled upon the death of the recipient. Notwithstanding any
provisions of this paragraph to the contrary, the corporation is
authorized to promulgate rules and regulations to provide for the waiver
or suspension of any financial obligation which would involve extreme
hardship.
 (f) Notwithstanding paragraph (c) of subdivision one of this section,
a student who otherwise satisfies all of the requirements under this
section but fails to complete at least thirty combined credits, or its
equivalent, applicable to his or her program or programs of study in any
year shall be eligible to receive an award payment for the first
semester of such year, provided however, the student shall be ineligible
for any further payments under this section.
 5. Recipient selection. The president may establish: (a) an
application deadline and (b) a method of selecting recipients if in any
given year there are insufficient funds to cover the needs of all the
applicants provided that priority shall be given to eligible applicants
who are currently in attendance at a public institution of higher
education.
 6. Rules and regulations. The corporation is authorized to promulgate
rules and regulations, and may promulgate emergency regulations,
necessary for the implementation of the provisions of this section
including, but not limited to, the criteria for distributing the awards,
which may include a lottery or other form of random selection.
 SUBPART III
 ACADEMIC PERFORMANCE AWARDS
Section 670. Regents college scholarships.
 670-a. Empire state scholarships of excellence.
 670-b. Scholarships for academic excellence.
 671. Regents professional education in nursing scholarships.
 672. Regents professional education in medicine or dentistry
 scholarships.
 672-a. Regents professional education in optometry scholarships.
 672-b. Regents professional education in veterinary medicine
 scholarships.
 673. Regents physician shortage scholarships.
 674. Regents veterans with war service scholarships.
 675. Empire state challenger scholarships for teachers.
 676. Empire state challenger fellowships for teachers.
 677. Regents physician loan forgiveness program.
 677-a. Physician loan repayment program.
 678. Regents health care professional opportunity
 scholarships.
 679. Regents professional opportunity scholarships.
 § 670. Regents college scholarships. 1. Number and certification.
Twenty-five thousand regents college scholarships shall be awarded each
year. Such scholarships shall be allocated as provided in article
thirteen to eligible students as certified to the president by the
commissioner.
 2. Duration. Each scholarship recipient shall receive an annual award
for each of not more than four academic years of undergraduate study, or
five academic years if a program of study normally requires five years
as defined by the commissioner pursuant to article thirteen; provided,
however, for the purposes of this section a student who is in his or her
last term of eligibility and who need not take twelve or more credits or
the equivalent thereof to complete the prescribed course of study of the
institution such student is attending shall remain eligible for such
award.
 3. Amount. The president shall make awards in the following amounts:
 (a) The annual award shall be one thousand dollars, but if the income
exceeds one thousand eight hundred dollars, the award shall be reduced
by one dollar for each ten dollars, or part thereof, of the excess,
provided the minimum award shall be two hundred fifty dollars. If the
annual amount of tuition and educational fees payable by the student is
more than three hundred fifty dollars, the award shall not exceed the
amount of such tuition and educational fees; if the amount of such
tuition and educational fees is three hundred fifty dollars or less, the
award shall not exceed three hundred fifty dollars.
 (b) The annual award for any scholarship awarded pursuant to this
section and effective subsequent to the nineteen hundred
seventy-three--nineteen hundred seventy-four school year shall be two
hundred fifty dollars. Provided, however, in the case of any student who
has received an award effective with the nineteen hundred
seventy-four--nineteen hundred seventy-five school year, if the award of
two hundred fifty dollars when combined with any award made pursuant to
the provisions of subdivision four of section six hundred sixty-seven of
this article would be less than the total of the combined awards he
might otherwise be entitled to receive pursuant to the provisions of
paragraph (a) of this subdivision and of subdivision three of section
six hundred sixty-seven, he shall be entitled to receive the combined
amount computed pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (a) of this
subdivision and of subdivision three of section six hundred sixty-seven.
 § 670-a. Empire state scholarships of excellence. 1. Number and
certification. One thousand empire state scholarships of excellence
shall be awarded each year. Such scholarships shall be allocated as
provided in article thirteen of this chapter to eligible students
certified to the president by the commissioner.
 2. Duration. A scholarship shall entitle the recipient to an annual
award for not more than four academic years of undergraduate study, or
five academic years if the program of study normally requires five years
as defined by the commissioner pursuant to article thirteen of this
chapter.
 3. Amount. The annual award shall be in the amount of two thousand
dollars provided in no event shall the amount of the annual award exceed
the recipient's cost of attendance at the institution attended. Cost of
attendance shall mean tuition, required fees, laboratory and other
instruction related expenses, books, transportation, room and board. The
cost of attendance however shall be reduced by the amount the recipient
shall receive or would be entitled to receive as a Pell grant pursuant
to section one thousand seventy-a of title twenty of the United States
Code. Anything in this article to the contrary notwithstanding, a
recipient of an empire state scholarship of excellence may concurrently
receive with such award any other academic or general award for which he
or she may be eligible provided however in no event shall the
combination of all such awards exceed the recipient's cost of attendance
at the institution.
 § 670-b. Scholarships for academic excellence. 1. Number and
certification. Five thousand scholarships shall be awarded in the
nineteen hundred ninety-seven--ninety-eight academic year, and eight
thousand scholarships shall be awarded in the nineteen hundred
ninety-eight--ninety-nine academic year and thereafter. Such
scholarships shall be allocated as provided in article thirteen of this
chapter to eligible students certified to the president by the
commissioner.
 2. Duration. A scholarship shall entitle the recipient to an annual
award for not more than four academic years of undergraduate study, or
five academic years, if the program of study normally requires five
years as defined by the commissioner pursuant to article thirteen of
this chapter.
 3. Amount. a. (i) For the nineteen hundred ninety-seven--ninety-eight
academic year, there shall be two thousand scholarships in the amount of
one thousand dollars each and there shall be three thousand scholarships
in the amount of five hundred dollars each.
 (ii) For the nineteen hundred ninety-eight--ninety-nine academic year
and thereafter, there shall be two thousand scholarships in the amount
of one thousand five hundred dollars each and there shall be six
thousand scholarships in the amount of five hundred dollars each.
 (iii) Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, students
awarded one thousand dollar scholarships in the nineteen hundred
ninety-seven--ninety-eight academic year shall be entitled in the
nineteen hundred ninety-eight--ninety-nine academic year and thereafter
to an annual award of one thousand five hundred dollars.
 b. In no event shall the amount of the annual award exceed the
recipient's cost of attendance at the institution attended. Cost of
attendance shall mean tuition, required fees, laboratory and other
instruction related expenses, books, transportation, room and board.
Anything in this article to the contrary notwithstanding, a recipient of
a scholarship may concurrently receive with such award any other
academic or general award for which he or she may be eligible provided
however in no event shall a recipient be awarded a scholarship in any
amount where the combination of all such awards would exceed the
recipient's cost of attendance at the institution.
 § 671. Regents professional education in nursing scholarships. 1.
Number and certification. Eight hundred regents professional education
in nursing scholarships shall be awarded each year. Such scholarships
shall be allocated as provided in article thirteen to eligible students
as certified to the president by the commissioner.
 2. Duration. Each such scholarship shall entitle the recipient to an
annual award for each year while enrolled in an approved course of study
leading to registration as a professional nurse, but not exceeding the
normal period of study required to complete the requirements for the
program, as such approved courses and normal periods of study are
defined by the commissioner pursuant to article thirteen.
 3. Amount. The president shall make awards in the following amounts:
 (a) The annual award shall be five hundred dollars, but if the income
exceeds one thousand eight hundred dollars, the award shall be reduced
by one dollar for each ten dollars, or part thereof, of the excess. The
minimum award shall be two hundred dollars. If the annual amount of
tuition and educational fees payable by the student is more than three
hundred fifty dollars, the award shall not exceed the amount of such
tuition and fees; if the amount of such tuition and educational fees is
three hundred fifty dollars, or less, the award shall not exceed three
hundred fifty dollars.
 (b) The annual award for any scholarship awarded pursuant to this
section and effective subsequent to the nineteen hundred
seventy-three--nineteen hundred seventy-four school year shall be two
hundred fifty dollars. Provided, however, in the case of any student
who has received an award effective with the nineteen hundred
seventy-four--nineteen hundred seventy-five school year, if the award of
two hundred fifty dollars when combined with any award made pursuant to
the provisions of subdivision four of section six hundred sixty-seven of
this article would be less than the total of the combined awards he
might otherwise be entitled to receive pursuant to the provisions of
paragraph (a) of this subdivision and of subdivision three of section
six hundred sixty-seven, he shall be entitled to receive the combined
amount computed pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (a) of this
subdivision and of subdivision three of section six hundred sixty-seven.
 § 672. Regents professional education in medicine or dentistry
scholarships. 1. Number and certification. One hundred regents
professional education in medicine or dentistry scholarships shall be
awarded each year. Such scholarships shall be allocated as provided in
article thirteen to eligible students as certified to the president by
the commissioner.
 2. Duration. Such scholarship shall entitle the recipient to an award
for not more than four academic years while matriculated in an approved
program, as defined by the commissioner pursuant to article thirteen.
 3. Amount. The president shall make academic year awards in the amount
of one thousand dollars, but if the income exceeds one thousand eight
hundred dollars, the award shall be reduced by the amount of one dollar
for each eight dollars, or part thereof, of the excess, except that in
no event shall the award be less than three hundred fifty dollars. If
the annual amount of tuition and educational fees payable by the student
is more than three hundred fifty dollars, the award shall not exceed the
amount of such tuition and fees.
 4. The provisions of this section shall only apply to any recipient
who receives his or her first award payment prior to the nineteen
hundred eighty-five--nineteen hundred eighty-six academic year.
 § 672-a. Regents professional education in optometry scholarships. 1.
Number and certification. Five regents professional education in
optometry scholarships shall be awarded each year. Such scholarships
shall be allocated as provided in article thirteen to eligible students
as certified to the president by the commissioner.
 2. Duration. Such scholarship shall entitle the recipient to an award
for not more than four academic years while matriculated in an approved
program, as defined by the commissioner pursuant to article thirteen.
 3. Amount. The president shall make academic year awards in the amount
of one thousand dollars, but if the income exceeds one thousand eight
hundred dollars, the award shall be reduced by the amount of one dollar
for each eight dollars, or part thereof, of the excess, except that in
no event shall the award be less than three hundred fifty dollars. If
the annual amount of tuition and educational fees payable by the student
is more than three hundred fifty dollars, the award shall not exceed the
amount of such tuition and fees.
 4. The provisions of this section shall only apply to any recipient
who receives his or her first award payment prior to the nineteen
hundred eighty-five--nineteen hundred eighty-six academic year.
 § 672-b. Regents professional education in veterinary medicine
scholarships. 1. Number and certification. Ten regents professional
education in veterinary medicine scholarships shall be awarded each
year. Such scholarships shall be allocated as provided in article
thirteen to eligible students as certified to the president by the
commissioner.
 2. Duration. Such scholarship shall entitle the recipient to an award
for not more than four academic years while matriculated in an approved
program, as defined by the commissioner pursuant to article thirteen.
 3. Amount. The president shall make academic year awards in the amount
of one thousand dollars, but if the income exceeds one thousand eight
hundred dollars, the award shall be reduced by the amount of one dollar
for each eight dollars, or part thereof, of the excess, except that in
no event shall the award be less than three hundred fifty dollars. If
the annual amount of tuition and educational fees payable by the student
is more than three hundred fifty dollars, the award shall not exceed the
amount of such tuition and fees.
 4. The provisions of this section shall only apply to any recipient
who receives his or her first award payment prior to the nineteen
hundred eighty-five--nineteen hundred eighty-six academic year.
 § 673. Regents physician shortage scholarships. 1. Number and
certification. At least thirty percent of the total scholarships
awarded each year under the provisions of section six hundred
seventy-two shall be awarded to eligible students certified to the
president by the commissioner.
 2. Duration. Each such scholarship shall entitle the recipient to an
award for not more than four academic years while matriculated in an
approved program, as defined by the commissioner pursuant to article
thirteen.
 3. Amount. The president shall make academic year awards in amounts
provided in this subdivision. The academic year award shall be four
thousand dollars, but if the family income of an applicant exceeds six
thousand dollars, the award shall be reduced by the amount of one dollar
for each four dollars, or part thereof, of the excess, except that in no
event shall the award be less than one thousand dollars.
 4. The provisions of this section shall only apply to any recipient
who receives his or her first award payment prior to the nineteen
hundred eighty-five--nineteen hundred eighty-six academic year.
 § 674. Regents veterans with war service scholarships. 1. Number and
certification. Six hundred regents veterans with war service
scholarships shall be awarded for study beginning with the college year
nineteen hundred seventy-five--nineteen hundred seventy-six, to eligible
students certified to the president by the commissioner.
 2. Residence. Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the
contrary, for such scholarship the only residence requirement for
eligibility is that an applicant must have been a legal resident of New
York state at the time of entry into the armed forces and must currently
be a legal resident.
 3. Duration. Each such scholarship shall entitle the recipient thereto
to an annual award for each of four academic years of full-time or
part-time study, as defined by the commissioner pursuant to article
thirteen, at a college or at a business, professional, vocational,
technical or trade school licensed or approved by the regents. If all of
a scholarship holder's attendance is less than full-time, as so defined,
payments may be made for a total period not to exceed five academic
years.
 4. Amount. Notwithstanding any provisions of this article to the
contrary, the president shall make academic year awards in the amounts
provided in this subdivision. The recipient shall be entitled to a
maximum award of three hundred fifty dollars for each semester or term
of full-time or part-time study, but not to exceed the cost of tuition
and educational fees for such study. However, the aggregate award for a
single academic year shall not exceed three hundred fifty dollars, or
five hundred twenty-five dollars if the recipient is in continuous
attendance during the entire academic year, including the summer term,
and the total aggregate payment under this subdivision shall in no case
exceed one thousand four hundred dollars.
 5. Leave of absence. Notwithstanding any provision of the article to
the contrary, if an award is paid the recipient under this subdivision
for any semester, quarter or term of attendance during an academic year,
then a leave of absence shall not be required for non-attendance during
any part of the balance of such academic year.
 § 675. Empire state challenger scholarships for teachers. 1. Number
and certification. Three hundred twelve Empire state challenger
scholarships for teachers shall be awarded each year. Such scholarships
shall be allocated as provided in article thirteen of this chapter to
eligible students as certified to the president by the commissioner.
 2. Duration. Such scholarship shall entitle the recipient to an annual
award for not more than four academic years while matriculated in an
approved program, as defined by the commissioner pursuant to article
thirteen of this chapter. In order to be eligible for an award, a
recipient must be enrolled in an approved program no later than the
beginning of the junior year.
 3. Amount. The president shall make academic year awards up to a
maximum amount of three thousand dollars in reimbursement for tuition
and fees. An award shall not exceed the amount of such tuition and fees.
 § 676. Empire state challenger fellowships for teachers. 1. Number
and certification. Two hundred full-time academic study fellowships and
two hundred part-time academic study fellowships shall be awarded each
year. All such fellowships shall be awarded to eligible students
certified to the president by the commissioner pursuant to article
thirteen of this chapter.
 2. Duration. Each fellowship award pursuant to paragraph b or c of
subdivision eight of section six hundred five of this chapter shall
entitle the recipient to an award for one academic year of full-time
study while matriculated in an approved graduate program, as defined by
the commissioner pursuant to article thirteen of this chapter. Each
fellowship awarded pursuant to paragraph d of subdivision eight of
section six hundred five of this chapter shall entitle the recipient to
an award for not more than two academic years of part-time study while
matriculated in any approved graduate program, as defined by the
commissioner pursuant to article thirteen of this chapter. No recipient
shall receive an award subsequent to completion of an approved graduate
program leading to permanent certification as a teacher in the field or
fields for which the fellowship was awarded.
 3. Amount. The president shall make full-time academic study awards up
to a maximum annual amount of four thousand dollars. The president shall
make part-time academic study awards up to a maximum annual amount of
one thousand dollars. Awards shall not exceed the recipient's cost of
attendance at the institution. Cost of the attendance shall mean
tuition, required fees, laboratory and other instruction related
expenses, books, transportation, room and board.
 § 677. Regents physician loan forgiveness program. 1. Number and
certification. Eighty regents physician loan forgiveness awards shall be
awarded each year. Such awards shall be allocated as provided in article
thirteen of this chapter to eligible physicians as certified to the
president by the commissioner.
 2. Calculation of award amounts. Each award shall consist of two
consecutive annual loan forgiveness payments. Each of the annual
payments shall be for an amount equal to the total of undergraduate and
medical school student loan expense or ten thousand dollars whichever is
less. The president shall be responsible for calculating the dollar
amount of each award that eligibile candidates may receive from this
program. For the purposes of this section, student loan expense shall
mean the cumulative total of the annual student loans covering the cost
of attendance at an undergraduate institution and/or medical school.
Interest paid or due on student loans that an applicant has taken out
for use in paying for such undergraduate and/or medical education shall
be considered eligible for reimbursement under this program.
 3. Award disbursement. a. Annual award disbursements shall be the
responsibility of the president and shall occur prior to the beginning
of each of the required terms of service as specified in the service
contract. The board of trustees of the higher education services
corporation shall adopt rules and regulations regarding criteria for
determining successful completion of the service contract and any appeal
process that may be required to implement this paragraph upon
recommendation of the president in consultation with the commissioner.
 b. The disbursement of the second annual award shall be dependent upon
successful completion of the first year requirement of the service
contract as defined by the president, as well as other criteria set
forth in this section.
 § 677-a. Physician loan repayment program. 1. Certification.
Physician loan repayment awards shall be awarded each year. Such awards
shall be allocated as provided in article nine of the public health law
to eligible physicians as certified to the president by the commissioner
of health.
 2. Duration. Each award shall entitle the recipient to an annual award
and a recipient shall be eligible for no more than two academic years
and no more than four years in post-residency placement.
 3. Calculation of award amounts. The president shall be responsible
for calculating the dollar amount of each award that eligible candidates
may receive from this program pursuant to section nine hundred three of
the public health law. For the purposes of this section, student loan
expense shall mean the cumulative total of the annual student loans
covering the cost of attendance at an undergraduate institution and/or
medical school. Interest paid or due on student loans that an applicant
has taken out for use in paying for such undergraduate and/or medical
education shall be considered eligible for reimbursement under this
program.
 4. Award disbursement. Annual award disbursements shall be the
responsibility of the president.
 * § 678. Regents health care professional opportunity scholarships. 1.
Number and certification. One hundred regents health career professional
opportunity scholarships shall be awarded each year. Such scholarships
shall be allocated as provided in article thirteen of this chapter to
eligible students as certified to the president by the commissioner.
 2. Duration. Such scholarship shall entitle the recipient to an award
for not more than four academic years while matriculated in an approved
program, as defined by the commissioner pursuant to article thirteen of
this chapter.
 3. Amount. The president shall make academic year awards in amounts
provided in this subdivision. The academic year award shall be ten
thousand dollars per year, provided, however, that in no event shall the
award exceed the actual costs of attendance. Costs of attendance shall
include tuition, required fees, laboratory and other instruction related
expenses, books, transportation, room and board.
 * NB Scholarship terminated per ch 31/85 § 17, as amended
 * § 679. Regents professional opportunity scholarships. 1. Number and
certification. Two hundred twenty regents professional opportunity
scholarships shall be awarded each year. Such scholarships shall be
allocated as provided in article thirteen of this chapter to eligible
students as certified to the president by the commissioner.
 2. Duration. No recipient shall be eligible to receive an award
pursuant to this section for more than four academic years unless
enrolled in a program of study recognized by the regents as normally
requiring more than four years to complete.
 3. Amount. The president shall make academic year awards in amounts
provided in this subdivision. The academic year award shall be up to
five thousand dollars provided however that if family income of the
applicant exceeds an amount established by the regents and approved by
the director of the division of the budget for an economically
disadvantaged applicant, the award shall be reduced by the amount of one
dollar for each four dollars, or part thereof, of the excess, provided,
however, that in no event shall the award be less than one thousand
dollars, and no award shall exceed the actual costs of attendance. Costs
of attendance shall include tuition, required fees, laboratory and other
instruction related expenses, books, transportation, room and board.
 * NB Scholarship terminated per ch 31/85 § 17, as amended
 SUBPART IV - OTHER AWARDS
Section 679-a. New York state licensed social worker loan forgiveness
 program.
 679-b. Primary care practitioner scholarship program.
 679-c. Senator Patricia K. McGee nursing faculty scholarship
 program.
 679-d. New York state nursing faculty loan forgiveness incentive
 program.
 679-e. New York state district attorney and indigent legal
 services attorney loan forgiveness program.
 679-f. New York state young farmers loan forgiveness incentive
 program.
 679-g. New York state get on your feet loan forgiveness program.
 679-h. New York state child welfare worker incentive scholarship
 program.
 679-i. New York state child welfare worker loan forgiveness
 incentive program.
 679-j. The New York state teacher loan forgiveness program.
 § 679-a. New York state licensed social worker loan forgiveness
program. 1. Purpose. The president shall grant student loan forgiveness
awards for the purpose of increasing the number of social workers
serving in critical human service areas. For the purposes of this
section, the term "critical human service area" shall mean an area in
New York state designated by the corporation, in consultation with a
committee comprised of one representative each from the corporation, the
department, the department of health, the department of mental hygiene,
and the office of children and family services, provided that such areas
shall include, but not be limited to, areas with a shortage of social
workers in home care, health, mental health, substance abuse, aging,
HIV/AIDS and child welfare concerns, or communities with multi-lingual
needs.
 2. Eligibility. To be eligible for an award pursuant to this
subdivision, applicants shall (a) be licensed as a social worker
pursuant to article one hundred fifty-four of this chapter; (b) comply
with subdivisions three and five of section six hundred sixty-one of
this part; and (c) have an outstanding student loan debt.
 3. Priority. Such awards shall be made annually to applicants in the
following priority:
 (a) First priority shall be given to applicants who have received
payment of an award pursuant to this section in a prior year and who, in
the year prior to application, have provided social work services in (i)
a critical human service area, or (ii) a previously designated critical
human service area;
 (b) Second priority shall be given to applicants who have not received
payment of an award pursuant to this section in a prior year and who
have provided social work services in a critical human service area in
the year prior to such application; and
 (c) Third priority shall be given to applicants who are economically
disadvantaged as defined by the corporation.
 4. Awards. The corporation shall grant awards in the value of six
thousand five hundred dollars to individuals who have provided full-time
social work services in a critical human service area in the year prior
to such application, provided that no recipient shall receive an award
that exceeds the total remaining balance of the student loan debt and
that no recipient shall receive cumulative awards, pursuant to this
section, in excess of twenty-six thousand dollars. Awards shall be
within the amounts appropriated for such purpose and based on
availability of funds.
 5. Rules and regulations. The corporation is authorized to promulgate
rules and regulations necessary for the implementation of the provisions
of this section. In the event that there are more applicants who have
the same priority, as provided in subdivision three of this section,
than there are remaining awards, the corporation shall provide in
regulation the method of distributing the remaining number of such
awards, which may include a lottery or other form of random selection.
 § 679-b. Primary care practitioner scholarship program. 1.
Certification. Primary care practitioner scholarships may be awarded
annually, subject to the availability of funds therefor. Such awards
shall be allocated pursuant to section nine hundred four of the public
health law, to eligible students certified to the president by the
commissioner of health.
 2. Duration. Each scholarship shall entitle the recipient to an annual
award and a recipient shall be eligible for no more than the equivalent
of two academic years based on full-time study.
 3. Calculation of award amounts. The president shall make annual
awards of up to fifteen thousand dollars, but in no event shall the
award exceed cost of attendance at the institution. Cost of attendance
shall mean tuition, required fees, books, transportation, room and
board.
 4. Award disbursement. Annual award disbursements shall be the
responsibility of the president.
 § 679-c. Senator Patricia K. McGee nursing faculty scholarship
program. 1. Purpose:
 a. The president shall grant scholarship awards for the purpose of
increasing the number of educators and adjunct clinical faculty teaching
in the field of nursing education in New York state. Such awards shall
be made on a competitive basis, as promulgated by the corporation
through rules and regulations to applicants who are registered
professional nurses and are enrolling in an approved program to obtain a
master's degree in nursing or a doctoral degree that will qualify them
as nursing faculty or adjunct clinical faculty.
 b. To be eligible for an award pursuant to this subdivision,
applicants shall (1) be a licensed registered nurse in New York state;
(2) enroll in a master's degree program in nursing or doctoral degree
program that will qualify them as nursing faculty or adjunct clinical
faculty in New York state; (3) agree to practice in New York state as
nursing faculty upon completion of such degree program; and (4) comply
with subdivisions three and five of section six hundred sixty-one of
this part.
 2. Award conditions and requirements. Scholarships shall be awarded on
a competitive basis as promulgated by the corporation through rules and
regulations to applicants whom the corporation has certified are
eligible to receive such awards; and who agree to provide not less than
twelve academic credit hours or its equivalent as nursing faculty or
clinical teaching service for the duration of at least four years upon
completion of the degree program.
 3. Amount. The corporation shall grant such awards within the amounts
appropriated for such purpose and based on availability of funds
according to a schedule to be determined by the corporation in an
amount:
 a. equal to the tuition charged to state resident students attending a
master's degree program in nursing or doctoral degree program that will
qualify them as nursing faculty or adjunct clinical faculty at the state
university of New York; the average mandatory fees charged at the state
university of New York, or the actual tuition and fees charged to the
recipient, whichever is less; and the average non-tuition cost of
attendance, as determined by the corporation and as approved by the
director of the budget, for a student at the state university of New
York or actual non-tuition cost of attendance at such institution,
whichever is less, provided that the scholarship shall not exceed an
amount that is equal to the total cost of attendance determined for
federal Title IV student financial aid purposes, less all other
scholarships and grants provided by New York state, other states, the
federal government, or other governments, and the amount of educational
benefits paid under any program that would duplicate the purposes of
this program, provided that any scholarships or grants provided to a
recipient by the institution which are intended to fund any portion of
the difference between the annual state award and the actual costs of
attendance at any such institution shall not be considered to duplicate
the purposes of this program.
 b. No annual award shall exceed twenty thousand dollars.
 4. Other awards. Award recipients shall be eligible to apply for other
awards.
 5. Penalties for noncompliance. a. The corporation shall convert to a
student loan the full amount of the award given pursuant to this
section, plus interest, according to a schedule to be determined by the
corporation if: (1) three years after the completion of the degree
program it is found that an applicant did not begin to provide nursing
faculty or clinical nurse faculty services; (2) if such applicant does
not provide nursing faculty or clinical nursing faculty services for
four years within seven years of the completion of the master's degree
program in nursing or doctoral degree; or (3) the student fails to
receive a master's degree in nursing or doctoral degree that will
qualify them as nursing faculty or adjunct clinical faculty within the
three years of receiving the award. The terms and conditions of this
subdivision shall be deferred for any interruption in graduate or
doctoral study or employment as established by the rules and regulations
of the corporation. Any obligation to comply with such provisions as
outlined in this section shall be cancelled upon the death of the
recipient. Notwithstanding any provisions of this subdivision to the
contrary, the corporation is authorized to promulgate rules and
regulations to provide for the waiver or suspension of any financial
obligation which would involve extreme hardship.
 b. The rate of interest charged for repayment of the student loan
shall be determined pursuant to rules and regulations promulgated by the
corporation.
 § 679-d. New York state nursing faculty loan forgiveness incentive
program. a. Purpose. (1) The president shall grant student loan
forgiveness awards for the purpose of increasing the number of educators
and adjunct clinical faculty teaching in the field of nursing education
in New York state. Such awards shall be made on a competitive basis as
promulgated by the corporation through rules and regulations, to
applicants who are registered professional nurses with previous clinical
experience in nursing who have completed a masters program in nursing or
doctoral degree that qualified them as nursing faculty or adjunct
clinical faculty.
 (2) To be eligible for an award pursuant to this subdivision,
applicants shall (i) be licensed as a registered professional nurse;
(ii) have an outstanding student loan debt from a nursing degree program
acquired on or after January first, two thousand one; (iii) have a
master's degree in nursing or doctoral degree that qualified them as
nursing faculty or adjunct clinical faculty; (iv) be employed as a
faculty member at a nursing school located in New York state; and (v)
comply with subdivisions three and five of section six hundred sixty-one
of this part.
 (3) An award of eight thousand dollars shall be made annually to
recipients who have provided classroom or clinical instruction of not
less than twelve academic credit hours, or its equivalent, as nursing
faculty or in clinical teaching service in the academic year preceding
the granting of the award, provided that no recipient shall receive
cumulative awards, pursuant to this section, in excess of forty thousand
dollars.
 (4) Other awards. Award recipients shall be eligible to apply for
other awards.
 b. Duration. Loan forgiveness awards shall be made annually to
applicants whom the corporation has certified are eligible to receive
such awards and have provided nursing faculty or clinical nurse faculty
services required pursuant to this article; provided that no award shall
be granted for more than five years.
 c. Amount. The corporation shall grant such awards within the amounts
appropriated for such purpose and based on availability of funds in an
amount not to exceed the total cost of the student loan debt.
 § 679-e. New York state district attorney and indigent legal services
attorney loan forgiveness program. 1. Purpose. The president shall grant
student loan forgiveness awards for the purpose of increasing the number
of experienced attorneys serving in the position of district attorney or
indigent legal services attorney in the counties of the state.
 2. Definitions. a. (i) "Eligible attorney" means an attorney, who is a
resident of and is admitted to practice law in New York state, who is
employed full-time as either a district attorney, as defined in
subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, or an indigent legal services
attorney, as defined in subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph, who is
admitted to practice law in this state for not more than eleven years or
who was within the eligible period as defined in paragraph b of this
subdivision during the time for which such person is seeking a student
loan expense grant. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an eligible attorney
shall include those district attorney applicants who were awarded
program eligibility and who provided qualified service between April
first, two thousand eight and March thirty-first, two thousand eleven;
such an eligible attorney shall remain eligible to participate in the
program provided they are within an eligible period measured from six
years from the date which such attorney was first employed as a district
attorney.
 (ii) "District attorney" means the district attorney of one of the
counties of the state or an employee of the office of any such district
attorney.
 (iii) "Indigent legal services attorney" means an attorney who is an
employee of (A) any agency designated by subdivisions one and two of
section seven hundred twenty-two of the county law, who is engaged in
the practice of criminal law on behalf of persons charged with a crime
who are financially unable to obtain counsel; (B) a not-for-profit
corporation that is exempt from the payment of federal income taxes
pursuant to section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code and
established for the purpose of providing legal services that include
civil legal services to persons within New York state who are
financially unable to obtain counsel; or (C) an agency specified in
clause (A) of this subparagraph and/or a corporation specified in clause
(B) of this subparagraph and who provides a combination of the civil and
criminal services specified therein.
 b. "Eligible period" means the six-year period after completion of the
third year and before the commencement of the tenth year of employment
as an eligible attorney. For purposes of this section, all periods of
time during which an admitted attorney was employed as an eligible
attorney and all periods of time during which a law school graduate
awaiting admission to the New York state bar was employed by a
prosecuting or criminal defense agency as permitted by section four
hundred eighty-four of the judiciary law shall be combined.
 c. "Student loan expense" means the total loan balance required to be
paid by the eligible attorney on the cumulative total of the attorney's
outstanding student loans covering his or her cost of attendance at an
undergraduate institution and/or law school, at the time of the
attorney's first application for reimbursement. Interest paid or due on
such loans shall be considered eligible for reimbursement under this
program. For purposes of this calculation, the amount of the student
loan expenses shall be reduced by any grants, loan forgiveness, or
similar reductions to the attorney's indebtedness that the attorney has
received or shall receive, including, but not limited to, law school
loan forgiveness and public service scholarships.
 d. "Year of qualified service" means the twelve month period measured
from the anniversary of the attorney's employment as an eligible
attorney, or as a law school graduate awaiting admission to the New York
state bar employed by a prosecuting or criminal defense agency as
permitted by section four hundred eighty-four of the judiciary law,
adjusted for any interruption in employment. Any period of temporary
leave from service taken by an eligible attorney shall not be considered
in the calculation of qualified service. However, the period of
temporary leave shall be considered an interruption in employment and
the calculation of the time period of qualified service shall recommence
when the eligible attorney returns to full time service.
 3. Awards. a. An eligible attorney may apply for reimbursement after
the completion of each year of qualified service provided however that
reimbursement to each eligible attorney shall not exceed three thousand
four hundred dollars, per qualifying year, subject to appropriations
available therefor. The president may establish: (i) an application
deadline and (ii) a method of selecting recipients if in any given year
there are insufficient funds to cover the needs of all the applicants.
Awards shall be within the amounts appropriated for such purpose and
based on availability of funds.
 b. An eligible attorney may apply after the completion of the fourth
year of qualified service, and annually thereafter after the completion
of the fifth through ninth year of qualified service, and may seek a
student loan expense grant for only the previous year of qualified
service within the time periods prescribed by the president. An eligible
attorney may receive student loan expense grants for no more than six
years of qualified service within an eligible period.
 4. Rules and regulations. The president shall promulgate rules and
regulations for the administration of this program. The president may
promulgate rules and regulations to delegate to the entities employing
the eligible attorneys the responsibility to certify the employment
status and the student loan balance of the applicants.
 § 679-f. New York state young farmers loan forgiveness incentive
program. 1. Purpose. The president shall grant student loan forgiveness
awards for the purpose of alleviating the burden of student loan debt
for young farmers. Such awards shall be made on a competitive basis, in
accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the corporation for
such purposes, to applicants who meet the eligibility criteria. Such
rules and regulations shall include provisions for the consideration of
applicants who are economically disadvantaged.
 2. Eligibility. To be eligible for an award pursuant to this section,
applicants shall: (a) have graduated and obtained a degree from an
approved New York state college or university; (b) have an outstanding
student loan debt from obtaining such degree; (c) operate a farm in New
York state on a full-time basis; (d) agree to operate such farm for the
duration of no less than five years; (e) have produced an "agricultural
product" as defined by section three hundred twenty-eight of the
agriculture and markets law, for no more than ten consecutive years; and
(f) comply with subdivisions three and five of section six hundred
sixty-one of this part.
 3. Awards. Awards shall be granted to qualified applicants in the
amount of up to ten thousand dollars per year, per applicant, not to
exceed a duration of five years and not to exceed the total amount of
such applicant's student loan debt. The corporation shall grant such
awards within amounts appropriated for such purposes and based on the
availability of funds. No one applicant shall receive more than a total
of fifty thousand dollars upon the end of a five year period.
 4. Priority. First priority shall be given to applicants who are
completing the second, third, fourth or fifth year of full-time farm
operation and are re-applying to receive an award under this program.
Second priority shall be given to an applicant who can demonstrate
economic need but did not receive an award during a previous application
period. If larger numbers of applicants are eligible pursuant to this
subdivision than funds available, applicants shall be chosen pursuant to
rules and regulations promulgated by the corporation. Provided, however,
that each applicant chosen shall receive an award of up to ten thousand
dollars in each year such applicant is accepted into the program.
 § 679-g. New York state get on your feet loan forgiveness program. 1.
Purpose. The president shall grant student loan forgiveness awards for
the purpose of alleviating the burden of federal student loan debt for
recent New York state college graduates.
 2. Eligibility. To be eligible for an award pursuant to this section,
an applicant shall: (a) have graduated from a high school located in New
York state or attended an approved New York state program for a state
high school equivalency diploma and received such high school
equivalency diploma; (b) have graduated and obtained an undergraduate
degree from a college or university with its headquarters located in New
York state in or after the two thousand fourteen--fifteen academic year;
(c) apply for this program within two years of obtaining such degree;
(d) be a participant in a federal income-driven repayment plan whose
payment amount is generally ten percent of discretionary income; (e)
have income of less than fifty thousand dollars; (f) comply with
subdivisions three and five of section six hundred sixty-one of this
part; and (g) work in New York state, if employed. For purposes of this
program, "income" shall be the total adjusted gross income of the
applicant and the applicant's spouse, if applicable.
 3. Awards. An applicant whose annual income is less than fifty
thousand dollars shall be eligible to receive an award equal to one
hundred percent of his or her monthly federal income-driven repayment
plan payments for twenty-four months of repayment under the federal
program. Provided, however, that the awards granted under this section
shall be deferred for a recipient who has been granted a deferment or
forbearance under the federal income-driven repayment plan. Upon
completion of such deferment or forbearance period, such recipient shall
be eligible to receive an award for the remaining time period under this
subdivision. A recipient who is not a resident of New York state at the
time any payment is made under this program shall be required to refund
such payments to the state. The corporation shall be authorized to
recover such payments in accordance with rules and regulations
promulgated by the corporation. A student who is delinquent or in
default on a student loan made under any statutory New York state or
federal education loan program or has failed to comply with the terms of
a service condition imposed by an award made pursuant to this article or
has failed to repay an award shall be ineligible to receive an award
under this program until such delinquency, default or failure is cured.
 4. Rules and regulations. The corporation is authorized to promulgate
rules and regulations, and may promulgate emergency regulations
necessary for the implementation of the provisions of this section.
 § 679-h. New York state child welfare worker incentive scholarship
program. 1. Purpose. The president shall grant scholarship awards for
the purpose of enhancing the proficiency of current child welfare
workers in New York state. Such awards shall be made on a competitive
basis to applicants who are currently employed at a voluntary
not-for-profit child welfare agency in New York state licensed by the
office of children and family services, or employed within such state
agency as a child welfare worker, with at least two years' experience
and are enrolling in an approved program to obtain a degree that will
enhance their ability to work in such agency.
 2. Eligibility. To be eligible for an award pursuant to this section,
applicants shall: a. be currently employed at a voluntary not-for-profit
child welfare agency in New York state licensed by the office of
children and family services, with at least two years of qualified
experience;
 b. be matriculated in an undergraduate or graduate degree program at
an institution of higher education located within New York state in a
program of study that would enhance their ability to work in such agency
as determined by the president;
 c. agree to work in a voluntary not-for-profit child welfare agency in
New York state licensed by the office of children and family services as
a child welfare worker on a full time basis for a period of no less than
five continuous years upon completion of such degree program within a
reasonable period of time and maintain residency in New York state for
such period of employment; and
 d. comply with subdivisions three and five of section six hundred
sixty-one of this part.
 3. Award conditions and requirements. a. Within amounts appropriated
therefore and based on availability of funds, scholarships shall be
granted beginning with the two thousand seventeen -- two thousand
eighteen academic year and thereafter on a competitive basis to
applicants whom the corporation has certified are eligible to receive
such awards; and who agree to work in a voluntary not-for-profit child
welfare agency in New York state licensed by the office of children and
family services as a child welfare worker on a full time basis for a
period of no less than five continuous years upon completion of such
degree within a reasonable period of time and maintain residency in New
York state for such period of employment.
 b. An applicant must make every reasonable effort to obtain employment
in a voluntary not-for-profit child welfare agency in New York state
licensed by the office of children and family services as a child
welfare worker upon graduation.
 4. Amount. The corporation shall grant such awards within the amounts
appropriated for such purpose and based on availability of funds
according to a schedule to be determined by the corporation in an
amount:
 a. equal to the tuition charged to state resident students attending
an undergraduate or graduate degree program, as applicable, at the state
university of New York; the average mandatory fees charged at the state
university of New York, or the actual tuition and fees charged to the
recipient, whichever is less; and the average non-tuition cost of
attendance, as determined by the corporation and as approved by the
director of the budget, for a student at the state university of New
York or actual non-tuition cost of attendance at such institution,
whichever is less provided that the scholarship shall not exceed an
amount that is equal to the total cost of attendance determined for
federal Title IV student financial aid purposes, less all other
scholarships and grants provided by New York state, other states, the
federal government, or other governments, and the amount of educational
benefits paid under any program that would duplicate the purposes of
this program, provided that any scholarships or grants provided to a
recipient by the institution which are intended to fund any portion of
the difference between the annual state award and the actual costs of
attendance at any such institution shall not be considered to duplicate
the purposes of this program.
 b. not to exceed twenty thousand dollars for a master's degree program
at a private institution; the average mandatory fees charged at the
private institution, or the actual tuition and fees charged to the
recipient, whichever is less; and the average non-tuition cost of
attendance, as determined by the corporation and as approved by the
director of the budget, for a student at such private institution or
actual non-tuition cost of attendance at such institution, whichever is
less, provided that the scholarship shall not exceed an amount that is
equal to the total cost of attendance determined for federal Title IV
student financial aid purposes, less all other scholarships and grants
provided by New York state, other states, the federal government, or
other governments, and the amount of educational benefits paid under any
program that would duplicate the purposes of this program, provided that
any scholarships or grants provided to a recipient by the institution
which are intended to fund any portion of the difference between the
annual state award and the actual costs of attendance at any such
institution shall not be considered to duplicate the purposes of this
program.
 5. Other awards. Award recipients shall be eligible to apply for other
awards.
 6. Duration. An award shall entitle the recipient to annual payments
for either an associate's degree, bachelor's degree, or graduate degree.
An eligible recipient enrolled in an eligible two year program of study
shall not receive an award for more than two academic years. An eligible
recipient enrolled in an eligible undergraduate program of study shall
not receive an award for more than four academic years of undergraduate
study or five academic years if the program of study normally requires
five years. An eligible recipient enrolled in a graduate program of
study shall not receive an award for more than two academic years.
Notwithstanding, such duration may be extended for an allowable
interruption of study as determined by the corporation.
 7. Penalties for noncompliance. a. The corporation may collect the
full amount of the award given pursuant to this section, plus interest,
according to a schedule to be determined by the corporation, if: (i) the
recipient fails to complete their degree program within a reasonable
time as determined by the corporation; or (ii) one year after the
completion of the degree program it is found that a recipient did not
begin full-time employment at a voluntary not-for-profit child welfare
agency in New York state licensed by the office of children and family
services as a child welfare worker; or (iii) the recipient fails to
complete five continuous years of full-time employment at a voluntary
not-for-profit child welfare agency in the state licensed by the office
of children and family services as a child welfare worker or maintain
residency in New York state for such period of employment; or (iv) the
recipient fails to respond to requests by the corporation for the status
of his or her academic or professional progress. The terms and
conditions of this subdivision shall be deferred for any interruption in
an undergraduate or graduate study or employment as established by the
rules and regulations of the corporation. Any obligation to comply with
such provisions as outlined in this section shall be cancelled upon the
death of the recipient. Notwithstanding any provisions of this
subdivision to the contrary, the corporation is authorized to promulgate
rules and regulations necessary for the waiver of suspension of any
financial obligation which would involve extreme hardship.
 8. Recipient selection. The president may establish:
 a. an application deadline; and
 b. a method of selecting recipients if in any given year there are
insufficient funds to cover the needs of all applicants and returning
recipients.
 9. Rules and regulations. The corporation is authorized to promulgate
rules and regulations, and may promulgate emergency regulations,
necessary for the implementation of the provisions of this section
including, but not limited to, the criteria to distributing the awards,
which may include a lottery or other form of random selection, and the
rate of interest charges for repayment of the student loan.
 § 679-i. New York state child welfare worker loan forgiveness
incentive program. 1. Purpose. the president shall grant student loan
forgiveness awards for the purpose of attracting workers to be employed
in voluntary not-for-profit child welfare agencies in New York state
licensed by the office of children and family services as a child
welfare worker. Such awards shall be made on a competitive basis, in
accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the corporation for
such purposes, to applicants who meet the eligibility criteria.
 2. Eligibility. To be eligible for an award pursuant to this section,
applicants shall:
 a. have graduated and obtained an undergraduate or graduate degree
from a college or university located in New York state;
 b. have outstanding student loan debt from obtaining such degree;
 c. agree to work in a voluntary not-for-profit child welfare agency in
New York state licensed by the office of children and family services as
a child welfare worker, on a full time basis for a period of no less
than five years;
 d. apply for this program within two years of college graduation; and
 e. comply with subdivisions three and five of section six hundred
sixty-one of this part.
 3. Awards. Awards shall be granted to qualified applicants in the
amount of up to ten thousand dollars per year, per applicant, not to
exceed a duration of five years and not to exceed the total amount of
such applicant's student loan debt. The corporation shall grant such
awards within amounts appropriated for such purposes and based on the
availability of funds. No one applicant shall receive more than a total
of fifty thousand dollars upon the end of a five-year period.
 4. Priority. First priority shall be given to applicants who have
received payment of an award pursuant to this section in a prior year
and remain eligible. Second priority shall be given to applicants who
are completing the second, third, fourth or fifth year of full-time
employment at a voluntary not-for-profit child welfare agency in New
York state licensed by the office of children and family services. Third
priority shall be given to an applicant who can demonstrate economic
need but did not receive an award during the first year of this
program's operation. If larger numbers of applicants are eligible
pursuant to this subdivision than funds available, applicants shall be
chosen pursuant to rules and regulations promulgated by the corporation;
provided, however, that each applicant chosen shall receive an award of
up to ten thousand dollars in each year such applicant is accepted into
the program.
 5. Rules and regulations. The corporation is authorized to promulgate
rules and regulations, and may promulgate emergency regulations,
necessary for the implementation of the provisions of this section.
 § 679-j. The New York state teacher loan forgiveness program. 1.
Purpose. The president shall grant student loan forgiveness awards for
the purpose of increasing the number of teachers serving in the state.
 2. Eligibility. To be eligible for an award pursuant to this
subdivision, applicants shall (a) be certified as a teacher; (b) be
employed full time in this state in an elementary or secondary school;
(c) comply with subdivisions three and five of section six hundred
sixty-one of this part; (d) have an outstanding student loan debt; and
(e) meet one of the following criteria:
 (i) teach in a shortage subject area;
 (ii) teach in a hard to staff district; or
 (iii) the applicant is economically disadvantaged, as defined by the
corporation.
 3. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the term "shortage
subject area" shall mean a curriculum subject matter or practice of
teaching where there is a shortage of teachers in New York state, as
designated by the department, and the term "hard to staff school
districts" shall mean school districts that have a shortage of teachers,
as designated by the department.
 4. Priority. Such awards shall be made annually to applicants in the
following priority:
 (a) First priority shall be given to applicants who have received
payment of an award pursuant to this section in a prior year and who, in
the year prior to application, are teachers in (i) a subject shortage
area, or (ii) a hard to staff school district;
 (b) Second priority shall be given to applicants who have not received
payment of an award pursuant to this section in a prior year and who are
teachers in (i) a subject shortage area, or (ii) hard to staff school
district in the year prior to such application; and
 (c) Third priority shall be given to applicants who are economically
disadvantaged as defined by the corporation.
 5. Awards. The corporation shall grant awards pursuant to the amount
appropriated for such purpose and based on availability of funds in an
amount up to five thousand dollars to individuals who are employed
full-time as teachers for the school year prior to such application,
provided that no recipient shall receive an award that exceeds the total
remaining balance of the student loan debt pursuant to this section, in
excess of twenty thousand dollars.
 6. Rules and regulations. The corporation is authorized to promulgate
rules and regulations and may promulgate emergency regulations necessary
for the implementation of the provisions of this section. In the event
that there are more applicants who have the same priority, as provided
in subdivision four of this section, than there are remaining awards,
the corporation shall provide in regulation the method of distributing
the remaining number of such awards, which may include a lottery or
other form of random selection.
 PART III
 STUDENT LOANS
Section 680. Powers and duties.
 681. Capacity of minors.
 681-a. Guaranteed student loans; special requirements.
 683-a Sale of student loan; notification to borrower.
 683-b. Information furnished by the state tax commission and the
 comptroller.
 § 680. Powers and duties. 1. In furtherance of the purposes set forth
in this article, the corporation, acting by and through its board, shall
have the following additional powers:
 a. To lend money in compliance with applicable federal law and
regulation, and upon such terms as the board may prescribe (1) to
persons who are attending or plan to attend colleges or career education
institutions in this state or (2) to persons who are residents of this
state and who are attending or plan to attend colleges or career
education institutions outside the state or (3) to persons on behalf of
eligible dependents who are attending or plan to attend colleges or
career education institutions in the state or (4) to persons who are
residents of this state on behalf of eligible dependents who are
attending or plan to attend colleges or career education institutions
outside the state; and
 b. To guarantee the loan of money in compliance with applicable
federal law and regulation, and upon such terms as the board may
prescribe by banks, savings banks, savings and loan associations,
pension funds, credit unions, colleges, career education institutions,
and insurance companies (1) to persons who are attending or plan to
attend colleges or career education institutions in this state or (2) to
persons who are residents of this state and who are attending or plan to
attend colleges or career education institutions outside the state or
(3) to persons on behalf of eligible dependents who are attending or
plan to attend colleges or career education institutions in the state or
(4) to persons who are residents of this state on behalf of eligible
dependents who are attending or plan to attend colleges or career
education institutions outside the state. Loans under this paragraph are
made under the authority of the federal student aid programs; and
 c. To enter into cooperative agreements, subject to the approval of
the board of trustees and the director of the budget, with other
entities, including, but not limited to, other states, the federal
government, and post-secondary institutions, to establish, administer,
and operate federal student aid programs. Notwithstanding the provisions
of paragraphs a and b of this subdivision, the corporation is
authorized, pursuant to such cooperative agreements, to provide federal
student aid services to students and families who are not residents of
New York state.
 2. The board shall adopt rules and regulations, consistent with
federal and state law, governing the programs administered by the
corporation pursuant to this part including, but not limited to the
application, granting, payment and repayments of loans made or
guaranteed by the corporation. Further, the board shall adopt rules and
regulations consistent with federal and state law governing the
participation of a college or career education institution in the
programs established by this part, including procedures for the
limitation, suspension or termination of such participation after notice
and opportunity for a hearing, due to the violation or failure to carry
out any rule or regulation prescribed by the board.
 3. The president of the higher education services corporation shall
ensure that information regarding training, employment services and
employment opportunities, including opportunities for programs available
without cost through the job opportunities and basic skills program, is
provided to any person determined to be a recipient of public
assistance. The commissioner of social services shall ensure that such
information is made available to the higher education services
corporation.
 § 681. Capacity of minors. Any person otherwise qualifying for a loan
from the corporation, or qualifying for a loan guaranteed by the
corporation, shall not be disqualified by reason of his being under the
age of eighteen years and for the purposes of applying for, receiving
and repaying such a loan any such person shall be deemed to have full
legal capacity to act; provided, however, that the signature of both
parents of an applicant not meeting emancipated status requirements
shall be required for the purposes of receiving such a loan unless the
president determines in accordance with rules and regulations to be
promulgated by the board that unusual family circumstances preclude the
availability of such signatures.
 § 681-a. Guaranteed student loans; special requirements. 1. As used in
this section:
 (a) "Federal guaranteed student loan program" shall mean the program
of the United States government making low interest loans available to
students or parents of students to pay for their cost of attending
post-secondary institutions established under Title IV, Part B of the
Higher Education Act of nineteen hundred sixty-five, as amended, or any
successor statute.
 (b) "Guaranteed student loan" shall mean a loan made by a lender to a
student who is resident of and is attending an institution in this state
or a parent of such a student under and pursuant to the federal
guaranteed student loan program.
 (c) "Lender" shall mean a bank, savings and loan association, credit
union, pension fund, insurance company, school or state lending agency
participating in such federal guaranteed student loan program.
 (d) "Guarantee agency" shall mean any state agency or not-for-profit
corporation which has entered into an agreement with the United States
secretary of education to guarantee loans made under the federal
guaranteed student loan program and which guarantees loans made to
residents of this state attending institutions in this state.
 (e) "Institution" shall mean any post-secondary institution, including
a vocational school, participating in the federal guaranteed student
loan program.
 2. (a) Any individual, institution, lender or guarantee agency which
shall provide a student with an application for a guaranteed student
loan shall advise the student prior to his or her execution of such
application that it is for such a loan. Any application for such a loan
provided to a student shall contain, on its face in bold faced, sixteen
point size print, the following statement: "This is an application for a
guaranteed student loan. The money loaned to you must be repaid by you
in full, with interest, in accordance with the terms of the loan.
Failure to repay the loan can adversely affect your credit and result in
legal action against you."
 3. No institution shall accept from a student an application for a
guaranteed student loan if the name of the lender is not prominently set
forth in the application.
 4. An institution shall not require a student to make an application
for a guaranteed student loan to a particular lender or otherwise select
for the student such lender. An institution may recommend a lender,
however, in such case, at such time it shall deliver to the student a
statement supplied by the president as to the student's right and
ability to obtain such loan from other lenders and as to the insurance
premiums charged by guarantee agencies on such loans.
 5. The corporation, pursuant to its authority to coordinate the
state's administrative effort in student financial aid and loan programs
with those of other levels of government shall develop and maintain
records of the guaranteed student loans made by lenders to students who
are residents of the state attending institutions in this state which
are guaranteed by guarantee agencies other than the corporation. It
shall obtain and collect from other guarantee agencies, at such times
and in such form as the president shall determine, information as to
such guaranteed student loans which shall include the following: (i) the
number and total dollar amount of such loans made during the period
reported, shown by lender and by institution; (ii) the number and total
dollar amount of loans made to students while attending institutions in
this state which were purchased in default during the period reported,
shown by lender and by institution; and (iii) the current default rate
for such loans by lender and by institution.
 6. Where a violation of this section by a guarantor or an institution
other than a public institution of higher education is alleged to have
occurred, the attorney general may apply in the name of the people of
the state of New York to the supreme court of the state of New York
within the judicial district in which such violations are alleged to
have occurred, on notice of five days, for an order enjoining or
restraining commission or continuance of the alleged unlawful acts. In
any such proceeding, the court may impose a civil penalty in an amount
not to exceed five thousand dollars. Enforcement of any violation by a
public institution shall be as otherwise authorized by law.
 § 683-a. Sale of student loan; notification to borrower. 1. "Banking
institution" as used in this section shall mean and include all banks,
trust companies, savings banks, savings and loan associations, credit
unions and foreign banking corporations whether incorporated, chartered,
organized or licensed under the laws of this state or any other state or
the United States.
 2. "Lender" as used in this section shall mean and include:
 (a) a national or state chartered bank, mutual savings bank, savings
and loan association, or credit union that:
 (1) is subject to examination and supervision in its capacity as a
lender by an agency of the United States or of the state in which its
principal place of operation is established; and
 (2) does not make or hold loans to students under the federal
guaranteed student loan program that total more than one-half of its
consumer credit loan dollar volume, including home mortgages, unless it
is a bank that is wholly owned by a state; or
 (b) a pension fund as defined in the federal employees retirement
income security act; or
 (c) an insurance company that is subject to examination and
supervision by an agency of the United States or a state; or
 (d) in any state, a single agency of the state or a single private
nonprofit agency designated by the state; or
 (e) for purposes only of purchasing and holding loans made by other
lenders under the federal guaranteed student loan program, the student
loan marketing association or an agency of any state functioning as a
secondary market.
 3. "Guaranteed education loan" as used in this section shall mean and
include any loan made for the purpose of financing higher education
which is made under the authority of Part B of Title IV of the Higher
Education Act of 1965 or under the authority of section six hundred
eighty of this chapter.
 4. Any banking institution or other eligible lender as such terms are
defined in this section which sells a student loan held by it to the
federal student loan marketing association in the manner authorized by
the federal guaranteed student loan program and applicable provisions of
federal law shall be required to provide written notification of such
sale to the student borrower by mail not later than the fifteenth day
next succeeding the date of such sale.
 5. Whenever a banking institution or other eligible lender as such
terms are defined in this section sells a guaranteed education loan to
another banking institution or eligible lender, such selling institution
shall notify the borrower in writing within fifteen days of such sale.
Such notice shall include the name and address of the institution which
has purchased such loan. The selling institution shall also notify the
New York state higher education services corporation or other guarantor
of such sale. Notice shall include:
 (a) the name and address of the institution which has purchased the
loan; and
 (b) the name, address and social security number of the borrower and
the borrower's account number.
 § 683-b. Information furnished by the state tax commission and the
comptroller. Information furnished to the New York state higher
education services corporation by the state tax commission and the
comptroller under or as a result of the agreement authorized by section
one hundred seventy-one-d of the tax law shall be considered
confidential and shall not be disclosed except to such federal
department or agency entitled to such information because such
disclosure is necessary for the proper administration of this part.
 PART IV
 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section 686. Dissolution of corporation.
 687. Separability.
 688. Construction.
 689. Transfer of officers and employees.
 689-a. Tuition credits.
 § 686. Dissolution of corporation. The corporation and its corporate
existence shall continue until terminated by law upon a finding that
there no longer exists any need for such a corporation; provided,
however, that no such law shall take effect so long as the corporation
shall have notes or other obligations outstanding. For the purpose of
this section, any appropriation or advance made to the corporation by
the state, which has not been repaid, shall not be deemed to be an
outstanding obligation of the corporation. Upon the dissolution of the
corporation or the cession of its activities all the property and moneys
of such corporation shall be disposed of in a manner provided by such
law.
 § 687. Separability. If any clause, sentence, subdivision, paragraph,
section or part of this article be adjudged by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or
invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its operation
to the clause, sentence, subdivision, paragraph, section or part thereof
directly involved in the controversy in which said judgment shall have
been rendered.
 § 688. Construction. To the extent that the provisions of this
article are inconsistent with the provisions of any other general or
special law, rule, regulation or charter, the provisions of this article
shall be controlling.
 § 689. Transfer of officers and employees. 1. Officers and employees
of state departments and agencies may be transferred to the corporation
and officers and employees of the corporation may be transferred to
state departments and agencies without examination and without loss of
any civil service status or rights. No such transfer may, however, be
made except with the approval of the head of the state department or
division involved and the director of the budget and the president of
the corporation and in compliance with the rules and regulations of the
state civil service commission.
 2. Promotions from positions in state departments and agencies to
positions in the corporation, and vice versa, may be made from
interdepartmental promotion lists resulting from promotion examinations
in which both employees of the corporation and employees of the state
are eligible to participate.
 3. In computing seniority for purposes of promotion or for purposes of
suspension or demotion upon the abolition of positions in the service of
the corporation or in the service of the state, in the case of an
employee of the corporation a period of prior employment in the service
of the state shall be counted in the same manner as though such period
of employment had been in the service of the corporation, and in the
case of an employee of the state a period of prior employment in the
service of the corporation shall be counted in the same manner as though
such period of employment had been in the service of the state. For the
purposes of the establishment and certification of preferred lists,
employees suspended from the corporation shall be eligible for
reinstatement in the service of the state, and employees suspended from
the service of the state shall be eligible for reinstatement in the
service of the corporation, in the same manner as though the corporation
were a department of the state.
 * § 689-a. Tuition credits. 1. The New York state higher education
services corporation shall calculate a tuition credit for each resident
undergraduate student who has filed an application with such corporation
for a tuition assistance program award pursuant to section six hundred
sixty-seven of this article, and is determined to be eligible to receive
such award, and is also enrolled in a program of undergraduate study at
a state operated or senior college of the state university of New York
or the city university of New York where the annual resident
undergraduate tuition rate will exceed the maximum tuition assistance
program award pursuant to subitem (a) of item one of clause (A) of
subparagraph (i) of paragraph a of subdivision three of section six
hundred sixty-seven of this article. Such tuition credit shall be
calculated for each semester, quarter or term of study that tuition is
charged and tuition for the corresponding semester, quarter or term
shall not be due for any student eligible to receive such tuition credit
until such credit is calculated, the student and school where the
student is enrolled is notified of the tuition credit amount, and such
tuition credit is applied toward the tuition charged.
 2. Each tuition credit pursuant to this section shall be an amount
equal to the product of the total annual resident undergraduate tuition
rate minus the maximum tuition assistance program award pursuant to
subitem (a) of item one of clause (A) of subparagraph (i) of paragraph a
of subdivision three of section six hundred sixty-seven of this article
then multiplied by an amount equal to the product of the total annual
award for the student pursuant to section six hundred sixty-seven of
this article divided by an amount equal to the maximum amount the
student qualifies to receive pursuant to clause (A) of subparagraph (i)
of paragraph a of subdivision three of section six hundred sixty-seven
of this article.
 * NB Repealed July 1, 2027
 PART V
 THE NEW YORK HIGHER EDUCATION LOAN PROGRAM
Section 690. Definitions.
 691. Powers and duties.
 692. Education loans; special requirements.
 693. Repayment of loans.
 694. Sale of education loans.
 694-a. Miscellaneous.
 694-b. Reporting.
 § 690. Definitions. As used in this part, the following terms shall
have the following meanings unless otherwise specified:
 1. "Education loan" shall mean any loan that is made under this
program to finance or refinance higher education expenses at an eligible
college.
 2. "Eligible borrower" or "borrower" shall mean (i) a student who is a
resident of New York state attending, or accepted for enrollment at, an
eligible college, or (ii) the parent, legal guardian, or sponsor, as
defined by the corporation in regulation, of a student attending, or
accepted for enrollment at, an eligible college who is a resident of New
York state, and who obtains an education loan from a lending institution
to pay for or finance higher education expenses under this program.
 3. "Eligible college" shall mean a post-secondary institution, located
within New York state, eligible for funds under Title IV of the Higher
Education Act of nineteen hundred sixty-five, as amended, or successor
statute offering a two-year, four-year, graduate or professional degree
granting or certificate program.
 4. "Eligible co-signer" shall mean a parent, legal guardian or
otherwise credit worthy individual over twenty-one years of age who
satisfies applicable credit criteria approved by the corporation and is
a resident of New York state.
 5. "Higher education expenses" shall mean the cost of attendance at an
eligible college and shall include tuition and fees, books, room and
board, and other educationally related expenses, as determined by the
corporation.
 6. "Holder" shall mean, with respect to an education loan: (i) a
lender; (ii) a public benefit corporation authorized to finance the
purchase or making of education loans pursuant to the public authorities
law; or (iii) any assignee of such lender or public benefit corporation.
 7. "Lending institution" or "lender" shall mean any entity that itself
or through an affiliate originates education loans, other than an entity
authorized to finance the purchase or making of education loans through
the issuance of bonds pursuant to the public authorities law.
 8. "Program" shall mean the New York Higher Education Loan Program
established by this article.
 9. "Student" shall mean any individual who is enrolled at least
half-time, as defined by the commissioner, in a two year, four year,
graduate or professional degree granting or certificate program at an
eligible college.
 § 691. Powers and duties. In furtherance of the purposes set forth in
this part, the corporation shall have the following additional powers
and duties:
 1. To market, originate, disburse, service, collect, administer,
guarantee, secure, finance, and purchase education loans not in default
status made under this program or contract for these services.
 2. To purchase defaulted education loans made under this program.
 3. To establish and maintain one or more default reserve funds and
accounts within such funds, in accordance with the terms of this
program.
 4. To develop and administer or contract to administer one or more
financial literacy programs.
 5. To provide or contract to provide default aversion services.
 6. To establish criteria for eligible colleges, lenders, and other
entities such as, but not limited to, servicers, and to enter into
participation agreements with any such eligible colleges, lenders, and
other entities and any entity authorized to finance the purchase or
making of education loans through the issuance of bonds pursuant to the
public authorities law, and any subsequent purchaser of education loans
made under this program.
 7. To establish criteria for all lender underwriting, education loan
purchases, servicing and default insurance payments.
 8. To establish criteria for the distribution of education loans made
under this program.
 9. To audit lenders, servicers, holders, and eligible colleges for
program compliance.
 10. To adopt rules and regulations to implement this program.
 § 692. Education loans; special requirements. In any year in which
fixed rate education loans are to be acquired using the proceeds of
bonds issued by the state of New York mortgage agency or other public
benefit corporation authorized to issue bonds for the purposes of this
program, preference shall be given to education loans made to eligible
borrowers for the benefit of students who demonstrate financial need
based on such student's family gross income, pursuant to rules and
regulations promulgated by the corporation after consultation with the
state of New York mortgage agency or other public benefit corporation
authorized to issue bonds for the purposes of this program. 1. Terms and
conditions. (a) eligible borrowers shall apply for education loans under
this program on forms prescribed by the corporation;
 (b) except as may be provided by regulation, a student for whom an
education loan is made shall be required to first apply for and exhaust:
(i) their maximum eligibility of loans under the Federal Family
Education Loan Program (FFELP) and the Federal Direct Student Loan
Program (FDSLP), excluding PLUS loans; (ii) any other federal student
aid, other than HEAL loans and other aid permitted by the corporation to
be excluded; (iii) any state student aid; and (iv) any other student aid
as prescribed by the corporation before being eligible for any education
loan under this program;
 (c) borrowers shall successfully complete a financial literacy course
as prescribed by the corporation;
 (d) student borrowers must apply for education loans under this
program with an eligible co-signer;
 (e) a borrower, or co-signer, who is in default on an education loan
made under this program, the Federal Family Education Loan Program, the
Williams D. Ford Program, or has failed to comply with the terms and
conditions of any award under this article and has failed to
satisfactorily cure such default or non-compliance as prescribed by
applicable law or regulation shall be ineligible to receive a loan under
this program, and shall further be ineligible for any other state
student aid while in default on an education loan made under this
program; and
 (f) participating eligible colleges, lending institutions, and other
participants in this program shall be required to enter into a
participation agreement with the corporation and comply with all
reporting and processing requirements and procedures as established by
the corporation. These participation agreements shall contain such other
specific terms and conditions of the program as shall be determined by
the corporation.
 2. Citizenship. A borrower must be (a) a citizen of the United States,
or
 (b) a noncitizen lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the
United States, or
 (c) an individual of a class of refugees paroled by the attorney
general of the United States under his or her parole authority
pertaining to the admission of noncitizens to the United States.
 3. Loan limits. Education loans made under this program shall have
annual and cumulative loan limits as approved from time to time by the
corporation, subject to the approval of the state of New York mortgage
agency, or other public benefit corporation authorized to issue bonds
under the public authorities law for purposes of this program, with
respect to loans that are expected to be financed by such entity.
 4. Interest rates. The interest rate of loans made under this program
shall be established in a manner that shall be approved at least
annually by the corporation, subject to the approval of the state of New
York mortgage agency, or other subject to public benefit corporation
authorized to issue bonds under the public authorities law for purposes
of this program, with respect to loans that are expected to be financed
by such entity.
 5. Default fee. A percentage of the education loan shall be paid as a
default fee, by or on behalf of the borrower or the lender, in an amount
to be established at least annually by the corporation subject to the
approval of the state of New York mortgage agency, or other public
benefit corporation authorized to issue bonds under the public
authorities law for purposes of this program, with respect to loans that
are expected to be financed by such entity. The default fee established
by the corporation, subject to the approval of the state of New York
mortgage agency, or other public benefit corporation authorized to issue
bonds under the public authorities law for purposes of this program,
with respect to education loans that are expected to be financed by such
entity, shall be a percentage of the principal amount of such loans, as
determined by the corporation, that, together with other amounts on
deposit in the applicable default reserve fund, shall not exceed an
amount sufficient to ensure that the balance of such funds satisfies the
obligations of such default reserve fund and permits such loans to be
financed. This fee may be considered part of the cost of attendance for
the purposes of calculating the loan amount for this program and shall
be transmitted to the corporation in accordance with rules or
regulations promulgated by the corporation. The corporation shall
deposit these funds into a designated account within the New York higher
education loan program variable rate default reserve fund, the New York
higher education loan program fixed rate default reserve fund, or the
state of New York mortgage agency New York higher education loan program
default reserve fund, as applicable.
 6. Consolidation. Education loans made pursuant to this program may be
eligible for consolidation upon the terms and conditions established by
the corporation. Any person consolidating education loans under this
program shall be considered a borrower for purposes of this part.
 7. Default reserve funds. (a) General provisions. One or more default
reserve funds shall be established in the custody of the comptroller
pursuant to sections seventy-eight-a and seventy-eight-b of the state
finance law. One or more default reserve funds shall be established in
the custody of the state of New York mortgage agency pursuant to
subdivision six of section two thousand four hundred five-a of the
public authorities law. These funds shall be used by the corporation to
pay default claims to participating lenders and holders of education
loans made pursuant to this program.
 (b) Deposits. The corporation shall promptly deposit or transfer into
the New York higher education loan program variable rate default reserve
fund created by section seventy-eight-a of the state finance law, the
New York higher education loan program fixed rate default reserve fund
created by section seventy-eight-b of the state finance law or the state
of New York mortgage agency New York higher education loan program
default reserve fund created by subdivision six of section two thousand
four hundred five-a of the public authorities law, with respect to
education loans, described in such provisions, any moneys received in
connection with this program other than payments of principal and
interest of education loans that are not in default status, including,
but not limited to: (i) default fees; (ii) fees received from eligible
colleges; (iii) funds received for the repayment of defaulted education
loans, the unpaid principal, capitalized and unpaid accrued interest of
which have been paid from the funds, including without limitation all
such amounts received through the operation of voluntary collection
activities, administrative wage garnishment or credit of tax
overpayments less any amounts received for collection fees assessed by
the corporation; (iv) contractual penalties and subsidy fees; (v) any
amount that may be appropriated to the corporation; (vi) any amount
received by the corporation or any agent from any other source for
deposit therein; and (vii) interest and investment income earned by the
funds.
 8. Lender due diligence. Participating lenders shall be required to
perform all due diligence requirements as prescribed by the corporation
and incorporated into the participation agreement and into regulations
promulgated by the corporation.
 9. Eligible college requirements. (a) Participating eligible colleges
shall be required to certify loan eligibility upon forms prescribed by
the corporation and incorporated into the participation agreement and
pursuant to regulations promulgated by the corporation.
 (b) Participating eligible colleges shall be required to contribute a
one percent fee prescribed by the corporation, subject to the approval
of the state of New York mortgage agency, or other public benefit
corporation authorized to issue bonds under the public authorities law
for purposes of this program, with respect to loans that are expected to
be financed by such entity, based upon the loan dollar volume or have
the contribution made on its behalf, pursuant to the terms of the
participation agreement. This fee shall be deposited into a designated
account within the New York higher education loan program variable rate
default reserve fund the New York higher education loan program fixed
rate default reserve fund, or the state of New York mortgage agency New
York higher education loan program default reserve fund, as described in
subdivision seven of this section as applicable. This fee, or any other
college fee, shall not be assessed to the student or eligible borrower
in connection with this program.
 § 693. Repayment of loans. 1. Terms of repayment. The terms of
repayment of education loans made under this program shall be
established in rules and regulations promulgated by the corporation
subject to the approval of the state of New York mortgage agency or
other public benefit corporation authorized to issue bonds under the
public authorities law for purposes of this program with respect to
loans that are expected to be financed by such entity.
 2. Grace period. The terms of any grace period for education loans
made under this program shall be established in rules and regulations
promulgated by the corporation subject to the approval of the state of
New York mortgage agency or other public benefit corporation authorized
to issue bonds under the public authorities law for purposes of this
program with respect to loans that are expected to be financed by such
entity. Notwithstanding, the grace period established shall be no less
than six months.
 3. Forbearance and deferments. Education loans made under this program
shall be eligible for in-school and military deferments pursuant to
rules and regulations promulgated by the corporation, or pursuant to
such additional deferments and/or forbearance as offered by an eligible
lender, in each case, subject to the approval of the state of New York
mortgage agency, or other authorized public benefit corporation
authorized to issue bonds under the public authorities law for purposes
of this program, with respect to loans that are expected to be financed
by such entity. Upon the assignment of a defaulted education loan made
under this program for collection as described in subdivision five of
this section, the borrower shall no longer be eligible for any
forbearance or deferments while such loan remains in default.
 4. Delinquency. A borrower shall be considered delinquent on an
education loan under this program after thirty days of non-payment. The
holder shall notify the corporation promptly after the first day of
delinquency and the corporation shall undertake actions to return the
borrower to repayment pursuant to rules and regulations established by
the corporation. Such actions shall include, but not be limited to,
attempts at: (i) locating and contacting the borrower and/or co-signer,
as applicable, regarding the delinquent status of their loan; (ii)
explaining the account history and clarifying any discrepancies; (iii)
counseling the borrower and/or co-signer, as applicable, regarding all
available repayment options, inducing deferments, and any public
assistance available to them; (iv) providing the borrower and/or
co-signer, as applicable, with documentation in connection with their
loan or loans; (v) informing the borrower and/or co-signer, as
applicable, of the consequences of default; and (vi) any other
assistance that would prevent a default by a borrower.
 5. Default. Any education loan under this program that is delinquent
for one hundred eighty days shall be deemed in default. Upon default,
the holder shall file a claim with the corporation and, if applicable,
the state of New York mortgage agency, for payment from the New York
education loan program variable rate default reserve fund, the New York
education loan program fixed rate default reserve fund, or the state of
New York mortgage agency New York education loan program default reserve
fund, as described in subdivision seven of section six hundred ninety
two of the education law, as applicable, pursuant to regulations
promulgated by the corporation. Upon receipt of a claim, the corporation
shall notify the borrower that their loan is being assigned to the
corporation for collection. The lender, or holder shall be paid one
hundred percent of the outstanding principal, and of the capitalized and
unpaid accrued interest. Upon such payment, this amount shall be the
principal owed by the borrower.
 All collection payments received by the corporation from a borrower,
or on behalf of borrowers, in default on loans made under this program,
except collection fees shall be deposited into a designated account
within the New York higher education loan program variable rate default
reserve fund, New York higher education loan program fixed rate default
reserve fund, or the state of New York mortgage agency New York higher
education loan program default reserve fund, as applicable.
 6. Collection fee. The corporation shall assess a collection fee, in
an amount to be determined by the corporation at least annually, on all
defaulted education loans under this program. This fee shall be retained
by the corporation for the administration of the program. The aggregate
annual revenue generated by such fee shall not exceed the actual costs
incurred by the corporation, in the preceding year, in collecting a
defaulted loan under this program on which the corporation has paid a
claim, except in the initial year for which such fee shall not exceed
the fee charged by the corporation for the collection of defaulted loans
under the federal family education loan program. Any amounts in excess
of actual cost shall be used to reduce the fee charged in the subsequent
year.
 7. Administrative wage garnishment. (a) Notwithstanding any provision
of law to the contrary, the corporation shall be entitled to garnish the
disposable pay of an individual to collect the amount owed by the
individual, if such individual fails to make required voluntary payments
under a repayment agreement with the corporation, provided that:
 (i) The amount deducted for any pay period does not exceed fifteen
percent of disposable pay. However, the amount deducted for any period
may exceed fifteen percent with the written consent of the individual;
 (ii) Prior to garnishment the individual shall have been given thirty
days written notice to the individual's last known address advising such
individual of the nature of the obligation, amount of the loan
obligation, the corporation's intent to garnish and an explanation of
the individual's rights under this section including the right to
inspect and copy records relating to the debt;
 (iii) The individual shall have been given an opportunity within the
aforementioned thirty days to enter into a written repayment agreement
with the corporation to avoid garnishment of wages;
 (iv) The individual shall have been provided an opportunity for a
hearing pursuant to the requirements of paragraph (f) of this
subdivision.
 (b) The individual's employer shall pay to the corporation amounts as
directed in the withholding order and shall be liable for failure to
comply with said order. The corporation may sue an employer in a court
of competent jurisdiction to recover from such employer the amount the
employer fails to withhold from the individual's wages following receipt
of the order of withholding with interest thereon plus attorneys' fees
and costs;
 (c) The notice of withholding served upon the employer shall contain
only such information as is necessary for the employer to comply with
the withholding order.
 (d) No amount may be deducted from the wages of an individual who has
been involuntarily separated from employment and has not been
continuously employed for twelve months. An individual must prove that
separation from employment was involuntary. Separation due to
incarceration shall not qualify as involuntary separation.
 (e) An employer may not discharge from employment, take disciplinary
action against or refuse to employ an individual by reason of the fact
that such individual's wages are subject to an order of withholding.
Such individual may take action against said employer in a court of
competent jurisdiction for reinstatement, back pay or such further
relief as may be just and necessary.
 (f) A hearing as described in subparagraph (iv) of paragraph (a) of
this subdivision shall be provided prior to an order of withholding if
the individual submits a written request for a hearing on or before the
fifteenth day following the notice described in subparagraph (ii) of
paragraph (a) of this subdivision in accordance with procedures set
forth by the corporation. If an individual fails to submit a written
request in the time frame provided, the corporation shall still provide
a hearing upon receipt of a written request, but such hearing need not
be provided prior to an order of withholding being issued to the
employer. The hearing shall not be conducted by a party under the
supervision or control of the corporation except that nothing shall
prohibit the corporation from appointing an administrative law judge. A
hearing decision shall be issued no later than sixty days after the
filing of the petition requesting the hearing.
 (g) For purposes of this section "disposable pay" shall mean that part
of the compensation of any individual from an employer remaining after
deduction of amounts required to be withheld by law.
 (h) All funds received through administrative wage garnishment shall
be deposited into a designated account within the New York higher
education loan program variable rate default reserve fund, the New York
higher education loan program fixed rate default reserve fund, or the
state of New York mortgage agency New York higher education loan program
default reserve fund, as applicable.
 8. New York state tax offset. The corporation shall be entitled to
receive credits of New York state tax overpayments pursuant to section
one hundred seventy-one-d and paragraph three of subdivision (e) of
section six hundred ninety-seven of the tax law with respect to
defaulted education loans under this program. All funds, or credits,
received through such tax offsets shall be deposited into a designated
account within the New York higher education loan program variable rate
default reserve fund, the New York higher education loan program fixed
rate default reserve fund, or the state of New York mortgage agency New
York higher education loan program default reserve fund, as applicable.
 9. Data share. The corporation shall be entitled to receive data from
the New York state department of taxation and finance pursuant to
section one hundred seventy-one-a and paragraph three of subdivision (e)
of section six hundred ninety-seven of the tax law with respect to
defaulted education loans under this program.
 10. Statute of limitation. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the
contrary, there shall be no statute of limitations to bring suit or
otherwise collect an education loan under this program. Judgments in
favor of the corporation under this program shall not expire and there
shall be no statute of limitations upon which to enforce or collect said
judgment.
 11. Capacity of minors. Any person otherwise qualifying for an
education loan under this program shall not be disqualified by reason of
his or her being under the age of eighteen years and for the purposes of
applying for, receiving and repaying such a loan, any such person shall
be deemed to have full legal capacity to act. The corporation, in
collecting education loans under this program, shall not be subject to a
defense raised by any borrower based on a claim of infancy.
 12. Usury. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary the
rate or amount of interest or fees payable on education loans made under
this program shall not exceed twenty-five per centum per annum or its
equivalent rate for a longer or shorter period.
 13. Death and disability discharge. Upon the death of a student, for
the funding of whose higher education expenses an education loan was
made, the education loan made under this program shall be deemed
discharged. If such a student becomes totally and permanently disabled,
the education loan under this program shall be deemed discharged. A
total or permanent disability shall mean a condition of an individual
who is unable to work and earn money because of an injury or illness
that is expected to continue indefinitely or result in death. The holder
of such discharged education loans shall be paid the outstanding
principal, capitalized and unpaid accrued interest due from the New York
higher education loan program variable rate default reserve fund, the
New York higher education loan program fixed rate default reserve fund,
or the state of New York mortgage agency New York higher education loan
program default reserve fund, as applicable.
 14. Bankruptcy. Education loans under this program shall be considered
non-dischargeable pursuant to section 523(a)(8) of the U.S. Bankruptcy
Code.
 15. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, other than section one
thousand six hundred eighty two and section two thousand four hundred
five-a of the public authorities law, a security interest in education
loans shall be perfected only by the filing of a financing statement in
the manner provided under section 9-310 of the uniform commercial code,
and shall attach and be assigned priority in the manner provided under
the uniform commercial code with respect to security interests perfected
by such a filing, and a description of collateral consisting of
education loans in any financing statement shall be conclusively deemed
to be legally sufficient if it refers to records identifying such loans
retained by the corporation, provided that any such security interest
shall be subject to any applicable lien under section two thousand four
hundred five-a of the public authorities law. The owner of any education
loan shall advise the corporation of any sale or assignment of such loan
at the time and in the manner required by the corporation.
 16. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any eligible public
college or public career education institution is hereby authorized to
enter into one or more agreements with the corporation and any entity
authorized to finance education loans pursuant to the public authorities
law providing for the participation of such college or career education
institution in the program and to perform or contract the performance of
its obligations under any such agreement. Such obligations may include
without limitation the payment obligations described in this title.
 § 694. Sale of education loans. 1. The corporation and holders shall
be authorized to enter into one or more agreements for the sale of
education loans made pursuant to this program.
 2. Education loan purchases may be financed (i) by bonds issued by the
state of New York mortgage agency, or other entity authorized to issue
bonds for such purpose pursuant to the public authorities law, in an
amount approved by the director of the division of the budget; or (ii)
by other non-state sources in amounts established pursuant to an
agreement with the corporation.
 3. The corporation shall establish the criteria and terms upon which
lenders may sell education loans subject to the approval of the state of
New York mortgage agency or any other entity authorized to issue bonds
under this program with respect to loans that are expected to be
financed by such entity.
 § 694-a. Miscellaneous. 1. No education loan shall be deemed subject
to section one hundred eight of the banking law, to article nine of the
banking law or to any other provisions of law governing the
qualifications to make loans or the terms or conditions of loans
described in this part, including, without limitation, the interest
rates, fees and charges applicable thereto. Neither the corporation nor
any entity authorized to finance education loans pursuant to the public
authorities law shall be subject to any licensing requirements in
connection with its education lending activities. No entity shall be
considered a lender for purposes of any other provision of law solely as
a result of its interest in an education loan made under this part.
 2. Funds may be appropriated to the corporation and/or the state of
New York mortgage agency, or other entity authorized to issue bonds
under this program, for the administration of this program.
 3. Interest paid on education loans made under this program shall be
allowed as a deduction in computing the net taxable income of any such
person for purposes of any income or franchise tax imposed by the state
or any political subdivision thereof.
 4. Any agreement of an entity authorized to issue bonds under the
public authorities law for purposes of this program to acquire education
loans from a lender shall be subject to the availability to such entity
of funding for such purpose upon terms and conditions approved by such
entity and shall not require the expenditure by such entity of funds
from any source other than amounts obtained through the issuance of
bonds or notes, including earnings thereon, and any appropriations
thereof.
 5. The corporation, the state of New York mortgage agency, any lender,
and any public benefit corporation authorized to issue bonds under the
public authorities law for the purposes of this program shall not be
subject to Title 5 of the general obligations law with respect to
education loans and such education loans shall not be subject to such
title.
 6. To the extent that the provisions of this part are inconsistent
with the provisions of any other part of this article, the provisions of
this part shall be controlling.
 § 694-b. Reporting. The corporation, after consultation with the state
of New York mortgage agency, and any other public benefit corporation
that shall have issued bonds under the public authorities law for
purposes of this program, with respect to loans that have been financed
by or that are expected to be financed by such entity, shall report
annually with respect to education loans made under this program for the
prior academic year to the governor, the temporary president of the
senate, the speaker of the assembly, the director of the division of the
budget, the senate finance committee, the assembly ways and means
committee and the standing committees of the legislature having
jurisdiction of higher education on the number and characteristics of
students who received fixed rate and/or variable rate loans under this
program, including, but not limited to, the interest rate charged, the
default and collection fees established, the grace period established if
other than six months, the number of students who received loans that
demonstrated financial need pursuant to section six hundred ninety-two
of this part, the income established by the corporation pursuant to
section six hundred ninety-two of this part, the number of students who
received fixed rate loans, the number of students who received variable
rate loans, the number of default claims received by the corporation,
the number of borrowers subject to administrative wage garnishment, and
a list of the lenders and holders, if known, who have provided variable
rate loans. Such annual report shall be submitted by the first day of
December following the close of the academic year for which such
education loans were made.
 ARTICLE 14-A
 NEW YORK STATE
 COLLEGE CHOICE TUITION SAVINGS PROGRAM
Section 695. Program established.
 695-a. Purposes.
 695-b. Definitions.
 695-c. Functions of the comptroller and the corporation.
 695-d. Powers of the comptroller.
 695-e. Program requirements; family tuition account.
 695-f. Program limitations; family tuition account.
 695-g. Scholarships and financial aid.
 § 695. Program established. There is hereby established the college
 choice tuition savings program and such program shall be known and may
 be cited as the "New York state college choice tuition savings
 program".
 § 695-a. Purposes. The purposes of the tuition savings program shall
be to authorize the establishment of family tuition accounts and to
provide guidelines for the maintenance of such accounts to:
 1. Enable residents of this state and other states to benefit from the
tax incentive provided for qualified state tuition programs under the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended; and
 2. Attract students to public and private colleges and universities
within the state.
 § 695-b. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:
 1. "Account" or "family tuition account" shall mean an individual
savings account established in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
 2. "Account owner" shall mean a person who enters into a tuition
savings agreement pursuant to the provisions of this article, including
a person who enters into such an agreement as a fiduciary or agent on
behalf of a trust, estate, partnership, association, company or
corporation. The account owner may also be the designated beneficiary of
the account.
 3. "Designated beneficiary" shall mean, with respect to an account or
accounts, the individual designated as the individual whose higher
education expenses are expected to be paid from the account or accounts.
 4. "Financial organization" shall mean an organization authorized to
do business in the state of New York and (a) which is an authorized
fiduciary to act as a trustee pursuant to the provisions of an act of
congress entitled "Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974" as
such provisions may be amended from time to time, or an insurance
company; and (b)(i) is licensed or chartered by the department of
financial services, (ii) is chartered by an agency of the federal
government, (iii) is subject to the jurisdiction and regulation of the
securities and exchange commission of the federal government, or (iv) is
any other entity otherwise authorized to act in this state as a trustee
pursuant to the provisions of an act of congress entitled "Employee
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974" as such provisions may be
amended from time to time.
 5. "Eligible educational institution" shall mean (a) any institution
of higher education defined as an eligible educational institution in
section 529(e)(5) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or
(b) any apprenticeship program described in section 529(c)(8) of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
 6. "Member of family" shall mean a family member as defined in section
529 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
 7. "Program" shall mean the New York state college choice tuition
savings program established pursuant to this article.
 8. "Qualified higher education expenses" shall mean any qualified
higher education expense included in section 529 of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986, as amended.
 9. "Qualified withdrawal" shall mean a withdrawal from an account:
 a. to pay the qualified higher education expenses of the designated
beneficiary of the account at an eligible educational institution;
 b. to pay principal and interest on any qualified education loan as
provided for in section 529(c)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
as amended; and
 c. to make a rollover to a Roth Individual Retirement Account as
provided for in section 529(c)(3)(E) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986, as amended.
 10. "Nonqualified withdrawal" shall mean a withdrawal from an account
but shall not mean:
 a. a qualified withdrawal;
 b. a withdrawal made as the result of the death or disability of the
designated beneficiary of an account; or
 c. a withdrawal made on the account of a scholarship.
 11. "Corporation" shall mean the New York state higher education
services corporation.
 12. "Comptroller" shall mean the comptroller of the state of New York.
 13. "Management contract" shall mean the contract executed by the
comptroller and a financial organization selected to act as a depository
and manager of the program.
 14. "Tuition savings agreement" shall mean an agreement between the
comptroller or a financial organization and the account owner.
 15. "Program manager" shall mean a financial organization selected by
the comptroller to act as a depository and manager of the program.
 § 695-c. Functions of the comptroller and the corporation. 1. The
comptroller and the corporation shall implement the program under the
terms and conditions established by this article and a memorandum of
understanding relating to any terms or conditions not otherwise
expressly provided for in this article.
 2. In furtherance of such implementation the memorandum of
understanding shall address the authority and responsibility of the
comptroller and the corporation to:
 a. develop and implement the program in a manner consistent with the
provisions of this article through rules and regulations established in
accordance with the state administrative procedure act;
 b. engage the services of consultants on a contract basis for
rendering professional and technical assistance and advice;
 c. seek rulings and other guidance from the United States Department
of Treasury and the Internal Revenue Service relating to the program;
 d. make changes to the program required for the participants in the
program to obtain the federal income tax benefits or treatment provided
by section 529 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or any
similar successor legislation;
 e. charge, impose, and collect administrative fees and service
charges in connection with any agreement, contract or transaction
relating to the program;
 f. develop marketing plans and promotion material;
 g. establish the methods by which the funds held in such accounts be
dispersed;
 h. establish the method by which funds shall be allocated to pay for
administrative costs; and
 i. do all things necessary and proper to carry out the purposes of
this article.
 § 695-d. Powers of the comptroller. 1. The comptroller may implement
the program through use of financial organizations as account
depositories and managers. Under the program, individuals may establish
accounts directly with an account depository.
 2. The comptroller may solicit proposals from financial organizations
to act as depositories and managers of the program. Financial
organizations submitting proposals shall describe the investment
instrument which will be held in accounts. The comptroller shall select
as program depositories and managers the financial organization, from
among the bidding financial organizations that demonstrates the most
advantageous combination, both to potential program participants and
this state, of the following factors:
 a. Financial stability and integrity of the financial organization;
 b. The safety of the investment instrument being offered;
 c. The ability of the investment instrument to track increasing costs
of higher education;
 d. The ability of the financial organization to satisfy recordkeeping
and reporting requirements;
 e. The financial organization's plan for promoting the program and the
investment it is willing to make to promote the program;
 f. The fees, if any, proposed to be charged to persons for opening
accounts;
 g. The minimum initial deposit and minimum contributions that the
financial organization will require;
 h. The ability of banking organizations to accept electronic
withdrawals, including payroll deduction plans; and
 i. Other benefits to the state or its residents included in the
proposal, including fees payable to the state to cover expenses of
operation of the program.
 3. The comptroller may enter into a contract with a financial
organization. Such financial organization management may provide one or
more types of investment instrument.
 4. The comptroller may select more than one financial organization for
the program.
 5. A management contract shall include, at a minimum, terms requiring
the financial organization to:
 a. Take any action required to keep the program in compliance with
requirements of section six hundred ninety-five-e of this article and
any actions not contrary to its contract to manage the program to
qualify as a "qualified state tuition plan" under section 529 of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended;
 b. Keep adequate records of each account, keep each account segregated
from each other account, and provide the comptroller with the
information necessary to prepare the statements required by section six
hundred ninety-five-e of this article;
 c. Compile and total information contained in statements required to
be prepared under section six hundred ninety-five-e of this article and
provide such compilations to the comptroller;
 d. If there is more than one program manager, provide the comptroller
with such information necessary to determine compliance with section six
hundred ninety-five-e of this article;
 e. Provide the comptroller or his designee access to the books and
records of the program manager to the extent needed to determine
compliance with the contract;
 f. Hold all accounts for the benefit of the account owner;
 g. Be audited at least annually by a firm of certified public
accountants selected by the program manager and that the results of such
audit be provided to the comptroller;
 h. Provide the comptroller with copies of all regulatory filings and
reports made by it during the term of the management contract or while
it is holding any accounts, other than confidential filings or reports
that will not become part of the program. The program manager shall make
available for review by the comptroller the results of any periodic
examination of such manager by any state or federal banking, insurance,
or securities commission, except to the extent that such report or
reports may not be disclosed under applicable law or the rules of such
commission; and
 i. Ensure that any description of the program, whether in writing or
through the use of any media, is consistent with the marketing plan
developed in the memorandum of understanding pursuant to the provisions
of section six hundred ninety-five-c of this article.
 6. The comptroller may provide that an audit shall be conducted of the
operations and financial position of the program depository and manager
at any time if the comptroller has any reason to be concerned about the
financial position, the recordkeeping practices, or the status of
accounts of such program depository and manager.
 7. During the term of any contract with a program manager, the
comptroller shall conduct an examination of such manager and its
handling of accounts. Such examination shall be conducted at least
biennially if such manager is not otherwise subject to periodic
examination by the superintendent of financial services, the federal
deposit insurance corporation or other similar entity.
 8. a. If selection of a financial organization as a program manager or
depository is not renewed, after the end of its term:
 (i) Accounts previously established and held in investment instruments
at such financial organization may be terminated;
 (ii) Additional contributions may be made to such accounts;
 (iii) No new accounts may be placed with such financial organization;
and
 (iv) Existing accounts held by such depository shall remain subject to
all oversight and reporting requirements established by the comptroller.
 b. If the comptroller terminates a financial organization as a program
manager or depository, he or she shall take custody of accounts held by
such financial organization and shall seek to promptly transfer such
accounts to another financial organization that is selected as a program
manager or depository and into investment instruments as similar to the
original instruments as possible.
 9. The comptroller may enter into such contracts as it deems necessary
and proper for the implementation of the program.
 § 695-e. Program requirements; family tuition account. 1. Family
tuition accounts established pursuant to the provisions of this article
shall be governed by the provisions of this section.
 2. A family tuition account may be opened by any person who desires to
save money for the payment of the qualified higher education expenses of
the designated beneficiary. An account owner may designate another
person as successor owner of the account in the event of the death of
the original account owner. Such person who opens an account or any
successor owner shall be considered the account owner as defined in
section six hundred ninety-five-b of this article.
 a. An application for such account shall be in the form prescribed by
the program and contain the following:
 (i) the name, address and social security number, employer
identification number, or individual taxpayer identification number of
the account owner unless a family tuition account that was in effect
prior to the effective date of the chapter of the laws of two thousand
nineteen that amended this subparagraph does not allow for a taxpayer
identification number, in which case a taxpayer identification number
shall be allowed upon the expiration of the contract;
 (ii) the designation of a designated beneficiary;
 (iii) the name, address, and social security number, employer
identification number, or individual taxpayer identification number of
the designated beneficiary, unless a family tuition account that was in
effect prior to the effective date of the chapter of the laws of two
thousand nineteen that amended this subparagraph does not allow for a
taxpayer identification number, in which case a taxpayer identification
number shall be allowed upon the expiration of the contract; and
 (iv) such other information as the program may require.
 b. The comptroller and the corporation may establish a nominal fee for
such application.
 3. Any person, including the account owner, may make contributions to
the account after the account is opened.
 4. Contributions to accounts may be made in cash or may be deposited
by a taxpayer who has elected to contribute all or a portion of a refund
of personal income tax to an account that has been established under
this article.
 a. Taxpayer contributions shall be made by direct deposit to the
designated account. The amount elected to be contributed by the taxpayer
must be at least twenty-five dollars and may be applied as a
contribution only for the tax year in which the refund is issued.
 b. The election shall be made on a form prescribed by the department
of taxation and finance and filed with the taxpayer's tax return for the
tax year or at such other time and in such other manner as the
department may prescribe. The department shall prescribe the maximum
number of accounts to which a taxpayer may elect to contribute a portion
of the refund.
 c. The election to contribute all or a portion of a refund shall not
be revocable.
 d. All or a portion of a refund may not be contributed to an account
that has been established under this article if the amount of the
taxpayer's elected refund for such tax year is reduced by any other
sections of the tax law to the amount less than the minimum amount of
contribution authorized under this section.
 5. An account owner may withdraw all or part of the balance from an
account on sixty days notice or such shorter period as may be authorized
under rules governing the program. Such rules shall include provisions
that will generally enable the determination as to whether a withdrawal
is a nonqualified withdrawal or a qualified withdrawal.
 6. a. An account owner may change the designated beneficiary of an
account to an individual who is a member of the family of the prior
designated beneficiary in accordance with procedures established by the
memorandum of understanding pursuant to the provisions of section six
hundred ninety-five-c of this article.
 b. An account owner may transfer all or a portion of an account to
another family tuition account, the subsequent designated beneficiary of
which is a member of the family as defined in section 529 of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
 c. Changes in designated beneficiaries and transfers under this
subdivision shall not be permitted to the extent that they would cause
all accounts for the same beneficiary to exceed the permitted aggregate
maximum account balance.
 7. The program shall provide separate accounting for each designated
beneficiary.
 8. No account owner or designated beneficiary of any account shall be
permitted to direct the investment of any contributions to an account or
the earnings thereon more than two times in any calendar year.
 9. Neither an account owner nor a designated beneficiary may use an
interest in an account as security for a loan. Any pledge of an interest
in an account shall be of no force and effect.
 10. The comptroller shall promulgate rules or regulations to prevent
contributions on behalf of a designated beneficiary in excess of an
amount that would cause the aggregate account balance for all accounts
for a designated beneficiary to exceed a maximum account balance, as
established from time to time by the comptroller and the corporation on
the basis of higher education costs in the state, with adequate
safeguards to prevent more contributions than necessary to provide for
the qualified higher education costs of the beneficiary, as required to
maintain the program as a "qualified tuition program" under section 529
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
 11. a. If there is any distribution from an account to any individual
or for the benefit of any individual during a calendar year, such
distribution shall be reported to the Internal Revenue Service and the
account owner, the designated beneficiary, or the distributee to the
extent required by federal law or regulation.
 b. Statements shall be provided to each account owner at least once
each year within sixty days after the end of the twelve month period to
which they relate. The statement shall identify the contributions made
during a preceding twelve month period, the total contributions made to
the account through the end of the period, the value of the account at
the end of such period, distributions made during such period and any
other information that the comptroller shall require to be reported to
the account owner.
 c. Statements and information relating to accounts shall be prepared
and filed to the extent required by federal and state tax law.
 12. a. A local government or organization described in section
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, may open and
become the account owner of an account to fund scholarships for persons
whose identity will be determined upon disbursement.
 b. In the case of any account opened pursuant to paragraph a of this
subdivision the requirement set forth in subdivision two of this section
that a designated beneficiary be designated when an account is opened
shall not apply and each individual who receives an interest in such
account as a scholarship shall be treated as a designated beneficiary
with respect to such interest.
 13. An annual fee may be imposed upon the account owner for the
maintenance of the account.
 14. The program shall disclose the following information in writing to
each account owner and prospective account owner of a family tuition
account:
 a. the terms and conditions for purchasing a family tuition account;
 b. any restrictions on the substitution of beneficiaries;
 c. the person or entity entitled to terminate the tuition savings
agreement;
 d. the period of time during which a beneficiary may receive benefits
under the tuition savings agreement;
 e. the terms and conditions under which money may be wholly or
partially withdrawn from the program, including, but not limited to, any
reasonable charges and fees that may be imposed for withdrawal;
 f. the probable tax consequences associated with contributions to and
distributions from accounts; and
 g. all other rights and obligations pursuant to tuition savings
agreements, and any other terms, conditions, and provisions deemed
necessary and appropriate by the terms of the memorandum of
understanding entered into pursuant to section six hundred ninety-five-c
of this article.
 15. Tuition savings agreements shall be subject to section fourteen-c
of the banking law and the "truth-in-savings" regulations promulgated
thereunder.
 16. Nothing in this article or in any tuition savings agreement
entered into pursuant to this article shall be construed as a guarantee
by the state or any college that a beneficiary will be admitted to a
college, or, upon admission to a college will be permitted to continue
to attend or will receive a degree from a college.
 § 695-f. Program limitations; family tuition account. 1. Nothing in
this article shall be construed to:
 a. give any designated beneficiary any rights or legal interest with
respect to an account unless the designated beneficiary is the account
owner;
 b. guarantee that a designated beneficiary will be admitted to an
eligible educational institution;
 c. create state residency for an individual merely because the
individual is a designated beneficiary; or
 d. guarantee that amounts saved pursuant to the program will be
sufficient to cover the qualified higher education expenses of a
designated beneficiary.
 2. a. Nothing in this article shall create or be construed to create
any obligation of the comptroller, the state, or any agency or
instrumentality of the state to guarantee for the benefit of any account
owner or designated beneficiary with respect to:
 (i) the rate of interest or other return on any account; and
 (ii) the payment of interest or other return on any account.
 b. The comptroller and the corporation by rule or regulation shall
provide that every contract, application, deposit slip, or other similar
document that may be used in connection with a contribution to an
account clearly indicate that the account is not insured by the state
and neither the principal deposited nor the investment return is
guaranteed by the state.
 § 695-g. Scholarships and financial aid. Monies in a family tuition
account shall not be used toward the calculation of New York state
financial aid under a financial aid program administered by the state.
 ARTICLE 15
 TEXT-BOOKS
Section 701. Power to designate text-books; purchase and loan of
 text-books; purchase of supplies.
 702. Requisites for change.
 704. Text-books containing seditious or disloyal matter.
 705. Penalty for violation.
 § 701. Power to designate text-books; purchase and loan of text-books;
purchase of supplies. 1. In the several cities and school districts of
the state, boards of education, trustees or such body or officer as
perform the functions of such boards, shall designate text-books to be
used in the schools under their charge.
 2. A text-book, for the purposes of this section shall mean: (i) any
book, or a book substitute, which shall include hard covered or
paperback books, work books, or manuals and (ii) for expenses incurred
after July first, nineteen hundred ninety-nine, any courseware or other
content-based instructional materials in an electronic format, as such
terms are defined in the regulations of the commissioner, which a pupil
is required to use as a text, or a text-substitute, in a particular
class or program in the school he or she legally attends. For expenses
incurred on or after July first, two thousand eleven, a text-book shall
also mean items of expenditure that are eligible for an apportionment
pursuant to sections seven hundred eleven, seven hundred fifty-one
and/or seven hundred fifty-three of this title, where such items are
designated by the school district as eligible for aid pursuant to this
section, provided, however, that if aided pursuant to this section, such
expenses shall not be aidable pursuant to any other section of law.
Expenditures aided pursuant to this section shall not be eligible for
aid pursuant to any other section of law. Courseware or other
content-based instructional materials in an electronic format included
in the definition of textbook pursuant to this subdivision shall be
subject to the same limitations on content as apply to books or book
substitutes aided pursuant to this section.
 3. In the several cities and school districts of the state, boards of
education, trustees or such body or officers as perform the function of
such boards shall have the power and duty to purchase and to loan upon
individual request, textbooks, to all children residing in such district
who are enrolled in a public school including children attending the
public schools of the district for whom the district is eligible to
receive reimbursement pursuant to paragraph a of subdivision eight of
section thirty-two hundred two of this chapter, provided, however, that
such children shall not be counted by any other school district, and to
all children residing in such district who are enrolled in a nonpublic
school. Textbooks loaned to children enrolled in said nonpublic schools
shall be textbooks which are designated for use in any public schools of
the state or are approved by any boards of education, trustees or other
school authorities. Such textbooks are to be loaned free to such
children subject to such rules and regulations as are or may be
prescribed by the board of regents and such boards of education,
trustees or other school authorities. Enrollment shall be as defined in
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter.
 4. No school district shall be required to purchase or otherwise
acquire textbooks, the cost of which shall exceed an amount equal to the
apportionment pursuant to subdivision six of this section plus a minimum
lottery grant determined pursuant to subdivision four of section
ninety-two-c of the state finance law multiplied by the number of
children residing in such district and so enrolled in the base year; and
no school district shall be required to loan textbooks in excess of the
textbooks owned or acquired by such district; provided, however that all
textbooks owned or acquired by such district shall be loaned to children
residing in the district and so enrolled in public and nonpublic schools
on an equitable basis.
 5. In the several cities and school districts of the state, boards of
education, trustees or other school authorities may purchase supplies
and either rent, sell or loan the same to the pupils attending the
public schools in such cities and school districts upon such terms and
under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by such boards of
education, trustees or other school authorities.
 6. The commissioner, in addition to the annual apportionment of public
monies pursuant to other articles of this chapter, shall apportion to
each school district an amount equal to the cost of the textbooks
purchased and loaned by the district pursuant to this section in the
base year, but in no case shall the aid apportioned to the district
exceed the product of the textbook factor plus a minimum lottery grant,
determined pursuant to subdivision four of section ninety-two-c of the
state finance law, and the sum of the enrollments in grades kindergarten
through twelve in the base year calculated pursuant to subparagraphs
four, five, and six of paragraph n of subdivision one of section
thirty-six hundred two of this chapter. Aid payable pursuant to this
section shall be deemed final and not subject to change after April
thirtieth of the school year for which payment was due.
 For aid payable in the two thousand seven--two thousand eight school
year and thereafter, the textbook factor shall equal forty-three dollars
and twenty-five cents.
 7. The apportionment provided for in this section shall be paid, at
such times as may be determined by the commissioner and approved by the
director of the budget, during the school year in which the expenditures
are reported to the department prior to such apportionment. Expenditures
by a school district in excess of the product of the textbook factor
plus a minimum lottery grant determined pursuant to subdivision four of
section ninety-two-c of the state finance law and the sum of the
enrollments in grades kindergarten through twelve in the base year
calculated pursuant to subparagraphs four, five, and six of paragraph n
of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter in
any school year shall be deemed approved operating expense of the
district for the purpose of computation of state aid pursuant to section
thirty-six hundred two of this chapter, but expenditures up to such
product shall not be deemed approved operating expenses for such
purpose.
 8. In its discretion, a board of education may adopt regulations
specifying the date by which requests for the purchase and loan of
textbooks must be received by the district. Notice of such date shall be
given to all non-public schools. Such date shall not be earlier than the
first day of June of the school year prior to that for which such
textbooks are being requested, provided, however, that a parent or
guardian of a child not attending a particular non-public school prior
to June first of the school year may submit a written request for
textbooks within thirty days after such child is enrolled in such
non-public school. In no event however shall a request made later than
the times otherwise provided pursuant to this subdivision be denied
where a reasonable explanation is given for the delay in making the
request.
 § 702. Requisites for change. 1. When a text-book shall have been
designated for use in a school district or city as provided in
subdivision one of section seven hundred one, it shall not be lawful to
supersede such text-book by any other book within a period of five years
from the time of such designation, except upon a three-fourths vote of
the board of education, trustees or of such body or officer as performs
the function of such board.
 § 704. Text-books containing seditious or disloyal matter. No
text-book in any subject used in the public schools in this state shall
contain any matter or statements of any kind which are seditious in
character, disloyal to the United States or favorable to the cause of
any foreign country with which the United States may be at war. The
commission, consisting of the commissioner of education and of two
persons to be designated by the regents, whose duty it shall be on
complaint to examine text-books used in the public schools of the state,
in the subjects of civics, economics, English, history, language and
literature, for the purpose of determining whether such text-books
contain any matter or statements of any kind which are seditious in
character, disloyal to the United States or favorable to the cause of
any foreign country with which the United States may be at war, is
hereby continued. Any person may present a written complaint to such
commission that a text-book in any of the aforesaid subjects for use in
the public schools of this state or offered for sale for use in the
public schools of this state contains matter or statements in violation
of this section, specifying such matter or statements in detail. If the
commission determine that the text-book against which complaint is made
contains any such matter or statements, it shall issue a certificate
disapproving the use of such text-book in the public schools of this
state, together with a statement of the reasons for its disapproval,
specifying the matter found unlawful. Such certificate of disapproval
of a text-book, with a detailed statement of the reasons for its
disapproval, shall be duly forwarded to the boards of education or other
boards or authorities having jurisdiction of the public schools of the
school districts of this state, and after the receipt of such
certificate the use of a text-book so disapproved shall be discontinued
in such school district.
 Any contract hereafter made by any such board of education or other
school authorities for the purchase of a text-book in any of such
subjects, which has been so disapproved, shall be void. Any school
officer or teacher who permits a text-book in any of such subjects,
which has been so disapproved, to be used in the public schools of the
state, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
 § 705. Penalty for violation. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this article shall be liable to a penalty of not less than
fifty dollars nor more than one hundred dollars for every such
violation, to be sued for by any taxpayer of the school district, and
recovered before any justice of the peace and when collected, to be paid
to the collector or treasurer for the benefit of said school district.
 ARTICLE 15-A
 SCHOOL LIBRARY MATERIALS
Section 711. Aid for the purchase of school library materials.
 712. Loan of school library materials.
 § 711. Aid for the purchase of school library materials. 1. In the
several cities and school districts of the state, boards of education,
trustees or such body or officers as perform the functions of such
boards, shall designate school library materials to be used in the
schools in the district.
 2. School library materials, for the purposes of this article shall
mean digital materials, audio/visual materials and printed materials
that may or may not require magnification which meet all of the
following criteria: (1) materials which are catalogued and processed as
part of the school library or media center for use by elementary and/or
secondary school children and teachers; (2) materials which with
reasonable care and use may be expected to last more than one year; and
(3) materials which would not be eligible for aid pursuant to sections
seven hundred one and seven hundred fifty-one of this title. School
library materials meeting these criteria may include (i) hard cover,
paperback books and e-books, periodicals, that is, print and digital
publications which are subscription-based and appear at regular
intervals of less than one year on a continuing basis for an indefinite
period, documents other than books, pamphlets, musical scores, other
printed, digital and published materials, (ii) for school year nineteen
hundred eighty-six--eighty-seven and thereafter, audio/visual materials
including films, film strips, micro-film, sound recordings, processed
slides, transparencies, kinescopes, video tapes, maps, charts, globes,
pictorial works, including pictures and picture sets, reproductions,
photographs, graphic works, and any other audio/visual materials of a
similar nature made.
 3. No school district shall be required to purchase or otherwise
acquire school library materials, the cost of which shall exceed an
amount equal to the library materials factor multiplied by the sum of
the public school district enrollment and the nonpublic school
enrollment in the base year as defined in subparagraphs two and three of
paragraph n of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this
chapter. For aid payable in the nineteen hundred ninety-eight--nineteen
hundred ninety-nine school year, the library materials factor shall be
four dollars. For aid payable in the two thousand seven--two thousand
eight school year and thereafter, the library materials factor shall be
six dollars and twenty-five cents.
 4. Commencing July first, nineteen hundred ninety eight, the
commissioner, in addition to the annual apportionment of public monies
pursuant to other articles of this chapter, shall apportion to each
school district an amount equal to the cost of the school library
materials purchased by the district pursuant to this section in the base
year, but in no case shall the aid apportioned to the district exceed
the product of the library materials factor and the sum of public school
district enrollment, nonpublic school enrollment, and additional public
enrollment as defined in subparagraphs two, three, and six of paragraph
n of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter.
Aid payable pursuant to this section shall be deemed final and not
subject to change after April thirtieth of the school year for which
payment was due.
 § 712. Loan of school library materials. 1. In the several cities and
school districts of the state, boards of education, trustees or such
body or officers as perform the function of such boards shall have the
power and duty to loan upon request of an individual or a group of
individual pupils, to all pupils defined in subdivision three of section
seven hundred eleven of this article, school library materials. School
library materials loaned to such pupils attending private schools shall
be school library materials which are designated for use in any public
elementary or secondary schools of the state or are approved by any
board of education, trustees or other school authorities. Such school
library materials are to be loaned free to such children subject to such
rules and regulations as are or may be prescribed by the board of
regents and such boards of education, trustees or other school
authorities.
 2. No school district shall be required to loan school library
materials in excess of the school library materials owned or acquired by
such district pursuant to section seven hundred eleven of this article.
Such school library materials shall be loaned on an equitable basis to
children defined in subdivision three of section seven hundred eleven of
this article attending in the current year. The payment of tuition under
article eighty-nine of this chapter is deemed to be an equitable loan to
children for whom such tuition is paid.
 * ARTICLE 15-B
 HIGHER EDUCATION TEXTBOOKS
Section 715. Instructional materials; students with disabilities.
 * NB Repealed August 15, 2028
 * § 715. Instructional materials; students with disabilities. 1. For
purposes of this section, the following words shall have the following
meanings: (a) "College" means college as defined in subdivision two of
section six hundred one of this chapter;
 (b) "Instructional material or materials" means textbooks and other
materials written and published by commercial publishers primarily for
use by students in postsecondary instruction that are required or
essential to a student's success in a course of study in which a student
with a disability is enrolled. The determination of which materials are
"required or essential to student success" shall be made by the
instructor of the course. "Instructional material or materials" shall
also include commercially published nontextual mathematics and science
material wherever available software permits the conversion of existing
electronic files of the materials into a format that is compatible with
braille translation software or alternative media for students with
disabilities.
 (c) "Nonprinted instructional materials" means commercially published
instructional materials in formats other than print, and includes
commercially published instructional materials that require the
availability of electronic equipment in order to be used as a learning
resource, including, but not necessarily limited to, commercially
published software programs, video disks, and video and audio tapes.
 (d) "Printed instructional material or materials" means instructional
material or materials commercially published in book or other
commercially published printed form.
 (e) "Structural integrity" means all of the commercially published
printed instructional material, including, but not limited to, the text
of the material, sidebars, the table of contents, chapter headings and
subheadings, footnotes, pictures, illustrations, graphs, charts,
indexes, glossaries, and bibliographies. If good faith efforts fail to
produce an agreement pursuant to subdivision two of this section between
the publisher or manufacturer and the commissioner as to an electronic
format that will preserve the structural integrity of the commercially
published printed instructional material, the publisher or manufacturer
shall provide the instructional material in the most updated electronic
format taking into consideration the recommendation made by the National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and shall preserve as much
of the structural integrity of the commercially published printed
instructional material as possible.
 (f) "Specialized format" means braille, audio, or digital text that is
exclusively for use by blind persons and students with other
disabilities.
 (g) "Advisory council", means a group of individuals appointed as
follows: seven shall be appointed directly by the governor, two shall be
appointed on the nomination of the temporary president of the senate,
two shall be appointed on the nomination of the speaker of the assembly,
one shall be appointed on the nomination of the minority leader of the
senate, and one shall be appointed on the nomination of the minority
leader of the assembly. The council shall be comprised of
representatives from college disability student support services; the
department; the publisher community; students with disabilities and
other interested parties who will provide input into policy development,
program guidelines and implementation strategies for the implementation
of this section, and updates and technical assistance to regional
college disability service coordinators.
 (h) "Guidelines" means a set of information, training, technical
guidance and best practices used in implementing the provisions of this
section.
 Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to prohibit a college
from assisting a student with a disability by using the electronic
version of commercially published printed instructional material
provided pursuant to this section solely to transcribe or arrange for
the transcription of the commercially published printed instructional
material into braille. In the event such a transcription is made, the
college shall have the right to share such braille copy of the
commercially published printed instructional material with other
students with disabilities.
 2. An individual, firm, partnership or corporation that publishes or
manufactures commercially published printed instructional materials for
students attending college shall provide for purchase by students with
disabilities such printed instructional material in an electronic format
mutually agreed upon by the commercial publisher or manufacturer and the
commissioner. These commercially published printed instructional
materials must be converted to an electronic format using the most
updated software technology available to the public at that time.
Computer files or electronic versions of commercially published printed
instructional materials shall maintain the structural integrity of such
printed instructional material, be compatible with commonly used braille
translation and speech synthesis software, and include corrections and
revisions as may be necessary. The computer files or electronic versions
of the commercially published printed instructional material shall be
available to students with disabilities at a cost comparable to the
printed version of such commercially published material and in a timely
manner, upon receipt of a written request that does all of the
following:
 (a) Certifies that the electronic version of the commercially
published printed instructional materials will be used by a student with
a disability.
 (b) Certifies that the student has a disability that prevents him or
her from using standard commercially published instructional materials.
 (c) Certifies that the commercially published printed instructional
material is for use by the student in connection with a course in which
he or she is registered or enrolled at the college.
 (d) Is signed by the coordinator of services for students with
disabilities at the college or by the campus or college official
responsible for monitoring compliance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12101 et seq.) at the college.
 3. An individual, firm, partnership or corporation specified in
subdivision two of this section may also require that, in addition to
the conditions enumerated above, the request shall include a statement
signed by the student agreeing to both of the following:
 (a) He or she will use the electronic copy of the commercially
published printed instructional material in specialized format solely
for his or her own educational purposes.
 (b) He or she will not copy or duplicate the commercially published
printed instructional material or electronic copy for use by others
consistent with the requirements of the copyright revision act of 1976,
as amended (17 U.S.C. §101 et seq.).
 4. If a college permits a student to directly use the electronic
version of a commercially published instructional material, such student
shall use the disk or file in a manner that complies at all times with
the Copyright Revisions Act of 1976, as amended (17 U.S.C. Sec. 101 et
seq.).
 5. An individual, firm, partnership or corporation that, for
commercial purposes, publishes or manufactures nonprinted instructional
materials for students attending college shall provide computer files or
other electronic versions of such nonprinted instructional materials for
use by students attending such college subject to the same conditions
set forth in subdivisions two and three of this section for printed
instructional materials, when technology is available to convert these
nonprinted instructional materials published or manufactured for
commercial purposes to a format that maintains the structural integrity
of such nonprinted instructional materials that is compatible with
braille translation and speech synthesis software.
 6. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorize any use of any
commercially published instructional materials that would constitute an
infringement of copyright under the Copyright Revision Act of 1976, as
amended (17 U.S.C. Sec. 101 et seq.).
 7. The governor shall convene a statewide advisory council as defined
in paragraph (g) of subdivision one of this section that will meet as
necessary to fulfill the functions set forth in paragraph (g) of
subdivision one of this section.
 * NB Repealed August 15, 2028
 ARTICLE 15-C
 TEXTBOOK ACCESS ACT
Section 720. Definitions.
 721. Pricing transparency.
 722. Sales of textbooks, textbook bundles.
 723. Special role of faculties in adoptions.
 724. Policies addressing course material adoptions and sample
 materials.
 § 720. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall
have the following meanings:
 1. "Bundled" means a textbook and any other learning material,
including, but not limited to, workbooks, online technologies,
dictionaries, CD-ROMS, or books, packaged together to be sold for one
price.
 2. "Institution of higher education" means any institution of higher
education, recognized and approved by the regents of the university of
the state of New York, which provides a course of study leading to the
granting of a post-secondary degree or diploma.
 3. "Publisher" means any publishing house, publishing firm, or
publishing company that publishes textbooks and supplemental materials.
 4. "Textbook" means any textbook that is adopted for a course, as
determined by the faculty member or members or entity charged with
choosing that textbook.
 5. "Supplemental materials" means materials that supplement the
primary textbook or textbooks that come in the form of another book,
online technologies, a workbook, CD-ROM, or any other format, and that
can be used by a faculty member or a student during the teaching of a
course.
 6. "Adopter" means any faculty member or academic department at
institutions of higher learning responsible for considering and choosing
textbooks and/or supplemental materials to be utilized in connection
with the accredited courses taught at institutions of higher education.
 § 721. Pricing transparency. 1. To ensure pricing transparency, all
publishers of college textbooks shall, on request, make readily
available to prospective adopters of their products who are members of
the faculties or purchasing entities of institutions of higher education
the price at which the publisher would make the products available to
the college bookstore that would offer the products to students.
 2. For purposes of this section, the term "products" means all
versions of a textbook or set of textbooks, except custom textbooks or
special editions of textbooks, available in the subject area for which a
prospective adopter is teaching a course, including supplemental
materials, both when sold together or separately from a textbook.
 § 722. Sales of textbooks, textbook bundles. Textbooks shall be sold
in the same manner as ordered by such faculty member or entity in charge
of selecting textbooks for courses. In the event such product is
unavailable as ordered, the bookstore, faculty, and relevant publisher
shall work together to provide the best possible substitute that most
closely matches the requested item or items, and the publisher shall
make available the price of such substitute or substitutes readily
available.
 § 723. Special role of faculties in adoptions. Each institution of
higher education shall institute policies that encourage faculty members
or the entity in charge of textbook adoptions to place their orders with
sufficient lead-time to enable the university, or contract-managed,
bookstore to confirm the availability of the requested materials and,
when appropriate, the availability of used textbooks or alternate
digital formats.
 § 724. Policies addressing course material adoptions and sample
materials. No employee at an institution of higher education shall
demand or receive any payment, loan, advance, goods, or deposit of
money, present or promised, for adopting specific course materials
required for coursework or instruction; with the exception that the
employee may receive:
 1. sample copies, instructor's copies, or instructional material, that
are not to be sold;
 2. royalties or other compensation from sales of textbooks that
include such instructor's own writing or work;
 3. honoraria for academic peer review of course materials; or
 4. training in the use of course materials and learning technologies.
 ARTICLE 16
 COMPUTER TECHNOLOGY
Section 751. Aid for computer software purchases.
 752. Loan of computer software.
 753. Instructional computer hardware and technology equipment
 apportionment.
 754. Loan of instructional computer hardware.
 755. Loan of smart schools classroom technology.
 § 751. Aid for computer software purchases. 1. In the several cities
and school districts of the state, boards of education, trustees or such
body or officers as perform the functions of such boards, shall
designate software programs to be used in conjunction with computers of
the school district.
 2. A software program, for the purposes of this article shall mean (a)
a computer program which a pupil is required to use as a learning aid in
a particular class in the school the pupil legally attends, or (b) for
expenses incurred after July first, two thousand nine, any content-based
instructional materials in an electronic format that are aligned with
state standards which are accessed or delivered through the internet
based on a subscription model. Such electronic format materials may
include a variety of media assets and learning tools, including video,
audio, images, teacher guides, and student access capabilities as such
terms are defined in the regulations of the commissioner. For expenses
incurred on or after July first, two thousand eleven, a software program
shall also mean items of expenditure that are eligible for an
apportionment pursuant to sections seven hundred one, seven hundred
eleven and/or seven hundred fifty-three of this title, where such items
are designated by the school district as eligible for aid pursuant to
this section, provided, however, that if aided pursuant to this section,
such expenses shall not be aidable pursuant to any other section of law.
 3. No school district shall be required to purchase or otherwise
acquire software programs, the cost of which shall exceed an amount
equal to the software factor multiplied by the sum of the public school
district enrollment and the nonpublic school enrollment in the base year
as defined in subparagraphs two and three of paragraph n of subdivision
one of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter.
 4. The commissioner, in addition to the annual apportionment of public
monies pursuant to other articles of this chapter, shall apportion to
each school district an amount equal to the cost of the software
programs purchased by the district pursuant to this section in the base
year, but in no case shall the aid apportioned to the district exceed
the product of the software factor and the sum of public school district
enrollment, nonpublic school enrollment, and additional public
enrollment as defined in subparagraphs two, three, and six of paragraph
n of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter.
 For aid payable in the nineteen hundred ninety-seven--ninety-eight and
nineteen hundred ninety-eight--ninety-nine school years, the software
factor shall equal four dollars and fifty-eight cents. For aid payable
in the nineteen hundred ninety-nine--two thousand school year, the
software factor shall equal seven dollars and fifty-five cents. For aid
payable in the two thousand--two thousand one school year, the software
factor shall equal fourteen dollars and ninety-eight cents. For aid
payable in the two thousand one--two thousand two school year, the
software factor shall equal twenty-three dollars and ninety cents. For
aid payable in the two thousand two--two thousand three school year and
thereafter, the software factor shall equal fourteen dollars and
ninety-eight cents. The apportionment provided for in this section shall
be paid at such times as may be determined by the commissioner and
approved by the director of the budget. Aid payable pursuant to this
section shall be deemed final and not subject to change after April
thirtieth of the school year for which payment was due.
 § 752. Loan of computer software. 1. In the several cities and school
districts of the state, boards of education, trustees or such body or
officers as perform the function of such boards shall have the power and
duty to loan upon request of an individual or a group of individual
pupils, to all pupils defined in subdivision three of section seven
hundred fifty-one of this article, software programs. Software programs
loaned to such pupils attending private schools shall be software
programs which are designated for use in any public elementary or
secondary schools of the state or are approved by any board of
education, trustees or other school authorities. Such software programs
are to be loaned free to such children subject to such rules and
regulations as are or may be prescribed by the board of regents and such
boards of education, trustees or other school authorities.
 2. No school district shall be required to loan software programs in
excess of the software programs owned or acquired by such district
pursuant to section seven hundred fifty-one of this article. Such
software programs shall be loaned on an equitable basis to children
defined in subdivision three of section seven hundred fifty-one of this
article attending in the current year. The payment of tuition under
article eighty-nine of this chapter is deemed to be an equitable loan to
children for whom such tuition is paid.
 § 753. Instructional computer hardware and technology equipment
apportionment. 1. In addition to any other apportionment under this
chapter, a school district shall be eligible for an apportionment under
the provisions of this section for approved expenses for (i) the
purchase or lease of micro and/or mini computer equipment or terminals
for instructional purposes or (ii) technology equipment, as defined in
paragraph c of subdivision two of this section, used for instructional
purposes, or (iii) for the repair of such equipment and training and
staff development for instructional purposes as provided hereinafter, or
(iv) for expenses incurred on or after July first, two thousand eleven,
any items of expenditure that are eligible for an apportionment pursuant
to sections seven hundred one, seven hundred eleven and/or seven hundred
fifty-one of this title, where such items are designated by the school
district as eligible for aid pursuant to this section, provided,
however, that if aided pursuant to this section, such expenses shall not
be aidable pursuant to any other section of law. Such aid shall be
provided pursuant to a plan developed by the district which demonstrates
to the satisfaction of the commissioner that the instructional computer
hardware needs of the district's public school students have been
adequately met and that the school district has provided for the loan of
instructional computer hardware to students legally attending nonpublic
schools pursuant to section seven hundred fifty-four of this article.
The apportionment shall equal the lesser of such approved expense in the
base year or, the product of (i) the technology factor, (ii) the sum of
the public school district enrollment and the nonpublic school
enrollment in the base year as defined in subparagraphs two and three of
paragraph n of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this
chapter, and (iii) the building aid ratio, as defined in subdivision
four of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter. For aid payable
in the two thousand seven--two thousand eight school year and
thereafter, the technology factor shall be twenty-four dollars and
twenty cents. A school district may use up to twenty percent of the
product of (i) the technology factor, (ii) the sum of the public school
district enrollment and the nonpublic school enrollment in the base year
as defined in subparagraphs two and three of paragraph n of subdivision
one of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter, and (iii) the
building aid ratio for the repair of instructional computer hardware and
technology equipment and training and staff development for
instructional purposes pursuant to a plan submitted to the commissioner.
 2. As used in this article:
 a. "Current year" shall have the same meaning as that term is defined
in subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this chapter;
 b. "Base year" shall have the same meaning as that term is defined in
subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this article; and
 c. "Technology equipment", for the purposes of this article, shall
mean equipment with a useful life used in conjunction with or in support
of educational programs including but not limited to video, solar
energy, robotic, satellite, laser and such other equipment as the
commissioner shall approve provided that expenses for the purchase or
lease of such equipment shall not be eligible for aid under any other
provisions of this chapter.
 3. No school district shall be required to purchase or otherwise
acquire instructional computer hardware or technology equipment, the
cost of which exceeds the amount of state aid provided pursuant to this
section.
 4. The apportionment provided for in this section shall be paid at
such times as may be determined by the commissioner and approved by the
director of the budget, during the school year in which the expenditures
are reported to the department prior to such apportionment, but not
earlier than the school year after the school year in which expenses are
incurred.
 5. Expenses aided pursuant to this section shall not be eligible for
aid pursuant to any other provision of this chapter.
 § 754. Loan of instructional computer hardware. 1. In the several
cities and school districts of the state, school authorities, as defined
in subdivision twelve of section two of this chapter, shall have the
power and duty, to the extent provided in this section, to loan, upon
request of an individual or a group of individual pupils, to all pupils
legally attending nonpublic elementary or secondary schools located in
the school district, instructional computer hardware which is designated
for use in any public elementary or secondary schools of the state or is
approved by any school authorities. Such instructional computer hardware
is to be loaned free to such children, commencing with the two thousand
seven--two thousand eight school year, subject to such rules and
regulations as are or may be prescribed by the board of regents and such
school authorities.
 2. No school district shall be required to loan instructional computer
hardware in excess of the instructional computer hardware acquired by
such district pursuant to section seven hundred fifty-three of this
article. Such instructional computer hardware shall be loaned on an
equitable basis to children attending nonpublic schools in the district
in the current year, provided that nothing in this article shall be
construed to require a school district to loan to children attending
nonpublic schools, pursuant to this section, instructional computer
hardware purchased with local or federal funds or with state funds other
than funds apportioned pursuant to this article. The payment of tuition
under article eighty-nine of this chapter is deemed to be an equitable
loan to children for whom such tuition is paid, and the provisions of
this section shall not apply.
 3. School authorities shall adopt regulations specifying the date by
which requests for the purchase and loan of instructional computer
hardware must be received by the district. Notice of such date shall be
given to all non-public schools in the school district. Such date shall
not be earlier than the first day of June of the school year prior to
that for which such instructional computer hardware is being requested,
provided, however, that a parent or guardian of a child not attending a
particular non-public school prior to June first of the school year may
submit a written request for instructional computer hardware within
thirty days after such child is enrolled in such non-public school. In
no event, however, shall a request made later than the times otherwise
provided pursuant to this subdivision be denied where a reasonable
explanation is given for the delay in making the request.
 § 755. Loan of smart schools classroom technology. 1. In the several
cities and school districts of the state, school authorities, as defined
in subdivision twelve of section two of this chapter, shall have the
power and duty, to the extent provided in this section, to loan, upon
request of an individual or a group of individual pupils, to all pupils
legally attending nonpublic elementary or secondary schools located in
the school district, smart schools classroom technology acquired
pursuant to subdivision sixteen of section thirty-six hundred forty-one
of this chapter which is designated for use in any public elementary or
secondary schools of the state or is approved by any school authorities.
Such smart schools classroom technology made available to nonpublic
students shall be limited to that allowable under both paragraph seven
of subdivision sixteen of section thirty-six hundred forty-one of this
chapter and section seven hundred fifty-four of this article. Such smart
schools classroom technology is to be loaned free to such children,
commencing with the two thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen school
year, subject to such rules and regulations as are or may be prescribed
by the board of regents and such school authorities.
 2. No school district shall be required to loan smart schools
classroom technology in excess of the smart schools classroom technology
acquired by such district pursuant to subdivision sixteen of section
thirty-six hundred forty-one of this chapter. Such smart schools
classroom technology shall be loaned on an equitable basis to children
attending nonpublic schools in the district in the current year,
provided that nothing in this article shall be construed to require a
school district to loan to children attending nonpublic schools,
pursuant to this section, classroom technology purchased with local or
federal funds or with state funds other than funds apportioned pursuant
to subdivision sixteen of section three hundred sixty-four of this
chapter, and provided further that no school district may loan smart
schools classroom technology in an aggregate amount greater than two
hundred fifty dollars multiplied by the nonpublic school enrollment in
the base year, at time of enactment, as defined in subparagraph three of
paragraph n of subdivision one of section thirty-six hundred two of this
chapter. The payment of tuition under article eighty-nine of this
chapter is deemed to be an equitable loan to children for whom such
tuition is paid, and the provisions of this section shall not apply.
 3. School authorities shall adopt regulations specifying the date by
which requests for the purchase and loan of smart schools classroom
technology must be received by the district. Notice of such date shall
be given to all non-public schools in the school district. For the two
thousand fourteen--two thousand fifteen school year, such date shall not
be earlier than the first day of January of such school year, and for
the two thousand fifteen--two thousand sixteen school year and
thereafter, such date shall not be earlier than the first day of June of
the school year prior to that for which such smart schools classroom
technology is being requested, provided, however, that a parent or
guardian of a child not attending a particular non-public school prior
to January first or June first of the school year, as applicable, may
submit a written request for smart schools classroom technology within
thirty days after such child is enrolled in such non-public school. In
no event, however, shall a request made later than the times otherwise
provided pursuant to this subdivision be denied where a reasonable
explanation is given for the delay in making the request.
 ARTICLE 17
 INSTRUCTION IN CERTAIN SUBJECTS
Section 801. Courses of instruction in patriotism and citizenship and
 in certain historic documents.
 801-a. Instruction in civility, citizenship and character
 education.
 802. Instruction relating to the flag; holidays.
 802-a. Instruction relating to general elections.
 803. Instruction in physical education and kindred subjects.
 803-a. Courses of study in prevention of child abduction.
 803-b. Courses of study in prevention of child sexual
 exploitation and child sexual abuse.
 804. Health education regarding mental health, alcohol, drugs,
 tobacco abuse and the prevention and detection of
 certain cancers.
 804-a. Comprehensive school health education demonstration
 program.
 804-b. Education regarding child development.
 804-c. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation instruction.
 804-d. Automated external defibrillator instruction.
 805. Asian American, Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islander
 history advisory committee; appointment; powers and
 duties.
 806. Courses of instruction in highway safety and traffic
 regulation; school safety patrols.
 806-a. Driver education.
 807. Fire and emergency drills.
 807-a. Fire inspections.
 807-b. College fire inspections.
 807-c. Transmission of fire alarm to fire department.
 807-d. Locating source of fires in schools.
 808. Instruction in fire and arson prevention.
 809. Instruction in the humane treatment of animals.
 809-a. Instruction in the safe use of firearms and in the game
 laws.
 810. Conservation day.
 811. Procurement, use and possession of hypodermic syringes
 and needles by school personnel for educational
 purposes.
 812. Health training program for secondary school students.
 813. School lunch period; scheduling.
 814. Courses of study in internet safety.
 815. State seal of biliteracy.
 816. Local library and school partnerships.
 817. Expanding access to advanced courses to improve
 educational equity.
 817*2. Student government.
 818. Evidence-based and scientifically based reading
 instruction.
 § 801. Courses of instruction in patriotism and citizenship and in
certain historic documents. 1. In order to promote a spirit of
patriotic and civic service and obligation and to foster in the children
of the state moral and intellectual qualities which are essential in
preparing to meet the obligations of citizenship in peace or in war, the
regents of The University of the State of New York shall prescribe
courses of instruction in patriotism, citizenship, civic education and
values, our shared history of diversity, the role of religious tolerance
in this country, and human rights issues, with particular attention to
the study of the inhumanity of genocide, slavery (including the freedom
trail and underground railroad), the Holocaust, and the mass starvation
in Ireland from 1845 to 1850, to be maintained and followed in all the
schools of the state. The boards of education and trustees of the
several cities and school districts of the state shall require
instruction to be given in such courses, by the teachers employed in the
schools therein. All pupils attending such schools, over the age of
eight years, shall attend upon such instruction.
 Similar courses of instruction shall be prescribed and maintained in
private schools in the state, and all pupils in such schools over eight
years of age shall attend upon such courses. If such courses are not so
established and maintained in a private school, attendance upon
instruction in such school shall not be deemed substantially equivalent
to instruction given to pupils of like age in the public schools of the
city or district in which such pupils reside.
 2. The regents shall prescribe courses of instruction in the history,
meaning, significance and effect of the provisions of the constitution
of the United States, the amendments thereto, the declaration of
independence, the constitution of the state of New York and the
amendments thereto, to be maintained and followed in all of the schools
of the state. The boards of education and trustees of the several cities
and school districts of the state shall require instruction to be given
in such courses, by the teachers employed in the schools therein. All
pupils attending such schools, in the eighth and higher grades, shall
attend upon such instruction.
 Similar courses of instruction shall be prescribed and maintained in
private schools in the state, and all pupils in such schools in grades
or classes corresponding to the instruction in the eighth and higher
grades of the public schools shall attend upon such courses. If such
courses are not so established and maintained in a private school,
attendance upon instruction in such school shall not be deemed
substantially equivalent to instruction given to pupils in the public
schools of the city or district in which such pupils reside.
 3. The regents shall determine the subjects to be included in such
courses of instruction in patriotism, citizenship, civic education and
values, our shared history of diversity, the role of history of
diversity, the role of religious tolerance in this country, and human
rights issues, with particular attention to the study of the inhumanity
of genocide, slavery (including the freedom trail and underground
railroad), the Holocaust, and the mass starvation in Ireland from 1845
to 1850, and in the history, meaning, significance and effect of the
provisions of the constitution of the United States, the amendments
thereto, the declaration of independence, the constitution of the state
of New York and the amendments thereto, and the period of instruction in
each of the grades in such subjects. They shall adopt rules providing
for attendance upon such instruction and for such other matters as are
required for carrying into effect the objects and purposes of this
section. The commissioner shall be responsible for the enforcement of
such section and shall cause to be inspected and supervise the
instruction to be given in such subjects. The commissioner may, in his
discretion, cause all or a portion of the public school money to be
apportioned to a district or city to be withheld for failure of the
school authorities of such district or city to provide instruction in
such courses and to compel attendance upon such instruction, as herein
prescribed, and for a non-compliance with the rules of the regents
adopted as herein provided.
 4. The regents shall designate a week during each year and prescribe a
uniform course of exercises in the public schools of the state suitable
for pupils of various ages to instill into the minds of such pupils the
purpose, meaning and importance of the bill of rights articles in the
federal and state constitutions. Such exercises shall be in addition to
any prescribed courses of study in the schools.
 5. The regents shall make available to all elementary schools in the
state suitable curriculum materials to aid in the instruction of pupils
in grades kindergarten through six in the understanding and acceptance
of children with disabilities as defined in section forty-four hundred
one of this chapter.
 § 801-a. Instruction in civility, citizenship and character education.
The regents shall ensure that the course of instruction in grades
kindergarten through twelve includes a component on civility,
citizenship and character education. Such component shall instruct
students on the principles of honesty, tolerance, personal
responsibility, respect for others, with an emphasis on discouraging
acts of harassment, bullying, discrimination, observance of laws and
rules, courtesy, dignity and other traits which will enhance the quality
of their experiences in, and contributions to, the community. Such
component shall include instruction of safe, responsible use of the
internet and electronic communications. The regents shall determine how
to incorporate such component in existing curricula and the commissioner
shall promulgate any regulations needed to carry out such determination
of the regents. For the purposes of this section, "tolerance," "respect
for others" and "dignity" shall include awareness and sensitivity to
harassment, bullying, discrimination and civility in the relations of
people of different races, weights, national origins, ethnic groups,
religions, religious practices, mental or physical abilities, sexual
orientations, genders, and sexes.
 § 802. Instruction relating to the flag; holidays. 1. It shall be the
duty of the commissioner to prepare, for the use of the public schools
of the state, a program providing for a salute to the flag and a daily
pledge of allegiance to the flag, and instruction in its correct use and
display which shall include, as a minimum, specific instruction
regarding respect for the flag of the United States of America, its
display and use as provided by federal statute and regulation and such
other patriotic exercises as may be deemed by him to be expedient, under
such regulations and instructions as may best meet the varied
requirements of the different grades in such schools. However, such
instruction shall include, as a minimum, the provisions of sections one
hundred seventy through one hundred seventy-seven of title thirty-six of
the United States Code.
 2. a. It shall also be the duty of the commissioner to make special
provision for the observance in the public schools of Lincoln's
birthday, Washington's birthday, Memorial day and Flag day, and such
other legal holidays of like character as may be hereafter designated by
law when the legislature makes an appropriation therefor.
 b. It shall also be the duty of the commissioner to make special
provision for the observance of a brief period of silence for September
11th Remembrance Day.
 3. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to authorize military
instruction or drill in the public schools during school hours, except
that the board of education of any school district may offer during
school hours a junior reserve officer training program in conjunction
with the United States Department of Defense to those students in grades
nine through twelve who are at least fourteen years of age provided that
enrollment and participation in such program is voluntary on the part of
the student and written consent of a parent or guardian is submitted by
such student and further provided, that the conduct of instruction on or
the presence within any school of any type of current or future weaponry
as part of such program is prohibited.
 § 802-a. Instruction relating to general elections. Every school and
teacher or instructor shall utilize a sample or facsimile ballot,
provided by the appropriate board of elections pursuant to section 7-118
of the election law, when providing instruction in the electoral process
relating to an ongoing general election, for which a sample or facsimile
ballot has been created, or when holding mock elections.
 § 803. Instruction in physical education and kindred subjects. 1. All
pupils above the age of eight years in all elementary and secondary
schools, shall receive as part of the prescribed courses of instruction
therein such physical education under the direction of the commissioner
of education as the regents may determine. Such courses shall be
designed to aid in the well-rounded education of pupils and in the
development of character, citizenship, physical fitness, health and the
worthy use of leisure. Pupils above such age attending the public
schools shall be required to attend upon such prescribed courses of
instruction.
 2. The board of education or trustees of every school district
regularly employing twenty or more teachers shall employ a teacher or
teachers qualified and duly licensed under the regulations of the
regents to give such instruction; in every other district of the state,
they shall require such instruction to be given by the teacher or
teachers regularly employed to give instruction in other subjects or by
a teacher or teachers qualified and duly licensed under the regulations
of the regents.
 3. The boards of education or trustees of two or more contiguous
districts in the same supervisory district, however, may join in the
employment of a teacher qualified and duly licensed under the
regulations of the regents to give such instruction; and the salary of
such teacher and the expenses incurred on account of such instruction
shall be apportioned by the district superintendent among such districts
according to the assessed valuation thereof, and as so apportioned shall
be a charge upon each of such districts.
 4. Similar courses of instruction shall be prescribed and maintained
in private schools in the state and all pupils in such schools over
eight years of age shall attend upon such courses; and if such courses
are not so established and maintained in any private school, attendance
upon instruction in such school shall not be deemed substantially
equivalent to instruction given to children of like ages in the public
school or schools of the city or district in which the child resides.
 5. It shall be the duty of the regents to adopt rules determining the
subjects to be included in courses of physical education provided for in
this section, the period of instruction in each of such courses, the
qualifications of teachers, and the attendance upon such courses of
instruction.
 6. The physical education hereinbefore provided for, may be given,
when practicable, in any armory of the state where such armory is within
convenient distance from the school, and at such times and in such
manner as not to interfere with the regular military uses of such
armory. The commanding officer in charge of any such armory shall, upon
application made by any board of education or trustees of the several
cities and school districts within the state, permit access to any such
armory, for the purposes herein mentioned.
 § 803-a. Courses of study in prevention of child abduction. 1. All
pupils in grades K-8 in all public schools in the state shall receive
instruction designed to prevent the abduction of children. Such
instruction shall be provided by or under the direct supervision of
regular classroom teachers, provided, however, that such instruction may
be provided by any other agency, public or private.
 2. The commissioner, shall provide technical assistance to assist in
the development of curricula for such courses of study which shall be
age appropriate and developed according to the needs and abilities of
pupils at successive grade levels in order to provide awareness skills,
information, self-confidence and support to aid in the prevention of
child abduction.
 3. For purposes of developing such courses of study, the board of
education or trustees of every school district may establish local
advisory councils or utilize the school-based shared decision making and
planning committee established pursuant to regulations of the
commissioner to make recommendations concerning the content and
implementation of such courses. School districts may alternatively
utilize courses of instruction developed by consortia of school
district, boards of cooperative educational services, other school
districts or any other agency, public or private. Such advisory councils
shall consist of, but not be limited to, parents, school trustees and
board members, appropriate school personnel, business and community
representatives, and law enforcement personnel having experience in the
prevention of child abduction.
 4. The board of education or trustees of every school district shall
provide appropriate training and curriculum materials for the regular
teachers who provide such instruction.
 § 803-b. Courses of study in prevention of child sexual exploitation
and child sexual abuse. 1. All pupils in grades K-8 in all public
schools in the state shall receive instruction designed to prevent child
sexual exploitation and child sexual abuse. Such program shall be
defined by the commissioner in regulations after consultation with the
department of health and be designed to educate students, parents and
school personnel about the prevention of child sexual exploitation and
child sexual abuse in grades kindergarten through eight. Such program
shall include, but not be limited to students and parents. Nothing in
this section shall prevent the department from making model curriculum
and resource materials available on the department's website.
 2. The commissioner may provide technical assistance to assist in the
development of curricula for such courses of study which shall be age
appropriate and developed according to the needs and abilities of pupils
at successive grade levels in order to provide awareness, skills,
information, self-confidence and support to aid in the prevention of
child sexual exploitation and child sexual abuse.
 § 804. Health education regarding mental health, alcohol, drugs,
tobacco abuse and the prevention and detection of certain cancers. 1.
All schools shall ensure that their health education programs recognize
the multiple dimensions of health by including mental health and the
relation of physical and mental health so as to enhance student
understanding, attitudes and behaviors that promote health, well-being
and human dignity.
 2. All schools shall include, as an integral part of health education,
instruction so as to discourage the misuse and abuse of alcohol, tobacco
and other drugs and promote attitudes and behavior that enhance health,
well being, and human dignity.
 3. Instruction regarding alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs shall be
included in the health education provided for all elementary school
pupils and shall be taught by the regular classroom teachers or by
teachers certified to teach health education. Such instruction shall be
designed according to the needs and abilities of the pupils at
successive grade levels with the purpose of developing desirable health
behavior, attitudes, and knowledge as well as self-reliance and problem
solving capacity.
 4. Instruction regarding alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs, in
addition to continued health guidance in the junior high school grades
and the senior high schools, shall be an integral part of a required
health education course at each of these levels in the secondary schools
curriculum. Students shall be required to demonstrate knowledge in the
subject area through the use of a test, graded project or report, or any
other means prescribed by the school authorities regarding alcohol,
drugs, and tobacco. Any such course shall be taught by teachers holding
a certificate to teach health. Related courses in the secondary school
curriculum shall be taught in a manner supportive of health education
regarding alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs. In addition, instruction
regarding the dangers of driving while under the influence of alcohol or
drugs shall be an integral part of a required health education course in
the senior high schools. Such instruction shall be provided in all
senior high schools whether or not these schools also provide driver
education courses.
 5. Instruction regarding methods of prevention and detection of
certain cancers, including but not limited to breast cancer, skin
cancer, testicular cancer and other cancers where certain preventive
measures have become generally accepted and certain detection methods
have been adopted and recommended generally to the public. Such
instruction shall be an integral part of a required health education
course at the senior high school level, in addition to continued health
guidance in senior high schools. Any such course shall be taught by
teachers holding a certificate to teach health.
 6. a. The commissioner may prescribe in regulations such health
education courses which include instruction regarding alcohol, tobacco,
and other drugs as the commissioner may deem necessary and desirable for
the welfare of pupils and the community. The contents may be varied to
meet the needs of particular school districts, or portions thereof, and
need not be uniform throughout the state, provided, however, that school
districts shall utilize either the curriculum for health education
instruction regarding alcohol, tobacco and other drugs prescribed by the
commissioner or a course approved by the commissioner in accordance with
criteria established by the commissioner. The commissioner is authorized
to make recommendations to the board of regents beginning December
first, two thousand fourteen and every three years thereafter relating
to the modernization of such instruction required pursuant to
subdivision one of this section, to include the most up to date age
appropriate information available regarding the misuse and abuse of
alcohol, tobacco and other drugs, including but not limited to heroin
and opioids. Such instruction shall include, but not be limited to,
information regarding drugs and other substances that are more prevalent
among school aged youth. Such recommendations shall be the result of a
collaboration between the department, the office of alcoholism and
substance abuse services and the department of health. If the board of
regents adopts such curriculum, the curriculum requirement shall take
effect no later than the next school year after such curriculum has been
adopted.
 b. The commissioner shall make available an interpersonal violence
prevention education package for grades kindergarten through twelve,
which package may consist of student pamphlets, parent pamphlets,
videotapes and other informative materials to be distributed to school
districts, and shall encourage the use of such material as part of the
health or other related curricula or programs.
 c. The regents shall review the health curriculum requirements in
existence on the effective date of this paragraph for the purpose of
streamlining such curriculum and identifying any outdated components
that may be eliminated or consolidated in order to ensure that students
have sufficient time and instruction to develop skills to address issues
of violence prevention and mental health. To the extent appropriate, the
regents shall modify the existing curriculum to provide greater focus on
the development of skills, by no later than middle school, that are
needed to recognize, cope with and address potentially violent incidents
including an understanding of student roles in emergency situations and
other related skills designed to reduce the threat of violence in
schools.
 7. School authorities shall provide the needed facilities, time, and
place for the instruction set forth herein and shall provide learning
aids and curriculum resource materials which contribute to effective
teaching methods and learning in health education regarding alcohol,
tobacco, and other drugs.
 8. All pre-service training programs in the state for elementary
teachers shall include adequate preparation regarding the instruction in
alcohol, tobacco, and other drugs set forth herein, and no teacher shall
be licensed except upon satisfactory demonstration of the competencies
included in the institutional proposals approved by the department.
 9. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to diminish or
impair the duties of the commissioner with respect to the continuing
program for critical health problems established by chapter seven
hundred eighty-seven of the laws of nineteen hundred sixty-seven as
amended. The commissioner shall coordinate actions taken under authority
of this section with the provisions of said chapter as they relate to
health education in schools, inservice training and training programs,
and curriculum or syllabus development regarding the deleterious effects
resulting from the use, misuse, and abuse of alcohol, tobacco, and other
drugs.
 § 804-a. Comprehensive school health education demonstration program.
1. Within the amounts appropriated, the commissioner is hereby
authorized to establish a demonstration program and to distribute state
funds to local school districts, boards of cooperative educational
services and in certain instances community school districts, for the
development, implementation, evaluation, validation, demonstration and
replication of exemplary comprehensive health education programs to
assist the public schools in developing curricula, training staff, and
addressing local health education needs of students, parents, and staff.
 2. School districts or BOCES may contract with appropriate agencies or
organizations to participate in such program. Such program shall be
limited to health education at the elementary level and shall be
designed on a multi-year basis. Such program shall include but not be
limited to the following components:
 a. Developer grants for comprehensive school health education
programs.
 (i) Such grants shall include the development, implementation, and
evaluation of a comprehensive health education program including such
activities as:
 (A) coordination of health instruction with other available programs
in the school and the community related to health education;
 (B) provision of inservice training and materials for elementary level
school teachers in comprehensive health education;
 (C) development and implementation of evaluation procedures to measure
students' knowledge, skills, behaviors, and attitudes prior to and after
project implementation; and
 (D) development and implementation of a mechanism for project
maintenance and long-range programming.
 (ii) Upon successful completion of the above activities and the
availability of funds, such grant recipients will assist other local
educational agencies with replication.
 b. Health education regional training centers. Regional training
centers for the purpose of developing materials and providing training
programs to meet the needs of teachers statewide in the implementation
of comprehensive school health education programs at the elementary
level will be established.
 c. Statewide advocacy for comprehensive health education. Development
and implementation of a statewide advocacy program to create an
awareness on the part of school administrators of the need to develop
strategies for implementing comprehensive school health education
programs at the elementary level.
 d. Replication of validated health education programs. Grants will be
awarded to local school districts or boards of cooperative educational
services for the replication of nationally or state-validated exemplary
health education programs.
 § 804-b. Education regarding child development. 1. All schools shall
be authorized to include, as an integral part of home economics or
health education, instruction regarding child development and parental
skills and responsibility.
 2. Instruction regarding child development and parental skills and
responsibility may be included in the home economics or health education
provided for all secondary school pupils and shall be taught by teachers
certified to teach home economics or health education. Related courses
in the secondary school curriculum may be taught in a manner supportive
of home economics education or health education regarding child
development and parental skills and responsibility.
 3. The commissioner shall promulgate rules and regulations to
establish a curriculum for instruction regarding child development and
parental skills and responsibility for the welfare of pupils and the
community to be available in school districts. The contents may be
varied to meet the needs of particular school districts, or portions
thereof, and need not be uniform throughout the state; such curriculum
may include instruction relating to the consequences and prevention of
shaken baby syndrome, which may include the viewing of a video
presentation for students in secondary schools.
 4. School authorities shall be authorized to provide the needed
facilities, time, and place for the instruction set forth herein and to
provide learning aids and curriculum resource materials which contribute
to effective teaching methods and learning in home economics education
or health education regarding child development and parental skills and
responsibility.
 § 804-c. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation instruction. 1. Instructions
regarding cardiopulmonary resuscitation may be offered for voluntary
admission as a part of the health education curriculum in all senior
high schools. In addition to the requirement that all teachers of health
education shall be certified to teach health, persons instructing pupils
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation shall possess valid certification by an
agency offering such certification in the performance of cardiopulmonary
resuscitation and in its instruction.
 2. The commissioner may prescribe regulations governing such health
education courses which shall include instruction in cardiopulmonary
resuscitation. Such regulations shall in no event prescribe a course of
study in cardiopulmonary resuscitation which sets forth standards for
instruction of a lesser quality than the requirements of the programs
adopted by the American Heart Association or the American Red Cross.
 3. School authorities that choose to offer such course shall provide
the needed facilities, time and place for the instruction set forth
herein and shall provide learning aids and curriculum resource materials
to support such course of study.
 § 804-d. Automated external defibrillator instruction. Instructions
regarding the correct use of an automated external defibrillator shall
be included as a part of the health education curriculum in all senior
high schools when cardiopulmonary resuscitation instruction is being
provided as authorized by section eight hundred four-c of this article.
In addition to the requirement that all teachers of health education
shall be certified to teach health, persons instructing pupils in the
correct use of automated external defibrillators shall possess valid
certification by a nationally recognized organization or the state
emergency medical services council offering certification in the
operation of an automated external defibrillator and in its instruction.
 * § 805. Asian American, Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islander history
advisory committee; appointment; powers and duties. 1. The commissioner
shall establish an Asian American, Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islander
(AANHPI) history advisory committee.
 2. (a) The committee shall be comprised of four members, to be
appointed as follows:
 (i) one member appointed by the governor;
 (ii) one member appointed by the temporary president of the senate;
 (iii) one member appointed by the speaker of the assembly; and
 (iv) one member appointed by the commissioner.
 (b) All members appointed to the committee shall be experts in Asian
American, Native Hawaiians and/or Pacific Islander studies and/or have a
background in educational instruction and/or educational administration.
 (c) All members of the committee shall be appointed within ninety days
of the effective date of this section.
 3. Vacancies in the membership of the committee shall be filled in the
same manner provided for original appointments.
 4. The committee shall meet no less than four times per year.
 5. The committee shall provide recommendations on the following:
 (a) high-quality K-12 curricular and instructional resources on AANHPI
history; and
 (b) strategies for strengthening and deepening public K-12 education
programs in the areas of AANHPI history, including analysis of the
survey referenced in section two of the chapter of the laws of two
thousand twenty-five that added this section.
 6. The committee shall submit their recommendations to the
commissioner no later than two years after the effective date of this
section and be disbanded thereafter.
 7. Committee members shall receive no compensation for their services,
but shall be allowed their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties.
 8. To effectuate the purposes of this section, the committee may
request from any department, board, bureau, commission or other agency
of the state, and the same are authorized to provide, such cooperation
and assistance, services and data as will enable the committee to
properly carry out its functions pursuant to this section.
 * NB Repealed December 12, 2028
 § 806. Courses of instruction in highway safety and traffic
regulation; school safety patrols. 1. The regents of The University of
the State of New York shall prescribe courses of instruction in highway
safety and traffic regulation which shall include bicycle safety, to be
maintained and followed in all the schools of the state. The boards of
education and trustees of the several cities and school districts of the
state shall require instruction to be given in such courses, by the
teachers employed in the schools therein. All pupils attending such
schools shall attend upon such instruction.
 Similar courses of instruction shall be prescribed and maintained in
private schools in the state, and all pupils in such schools shall
attend upon such courses. If such courses are not so established and
maintained in a private school, attendance upon instruction in such
school shall not be deemed substantially equivalent to instruction given
to pupils of like grade in the public schools in the city or district in
which such pupils reside.
 2. The regents shall determine the subjects to be included in such
courses of instruction in highway safety and traffic regulation
including bicycle safety, and the period of instruction in each of the
grades in such subjects. They shall adopt rules providing for
attendance upon such instruction and for such other matters as are
required for carrying into effect the teaching of the courses of
instruction prescribed by this section. The commissioner of education
shall be responsible for the enforcement of such section and shall cause
to be inspected and supervise the instruction to be given in such
subjects. The commissioner may, in his discretion, cause all or a
portion of the public school money to be apportioned to a district or
city to be withheld for failure of the school authorities of such
district or city to provide instruction in such courses and to compel
attendance upon such instruction, as herein prescribed, and for a
noncompliance with the rules of the regents adopted as herein provided.
 3. Any board of education or school district board is empowered to
organize in the school over which it has control a school safety patrol
and, with the written consent of the parents, to appoint pupils as
members thereof for the purpose of influencing and encouraging the safe
use of highways and highway crossings and bicycles by the pupils of the
school. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to authorize or
permit the use of any safety patrol member for the purpose of directing
vehicular traffic nor shall any safety patrol member be stationed in
that portion of the highway intended for the use of vehicular traffic.
Such patrol shall function only under the direction and control of the
principal or teacher in charge of such school. No liability shall attach
either to the school district or any individual, trustee, board member,
superintendent, principal, teacher or other school authority by virtue
of the organization, maintenance or operation of a school safety patrol
organized, maintained and operated under authority of this section.
 § 806-a. Driver education. 1. Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, all school districts providing instruction in driver education
shall include in such instruction: (a) a driver safety component with an
emphasis on the effects of alcohol and drug use, (b) instruction in
motorcycle safety awareness. The commissioner, upon approval by the
commissioner of motor vehicles, shall establish a curriculum for the
alcohol and drug education component which shall include but not be
limited to: instruction describing the hazards of driving while impaired
or intoxicated; the penalties for alcohol related motor vehicle
violations including sanctions set forth in the penal law that apply to
homicides and assaults arising out of the operation of a motor vehicle
while intoxicated and those sanctions set forth in the vehicle and
traffic law relating to driving while intoxicated; and the medical,
biological and physiological effects of the consumption of alcohol and
their impact on the operation of a motor vehicle.
 2. The commissioner, upon approval of the commissioner of motor
vehicles, shall establish by regulation a certification process by
driver education courses of the amount of time a holder of a class DJ or
class MJ learner's permit has spent operating a motor vehicle while
under the immediate supervision of a driver education teacher. A
certificate issued pursuant to this subdivision shall be deemed to be
proof of all or a portion of the supervised driving experience required
under certification pursuant to paragraph (d) of subdivision two of
section five hundred two of the vehicle and traffic law.
 § 807. Fire and emergency drills. 1. It shall be the duty of the
principal or other person in charge of every public or private school or
educational institution within the state, other than colleges or
universities, to instruct and train the pupils by means of drills, so
that they may in a sudden emergency be able to respond appropriately in
the shortest possible time and without confusion or panic. Such drills
shall be held at least twelve times in each school year, eight of which
required drills shall be held between September first and December
thirty-first of each such year. Eight of all such drills shall be
evacuation drills, four of which shall be through use of the fire
escapes on buildings where fire escapes are provided or through the use
of identified secondary means of egress. Four of all such required
drills shall be lock-down drills. Drills shall be conducted at different
times of the school day. Pupils shall be instructed in the procedure to
be followed in the event that a fire occurs during the lunch period or
assembly, provided however, that such additional instruction may be
waived where a drill is held during the regular school lunch period or
assembly. Four additional drills shall be held in each school year
during the hours after sunset and before sunrise in school buildings in
which students are provided with sleeping accommodations. At least two
additional drills shall be held during summer school in buildings where
summer school is conducted, and one of such drills shall be held during
the first week of summer school.
 1-a. In the case of after-school programs, events or performances
which are conducted within a school building and which include persons
who do not regularly attend classes in such school building, the
principal or other person in charge of the building shall require the
teacher or person in charge of such after-school program, event or
performance to notify persons in attendance at the beginning of each
such program, event or performance, of the procedures to be followed in
the event of an emergency so that they may be able to respond in a
timely, orderly manner.
 2. It shall be the duty of the board of education or school board or
other body having control of the schools in any district or city to
cause a copy of this section to be printed in the manual or handbook
prepared for the guidance of teachers, where such manual or handbook is
in use or may hereafter come into use.
 3. It shall be the duty of the person in charge of every public or
private college or university within the state, to instruct and train
the students by means of drills, so that they may in a sudden emergency
be able to leave the college or university building in the shortest
possible time and without confusion or panic. Such drills shall be held
at least three times in each year, one of which required drills shall be
held between September first and December first of each such year. In
buildings where summer sessions are conducted, one of such required
drills shall be held during the first week of such summer session. At
least one of such required drills shall be through use of the fire
escapes on buildings where fire escapes are provided. At least one
additional drill shall be held in each year during the hours after
sunset and before sunrise in college or university buildings in which
students are provided with sleeping accommodations.
 4. Neglect by any principal or other person in charge of any public or
private school or educational institution to comply with the provisions
of this section shall be a misdemeanor punishable at the discretion of
the court by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars; such fine to be paid to
the pension fund of the local fire department where there is such a
fund.
 § 807-a. Fire inspections. 1. It shall be the duty of the school
authorities in general charge of the operation of any public or private
school to cause the buildings of such school containing classroom,
dormitory, laboratory, physical education, dining or recreational
facilities for student use to be inspected at least annually for fire
hazards which might endanger the lives of students, teachers and
employees therein.
 2. The annual fire inspection shall be made prior to the first day of
December of every school year and the report thereof shall be filed by
the school authorities in the places required by subdivision five of
this section no later than the sixteenth day of December of every such
year.
 3. a. The school authorities shall cause any fire inspection pursuant
to this section to be made by one of the following methods, or any
combination of such methods:
 (1) Requesting inspection by the fire department of any city, town,
village or fire district in which the building is located.
 (2) Requesting inspection by a fire corporation which is subject to
the provisions of section fourteen hundred two of the not-for-profit
corporation law, if such building is located within the area described
in the certificate of incorporation of any such corporation.
 (3) Requesting inspection by the county fire coordinator, or the
officer performing the powers and duties of a county fire coordinator
pursuant to a local law, of the county in which the building is located,
or by any deputy county fire coordinator or deputy of such other officer
so performing the powers and duties of a county fire coordinator
designated to make the inspection by the county fire coordinator or such
other officer so performing the powers and duties of a county fire
coordinator, if the building is located outside a city, town, village,
or fire district, which has its own fire department and outside the area
described in the certificate of incorporation of any fire corporation
which is subject to the provisions of section fourteen hundred two of
the not-for-profit corporation law.
 (4) Requesting inspection by a fire inspector, who holds a valid
certification.
 b. If any fire department, certified fire inspector or fire
corporation described in subparagraphs one, two, and four of paragraph a
of this subdivision shall fail or refuse to make a fire inspection
promptly after having been requested to do so by the school authorities,
the request shall be denied in writing to the school authorities with an
explanation of why such request was denied. In no event may an authority
who is otherwise required by law to conduct fire inspections in such
municipality or a county fire coordinator refuse a request by a school
authority for such inspection.
 c. Regardless of the method or methods used to accomplish the
inspection required by this section, the authority making the inspection
shall file the report thereof with the school authorities no later than
the first day of December.
 4. The state fire administrator shall prescribe the form of the fire
inspection report and the commissioner shall furnish a supply of such
form to school authorities annually, either by mail or electronically.
In prescribing such form the state fire administrator shall consider
standards for fire safety set forth in the state building construction
code, the state building conservation and fire prevention code, the
regulations of the commissioner and other safety standards.
 5. a. The report of any fire inspection shall be filed in the office
of the school authorities and with the commissioner. All such reports
filed in any public office shall be kept as public records for at least
three years after which period they may be destroyed.
 b. Within twenty days after the report is filed with the school
authorities, the school authorities shall cause public notice of the
filing of such report to be given in substantially the following form:
"Notice is hereby given that the annual inspection for (year) of
the school building (or of the
and school buildings) of (name of school district or private
school) for fire hazards which might endanger the lives of students,
teachers and employees therein, has been completed and the report
thereof is available at the office of (school district or private
school) at for inspection by all interested persons". If the
inspection was not made for the school authorities by the fire
department or fire company responsible for fire protection of the
building, such authorities shall cause a copy of such notice to be
mailed or electronically transmitted to the chief of such fire
department or company.
 c. The school authorities of public schools shall cause such notice to
be published on the school's website or at least once in the official
newspaper, or if there is no official newspaper, in a newspaper having
general circulation in the school district, and if there is no newspaper
having general circulation in the district, shall cause such notice to
be posted in ten conspicuous places in the district. Proof of
publication or posting of such notice and of the mailing of a copy of
such notice to the fire chief shall be filed in the office of the
district.
 d. The school authorities of private schools shall cause such notice
to be published on the school's website or at least once in a newspaper
having general circulation in the postal area in which the school
building is located, and if there is no newspaper having general
circulation in such postal area, shall cause such notice to be posted in
ten conspicuous places in such postal area. Proof of posting or
publication of such notice and of the mailing of a copy of such notice
to the fire chief shall be filed in the school office.
 e. If the report shows any alleged deficiencies, the school
authorities shall provide the details of such deficiencies and the
proposed actions to be taken to correct such deficiencies to the local
government that administers and enforces the uniform fire prevention and
building code for the municipality in which the building is located.
 6. a. It shall be the duty of the commissioner to ascertain annually
whether the inspections of school buildings required by this section
have been made and the reports of the inspection have been filed in
their respective offices. The commissioner shall review the reports of
inspection filed pursuant to this section and may make recommendations
to the school authorities with respect to any problems relating to
school fire safety noted in such reports. The commissioner shall require
a re-inspection of school buildings where a report of inspection
identified violations until it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of
the commissioner that said violations have been corrected. In the event
that a public school fails to correct violations following a
re-inspection, the commissioner may deny an annual certificate of
occupancy to such school building. The commissioner may inspect or cause
to be inspected at any reasonable time for fire prevention and fire
protection purposes the school buildings required to be inspected by
this section.
 b. In the event a private school has failed to file an annual fire
safety report with the department within ninety days of the sixteenth of
December, the commissioner shall inspect or request an appropriate local
authority, described in subdivision seven of this section, to inspect
the school. If a private school either refuses access for an inspection
pursuant to this paragraph, or does not correct violations identified in
such report in a timely manner, the commissioner shall immediately
notify, in writing, the local government who issues the certificate of
occupancy for the school of their failure to file a fire safety report.
 7. a. Every public or private school required to be inspected as
hereinabove provided may be inspected for fire prevention and fire
protection purposes at any reasonable time by:
 (1) the chief of the fire department of the city, town, village or
fire district in which the school is located,
 (2) the chief of a fire corporation having its headquarters outside a
village or fire district, if the school is located in the area described
in the certificate of incorporation of such company,
 (3) the chief of the fire department or fire company affording fire
protection to a fire district, fire protection district, or fire alarm
district pursuant to a contract, if the school is located in any such
district,
 (4) the member of any fire department or fire company listed in
subparagraph one, two or three of this paragraph assigned by the chief
thereof the duty of inspecting school buildings,
 (5) the fire inspector, who holds a valid certification, of any city,
town, village or fire district in which the building is located.
 b. In no event shall the school authorities of any public or private
school, required to be inspected as hereinabove provided, refuse access
at any reasonable time to any person described in subparagraphs one,
two, three, four or five of paragraph a of this subdivision, who appears
for the purpose of conducting an inspection for fire prevention or fire
protection purposes; provided, however, that the administrator or the
designee of the administrator of the school to be inspected shall be
given the opportunity to be present during the inspection.
 8. The term "school authorities", as used in this section, means, in
relation to public schools, the trustees, or board of education, or
corresponding officers, whether one or more, and by whatever name known
of a city school district, or other school district however created, or,
in relation to private schools, the board of trustees, board of
directors, or other governing board in general charge of the operation
of any such school.
 9. The term "private school", as used in this section, means:
 a. Any nursery school or kindergarten attended by six or more pupils
three years of age or older which may apply for registration by the New
York state education department pursuant to part one hundred twenty-five
of title eight of the official compilation of codes, rules and
regulations of the state of New York; provided, however, that this
section shall not apply to day care facilities possessing a valid permit
as required by section three hundred ninety of the social services law;
or
 b. Any establishment, other than a public school, attended by
twenty-five or more pupils for the purpose of receiving the instruction
of academic grade at the elementary or secondary level required by part
one of article sixty-five of this chapter.
 10. This section shall not apply to the school authorities in the
cities of New York, Buffalo, Rochester, Syracuse and Yonkers or to
colleges and universities.
 § 807-b. College fire inspections. 1. It shall be the duty of the
college authorities in general charge of the operation of any public or
independent college to cause the buildings under the jurisdiction of
such college containing classroom, dormitory, fraternities, sororities,
laboratory, physical education, dining or recreational facilities for
student use to be inspected at least annually for fire hazards which
might endanger the lives of students, teachers and employees therein.
Inspections of all public and independent college buildings, with the
exception of those within a city having a population of one million or
more, shall be conducted by the state office of fire prevention and
control or a designee of the state fire administrator. An inspection
report shall be produced by the inspecting agency for each building
inspected.
 2. The annual fire inspection for public and independent colleges
shall be made when the college is in session.
 3. The office of fire prevention and control is authorized to adopt
rules and regulations establishing minimum standards for the content and
frequency of such inspections in order to ensure compliance with
applicable fire safety standards. In the event violations of applicable
codes, rules and regulations pertaining to fire safety are found during
inspections, the office of fire prevention and control is authorized to
take appropriate actions to ensure that violations are promptly
remedied.
 4. The state fire administrator shall prescribe the format of the fire
inspection report. In prescribing such format the state fire
administrator shall consider standards for fire safety set forth in the
uniform fire prevention and building code and other applicable fire
safety standards.
 5. Within ninety days of completing such inspection, the office of
fire prevention and control or its designee shall file a copy of the
report with the office of the college authorities and with the
commissioner. All such reports so filed shall be kept as records for at
least three years after which period they may be destroyed. A copy of
such report shall also be filed with the chief, or other comparable
officer, of any fire department or fire corporation which has the
regular duty of fighting fire in the building inspected.
 6. The office of fire prevention and control or its designee shall
make recommendations to the college authorities with respect to any
problems relating to building fire safety noted in such reports. The
commissioner may inspect or cause to be inspected at any reasonable time
for fire prevention and fire protection purposes the buildings required
to be inspected by this section. The commissioner may impose a fine of
up to five hundred dollars per day upon any public or independent
college which fails to remedy, to the satisfaction of the office of fire
prevention and control, any violation noted in a report within thirty
days of receiving a copy of such report.
 7. Every public or independent college building required to be
inspected by the office of fire prevention and control or its designee
may also be examined for fire protection purposes at any reasonable time
by
 a. the chief of the fire department of the city, town, village or fire
district in which the college building is located,
 b. the chief of a fire corporation having its headquarters outside a
village or fire district, if the college building is located in the area
described in the certificate of incorporation of such company,
 c. the chief of the fire department or fire company affording fire
protection to a fire district, fire protection district, or fire alarm
district pursuant to a contract, if the college building is located in
any such district,
 d. the member of any fire department or fire company listed in
paragraphs a, b or c of this subdivision assigned by the chief.
 8. Any person, or any public or other corporation for which any such
persons acts, shall not be liable for any error, omission or lack of
thoroughness in the making of the inspection and report required or
permitted by this section.
 9. The term "college authorities", as used in this section, means the
board of trustees, board of directors, or other governing board in
general charge of the operation of any such college.
 10. The term "public college" shall mean and include "state-operated
institutions", "statutory or contract colleges" and "community colleges"
as defined in section three hundred fifty of this chapter.
 11. The term "independent college" shall mean colleges other than
those included within subdivision ten of this section.
 § 807-c. Transmission of fire alarm to fire department. 1. The school
authorities designated in subdivision eight of section eight hundred
seven-a of this article in charge of the operation of any public school
or of any private school designated in subdivision nine of such section,
located in an area within which a fire department or fire company is
responsible for fire protection and within which there is no
electrically or electronically operated fire alarm reporting system
provided for public use may cause the internal fire alarm, fire
detection, or fire extinguishing system of each building in which is
contained classroom, dormitory, laboratory, physical education, dining
or recreational facilities for student use to be interconnected with the
fire alarm reporting location or system which is provided for such fire
department or fire company to receive alarms from the public so that
upon activation of such internal fire alarm, fire detection, or fire
extinguishing system a signal will be automatically transmitted to such
fire alarm reporting location or system.
 2. School authorities and the governing body having jurisdiction of
any fire department or fire company are hereby authorized, by agreement
between them, to apportion the costs of installing and maintaining any
such interconnection, and such costs are hereby deemed appropriate
expenditures from the funds of such school authorities and governing
bodies.
 § 807-d. Locating source of fires in schools. 1. In all public and
private school buildings having a central annunciator panel or fire
alarm cabinet which displays a visual signal identifying any heat
detector, smoke detector, or manually operated fire alarm box within the
building which has been activated, there shall be provided as a part of
or immediately adjacent to such panel or cabinet a chart or plan showing
the specific location within the building of each such device.
 2. In the case of school buildings and additions to existing school
buildings, the construction of which is commenced after September first,
nineteen hundred seventy-three, any such panel or cabinet and such chart
or plan within such building or addition shall be so located that the
same may be read without entering the building.
 § 808. Instruction in fire and arson prevention. 1. The commissioner
is hereby directed to provide and prescribe a course of instruction in
fire and arson prevention, injury prevention and life safety education
relating to the protection against injury or death and protection of
property against loss or damage as a result of criminally initiated or
other preventable fire, for use in the schools of the state, as
prescribed by this section. Such course of instruction shall include
materials to educate children on the dangers of falsely reporting a
criminal incident, an impending explosion or fire emergency involving
danger to life or property, an impending catastrophe, or a life safety
emergency.
 2. The board of education, trustees, principal or other person in
charge of every public, private and parochial school in the state shall
arrange for giving such course of instruction in every school under its
or his control or direction. Such instruction shall be given to all of
the pupils in every such school for a period of not less than forty-five
minutes in each month during which such school is in session.
 § 809. Instruction in the humane treatment of animals. 1. The officer,
board or commission authorized or required to prescribe courses of
instruction shall cause instruction to be given in every elementary
school under state control or supported wholly or partly by public money
of the state, in the humane treatment and protection of animals and the
importance of the part they play in the economy of nature as well as the
necessity of controlling the proliferation of animals which are
subsequently abandoned and caused to suffer extreme cruelty. Such
instruction shall be for such period of time during each school year as
the board of regents may prescribe and may be joined with work in
literature, reading, language, nature study or ethnology. Such weekly
instruction may be divided into two or more periods. A school district
shall not be entitled to participate in the public school money on
account of any school or the attendance at any school subject to the
provisions of this section, if the instruction required hereby is not
given therein.
 2. Study and care of live animals. Any school which cares for or uses
animals for study shall ensure that each animal in such school be
afforded the following: appropriate quarters; sufficient space for the
normal behavior and postural requirements of the species; proper
ventilation, lighting, and temperature control; adequate food and clean
drinking water; and quarters which shall be cleaned on a regular basis
and located in an area where undue stress and disturbance are minimized.
 3. Application. The provisions of this section shall not be construed
to prohibit or constrain vocational instruction in the normal practice
of animal husbandry, or prohibit or constrain instruction in
environmental education activities as established by the department of
environmental conservation.
 4. Dissection of animals. Any student expressing a moral or religious
objection to the performance or witnessing of the dissection of an
animal, either wholly or in part, shall be provided the opportunity to
undertake and complete an alternative project that shall be approved by
such student's teacher; provided, however, that such objection is
substantiated in writing by the student's parent or legal guardian.
Students who perform alternative projects who do not perform or witness
the dissection of animals shall not be penalized. The board of education
or trustees of a school district shall develop a policy to give
reasonable notice to all students enrolled in a course that includes the
dissection of an animal and students' parents or legal guardians about
their rights under this subdivision. Such notice shall be made available
upon request at the school and distributed to parents and students
enrolled in a course that includes dissection at least once at the
beginning of the school year.
 5. Treatment of live vertebrate animals. a. Except as provided for in
this subdivision, no school district, school principal, administrator,
or teacher shall require or permit the performance of a lesson or
experimental study on a live vertebrate animal in any such school or
during any activity conducted under the auspices of such school whether
or not the activity takes place on the premises of such school where
such lesson or experimental study employs: (i) micro-organisms which
cause disease in humans or animals, (ii) ionizing radiation, (iii) known
cancer producing agents, (iv) chemicals at toxic levels, (v) drugs
producing pain or deformity, (vi) severe extremes of temperature, (vii)
electric or other shock, (viii) excessive noise, (ix) noxious fumes, (x)
exercise to exhaustion, (xi) overcrowding, (xii) paralysis by muscle
relaxants or other means, (xiii) deprivation or excess of food, water or
other essential nutrients, (xiv) surgery or other invasive procedures,
(xv) other extreme stimuli, or (xvi) termination of life.
 b. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this section, the
commissioner may, upon the submission of a written program plan, issue
to such school a written waiver of such restrictions for students
subject to the following provisions: (i) the student shall be in grade
ten, eleven, or twelve; and (ii) the student shall be under the
supervision of one or more teachers certified in science; and (iii) the
student shall be pursuing an accelerated course of study in the sciences
as defined by the commissioner in preparation for taking a state or
national advanced placement examination. The commissioner shall issue a
waiver of such restrictions for any teacher certified in science
instructing such student. The written program plan shall include, but
not be limited to: (i) the educational basis for requesting a waiver;
(ii) the objective of the lesson or experiment; (iii) the methods and
techniques to be used; and (iv) any other information required by the
commissioner.
 6. Report. On or before the first day of January next succeeding the
effective date of this amended section, the commissioner shall annually
submit a report to the governor and the legislature which shall include,
but not be limited to, the number of written program plan proposals
submitted by schools and the number of such proposals subsequently
approved by the commissioner. In those cases where a program plan
proposal has been approved by the commissioner, such plan shall be
appended to and become a part of the commissioner's annual report.
 § 809-a. Instruction in the safe use of firearms and in the game laws.
The officer, board, or commission authorized or required to prescribe
courses of instructions in any school under state control, may authorize
instructions to be given in the safe and proper use of firearms allowed
by law to be used in the taking of wild game, and may also authorize
instructions to be given in the study of game laws and of proper hunting
and conservation practices. Such courses of instruction shall be
approved by both the education department and the department of
environmental conservation.
 § 810. Conservation day. 1. The last Friday in April each year is
hereby made and declared to be known as Conservation day, and observed
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, except that for the
year nineteen hundred seventy-eight, Conservation day shall be May
third.
 2. It shall be the duty of the authorities of every public school in
this state to assemble the pupils in their charge on that day in the
school building, or elsewhere, as they may deem proper, and to provide
for and conduct (1) such exercises as shall tend to encourage the
planting, protection and preservation of trees and shrubs, and an
acquaintance with the best methods to be adopted to accomplish such
results, and (2) such lectures, pictures or tours, as shall tend to
increase the interest and knowledge of such pupils in the fish and wild
life, soil and water of the state.
 3. The commissioner of education may prescribe from time to time a
course of exercises and instruction in the subjects hereinbefore
mentioned, which shall be adopted and observed by the public school
authorities on Conservation day. Upon receipt of copies of such course
sufficient in number to supply all the schools under their supervision,
the school authorities aforesaid shall promptly provide each of the
schools under their charge with a copy, and cause it to be observed.
 § 811. Procurement, use and possession of hypodermic syringes and
needles by school personnel for educational purposes. 1.
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 220.45 of the penal law, it
shall be lawful for authorized persons under the jurisdiction of the
public school authorities in a public school; or of the state education
department; or of the governing board of any other educational
institution, the curriculum of which is registered by the department, to
purchase, acquire, have under control, possess and use hypodermic
syringes and needles for instructional or other educational purposes
provided such school authorities in the case of a school district, the
appropriate superior officer in the case of the department, or such
governing board in the case of other institutions, has filed with the
commissioner of education and with the state department of health a
certificate of need for such hypodermic needles which shall set forth
the following:
 a. The legal designation and address of the school district, if a
public school or if another school or institution, the name and address
thereof, and the exact location where such hypodermic syringes and
needles will be used and stored.
 b. The name and address of the chief administrative officer of the
school or institution.
 c. The use proposed to be made of such hypodermic needles.
 d. The names of persons employed in the school, the department, or
other institution authorized to have custody and/or use of such
hypodermic needles.
 e. The safeguards to be taken to prevent such instruments from falling
into the hands of unauthorized persons.
 f. The disposition which will be made of unwanted or broken syringes
and needles. In the case of the department such certificate shall be
made and filed by the assistant commissioner under whose supervision the
work involving the use of such hypodermic syringes or needles is done,
and a duplicate thereof shall be filed with the state department of
health.
 2. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to require the
filing of such names by medical institutions, including but not limited
to, public health centers, industrial clinics, diagnostic, treatment or
research centers, rehabilitation facilities, nursing homes, medical
schools or colleges, tuberculosis, mental, chronic disease and other
types of hospitals, clinical laboratories, outpatient departments,
nurses training facilities and central service facilities operated in
conjunction with medical institutions.
 3. The commissioner, after consultation with the commissioner of
health, shall make regulations for the administration of this section.
 § 812. Health training program for secondary school students. 1. The
commissioner, in cooperation with the board of regents, is authorized
and directed to establish and develop a program of credit for health
training for those secondary school students evidencing an interest to
pursue a health care services career. Such program may be instituted by
any school district seeking to provide its secondary school students
with an opportunity to participate in a health care facility or agency
training program wherein its secondary school students shall receive
academic credit for work related training received at health care
facilities or agencies.
 2. The board of regents shall establish criteria to be used by school
districts participating in such program for the selection of eligible
secondary school students seeking placement in a health training program
subject to availability of placement openings.
 § 813. School lunch period; scheduling. Each school shall schedule a
reasonable time for each full day pupil attending pre-kindergarten
through grade twelve to consume lunch.
 § 814. Courses of study in internet safety. 1. Any school district in
the state may provide, to pupils in grades kindergarten through twelve,
instruction designed to promote the proper and safe use of the internet.
 2. The commissioner shall provide technical assistance to assist in
the development of curricula for such courses of study which shall be
age appropriate and developed according to the needs and abilities of
pupils at successive grade levels in order to provide awareness, skills,
information and support to aid in the safe usage of the internet.
 3. The commissioner shall develop age-appropriate resources and
technical assistance for schools to provide to students in grades three
through twelve and their parents or legal guardians concerning the safe
and responsible use of the internet. The resources shall include, but
not be limited to, information regarding how child predators may use the
internet to lure and exploit children, protecting personal information,
internet scams and cyber-bullying.
 § 815. State seal of biliteracy. 1. (a) The state seal of biliteracy
is established to recognize high school graduates who have attained a
high level of proficiency in listening, speaking, reading, and writing
in one or more languages in addition to English. The state seal of
biliteracy shall be awarded by the commissioner. School district
participation in this program is voluntary.
 (b) The purposes of the state seal of biliteracy are as follows:
 (1) To encourage pupils to study languages.
 (2) To certify attainment of biliteracy.
 (3) To provide employers with a method of identifying people with
language and biliteracy skills.
 (4) To provide universities with an additional method to recognize
applicants seeking admission.
 (5) To prepare pupils with twenty-first century skills.
 (6) To recognize the value of foreign language and native language
instruction in public schools. For the purpose of this section foreign
language means any language other than English (LOTE) including all
modern languages, Latin, American Sign Language, Native American
languages and native languages.
 (7) To strengthen intergroup relationships, affirm the value of
diversity, and honor the multiple cultures and languages of a community.
 2. (a) The state seal of biliteracy certifies attainment of a high
level of proficiency by a graduating high school pupil in one or more
languages, in addition to English.
 (b) The board of regents shall promulgate such regulations of the
commissioner as may be necessary to establish the criteria that students
must achieve to earn a state seal of biliteracy, which may include, but
is not limited to attainment of units of credit in English language arts
and languages other than English, passage of state assessments in
English language arts and language other than English, and passage of
such additional assessments of foreign language proficiency as may be
approved by the commissioner for this purpose.
 (c) For purposes of this section, foreign language means any language
other than English (LOTE) including all modern languages, Latin,
American Sign Language, Native American languages and native languages.
 3. The commissioner shall do both of the following:
 (a) Prepare and deliver to participating school districts an
appropriate insignia to be affixed to the diploma and transcript of the
pupil indicating that the pupil has been awarded a state seal of
biliteracy by the commissioner.
 (b) Provide other information he or she deems necessary for school
districts to successfully participate in the program.
 4. A school district that participates in the program under this
section shall do both of the following:
 (a) Maintain appropriate records in order to identify pupils who have
earned a state seal of biliteracy.
 (b) Affix the appropriate insignia to the diploma and transcript of
each pupil who earns a state seal of biliteracy.
 5. No fee shall be charged to a pupil pursuant to this section.
 § 816. Local library and school partnerships. 1. Legislative intent.
In order to promote and encourage children to read and learn outside the
classroom, this law seeks to encourage local libraries and schools to
work together to promote the availability of library services and
resources.
 2. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
shall be defined as follows:
 a. "School district" shall mean any public school district in the
state of New York that contains one or more schools with any combination
of grades from and including kindergarten through grade twelve.
 b. "Public library" shall mean any public or association library as
defined in section two hundred fifty-three of this title.
 3. Upon the request of a public library that is located within the
boundaries of a school district, the district shall disseminate
informational materials provided by the library regarding the public
library and applications for public library cards to students enrolled
in the school district. Such materials shall be distributed to any or
all of the following, as requested by the public library:
 a. annually to every student of such school district upon his or her
entry into kindergarten, grade six and grade nine, except that a library
and school may agree to alternate or additional grades;
 b. to every student upon his or her enrollment as a new student; and
 c. available at all times in the school library in each school within
the school district for students and parents who wish to obtain such
materials.
 4. The director of each participating public library shall consult
annually with the school district in order to coordinate the provision
of materials containing information regarding the library, instructions
on how students may obtain a library card and an application for a
library card.
 5. Each public library that is located in the school district shall
provide sufficient copies of such materials to the school district for
distribution as described in subdivision three of this section so that
each school may satisfy the requirements of this section.
 6. In the event there is no public library located within the
boundaries of a school district, such school district shall not be
required to comply with this section.
 7. The commissioner shall have the authority to establish rules and
regulations to implement the provisions of this section.
 8. Nothing in this act shall require a school district to expend
additional funds in order to comply with the provisions of this section.
 9. This section shall not apply to a school district or a library in a
city of one million or more where such district or library are subject
to a local law which was adopted prior to the enactment of this section
and which provides for the distribution of library materials in public
schools.
 * § 817. Expanding access to advanced courses to improve educational
equity. 1. Each school district and charter school shall annually
provide notification to parents and students of the benefits and the
opportunities within the district or charter school of participating in
advanced courses.
 2. Such notification shall include:
 a. the benefits of participating in advanced courses;
 b. a description of the advanced courses offered by the school
district or charter school in middle and high school and how to prepare
for and enroll in them;
 c. a description of the advanced courses to be offered by the school
district or charter school in the following school year; and
 d. a description of the academic and non-academic support the school
district or charter school provides to help students succeed in advanced
courses, as well as any financial assistance available to reduce or
eliminate any costs associated with participation in advanced courses,
including but not limited to related fees, supplies, and assessments.
 3. Notification shall be provided electronically or by mail and be
posted on the website of the school district or charter school.
 * NB There are 2 § 817's
 * § 817. Student government. The board of education or trustees of
every school district serving high school students in grades nine
through twelve with no districtwide or school building peer selected
student government shall establish at least one student government
organization within such district or school building with the goal of
ensuring all eligible students have the opportunity to participate in
such student government.
 * NB There are 2 § 817's
 § 818. Evidence-based and scientifically based reading instruction. 1.
(a) On or before January first, two thousand twenty-five, the
commissioner shall provide school districts with the instructional best
practices for the teaching of reading to students in prekindergarten
through grade three. Instructional best practices for the teaching of
reading shall be evidence-based and scientifically based, focusing on
reading competency in the areas of phonemic awareness, phonics,
vocabulary development, reading fluency, comprehension, including
background knowledge, oral language and writing, oral skill development,
and align with the department's culturally responsive-sustaining
framework. Such instructional best practices shall be periodically
updated by the commissioner where appropriate.
 (b) Every school district shall annually review their curriculum and
instructional practices in the subject of reading for students in
prekindergarten through grade three to ensure that they align with the
reading instructional best practices provided by the commissioner, and
that all early reading instructional practices and interventions are
part of an aligned plan designed to improve student reading outcomes in
prekindergarten through grade three.
 2. For the purpose of this section, "evidence-based and scientifically
based", "phonemic awareness", "comprehension", "reading fluency",
"vocabulary development", "culturally responsive-sustaining framework",
and such other terms necessary to implement this section shall be as
defined by the commissioner in regulations.
 3. On or before September first, two thousand twenty-five, every
school district shall verify to the commissioner that their curriculum
and instructional practices in the subject of reading in prekindergarten
through grade three align with all of the elements of the instructional
best practices provided by the commissioner pursuant to this section.
 ARTICLE 19
 MEDICAL AND HEALTH SERVICE
Section 901. School health services to be provided.
 902. Employment of health professionals.
 902-a. Treatment of students diagnosed with diabetes by school
 personnel.
 902-b. Treatment by licensed school personnel of students
 diagnosed with allergies.
 903. Students to furnish health certificates; and dental
 health certificates.
 904. Examinations by health appraisal.
 905. Record of screening examinations for vision, hearing and
 scoliosis.
 906. Existence of communicable diseases; return after illness.
 907. Use of sunscreen.
 908. Prohibition against meal shaming.
 909. School hygiene districts.
 910. Choice of method of treatment.
 911. Enforcement.
 912. Health and welfare services to all children.
 912-a. Urine analysis; drug detection.
 912-b. Speech and language improvement services.
 913. Medical examinations of teachers and other employees.
 914. Immunization of children.
 915. Prohibiting the sale of certain sweetened foods.
 915-a. Universal free school meals.
 916. Pupils with asthma or another respiratory disease
 requiring rescue inhaler treatment.
 916-a. Pupils with allergies.
 916-b. Pupils with diabetes.
 917. On-site cardiac automated external defibrillator.
 917-a. On-site cardiac automated external defibrillator in
 nonpublic schools.
 918. School district nutrition advisory committees.
 919. On-site nebulizers.
 920. Public schools; infestation of bedbugs (Cimex
 lectularius).
 921. Training of unlicensed school personnel to administer
 certain medications.
 921-a. On-site epinephrine device.
 922. Opioid overdose prevention.
 923. Sudden cardiac arrest.
 924. Ingredient and nutritional information requirements.
 926. Water safety information.
 § 901. School health services to be provided. 1. School health
services, as defined in subdivision two of this section, shall be
provided by each school district for all students attending the public
schools in this state, except in the city school district of the city of
New York, as provided in this article. School health services shall
include the services of a registered professional nurse, if one is
employed, and shall also include such services as may be rendered as
provided in this article in examining students for the existence of
disease or disability and in testing the eyes and ears of such students.
 2. School health services for the purposes of this article shall mean
the several procedures, including, but not limited to, medical
examinations, dental inspection and/or screening, scoliosis screening,
vision screening and audiometer tests, designed to determine the health
status of the child; to inform parents or other persons in parental
relation to the child, pupils and teachers of the individual child's
health condition subject to federal and state confidentiality laws; to
guide parents, children and teachers in procedures for preventing and
correcting defects and diseases; to instruct the school personnel in
procedures to take in case of accident or illness; to survey and make
necessary recommendations concerning the health and safety aspects of
school facilities and the provision of health information.
 § 902. Employment of health professionals. 1. As used in this article
"health professionals" means persons duly licensed or otherwise
authorized to practice a health profession pursuant to applicable law,
including, but not limited to, physicians, registered professional
nurses, nurse practitioners, physicians assistants, optometrists,
dentists, dental hygienists, dietitians and nutritionists, and
audiologists.
 2. a. The board of education, and the trustee or board of trustees of
each school district, shall employ, at a compensation to be agreed upon
by the parties, a qualified physician, or a nurse practitioner to the
extent authorized by the nurse practice act and consistent with
subdivision three of section six thousand nine hundred two of this
chapter, to perform the duties of the director of school health
services, including any duties conferred on the school physician or
school medical inspector under any provision of law, to perform and
coordinate the provision of health services in the public schools and to
provide health appraisals of students attending the public schools in
the city or district. The physicians or nurse practitioners so employed
shall be duly licensed pursuant to applicable law.
 b. Any such board or trustees may employ one or more school nurses,
who shall be registered professional nurses, as well as other health
professionals, as may be required. Such registered professional nurses
and other health professionals shall aid the director of school health
services of the district and shall perform such duties, including health
instruction for the benefit of the public schools as may be prescribed
by such board or trustees, in compliance with each such health
professional's practice act.
 3. Health professionals may be employed by the trustees or boards of
education of two or more school districts, and the compensation of such
health professionals, and the expenses incurred in providing school
health services for students as provided in this article, shall be borne
jointly by such districts, and be apportioned among them in any manner
agreed to by such districts in a sharing agreement entered pursuant to
section one hundred nineteen-o of the general municipal law. The
trustees or boards of education of two or more school districts in a
supervisory district may enter into an agreement, or agreements as may
be required, with a board of cooperative educational services for the
provision of the services of one or more registered professional nurses,
and other health professionals to perform health services, including
health instruction in such districts.
 § 902-a. Treatment of students diagnosed with diabetes by school
personnel. 1. Licensed nurses, nurse practitioners, physician
assistants, or physicians employed by school districts or boards of
cooperative educational services are authorized to calculate prescribed
insulin dosages, administer prescribed insulin, program the prescribed
insulin pump, refill the reservoir in the insulin pump, change the
infusion site, inject prescribed glucagon, teach an unlicensed person to
administer glucagon to an individual, and perform other authorized
services pursuant to the scope of practice of the licensed individual
under title VIII of this chapter, to pupils who have received written
permission by a physician or other licensed health care provider, and
written parental consent to carry and use insulin and glucagon pursuant
to section nine hundred sixteen-b of this article, during the school day
on school property and at any school function as such terms are defined,
respectively, by subdivisions one and two of section eleven of this
chapter. Nothing in this section shall authorize unlicensed persons to
perform these services except as otherwise permitted by section nine
hundred twenty-one of this article.
 2. A school district, board of cooperative educational services and/or
their agents or employees shall incur no legal or financial liability as
a result of any harm or injury sustained by a pupil or other person
caused by reasonable and good faith compliance with this section.
 § 902-b. Treatment by licensed school personnel of students diagnosed
with allergies. 1. (a) Licensed nurses, nurse practitioners, physician
assistants, or physicians employed by schools are authorized to
administer prescribed epinephrine pursuant to the scope of practice of
the licensed individual under title VIII of this chapter, to pupils
diagnosed by a physician or other duly authorized health care provider
with an allergy who have the written permission of a physician or other
duly authorized health care provider for the administration of emergency
epinephrine and written parental consent to carry and use an epinephrine
device pursuant to section nine hundred sixteen-a of this article,
during the school day on school property and at any school function as
such terms are defined, respectively, by subdivisions one and two of
section eleven of this chapter.
 (b) For the purposes of this subdivision, the term "epinephrine
device" shall have the same meaning as set forth in paragraph (b) of
subdivision one of section three thousand-c of the public health law.
 2. A school district, board of cooperative educational services and/or
their agents or employees shall incur no legal or financial liability as
a result of any harm or injury sustained by a pupil or other person
caused by reasonable and good faith compliance with this section.
 § 903. Students to furnish health certificates; and dental health
certificates. 1. A health certificate shall be furnished by each
student in the public schools upon his or her entrance in such schools
and upon his or her entry into the grades prescribed by the commissioner
in regulations, provided that such regulations shall require such
certificates at least twice during the elementary grades and twice in
the secondary grades. An examination and health history of any child may
be required by the local school authorities at any time in their
discretion to promote the educational interests of such child. Each
certificate shall be signed by a duly licensed physician, physician
assistant, or nurse practitioner, who is authorized by law to practice
in this state, and consistent with subdivision three of section six
thousand nine hundred two of this chapter, or by a duly licensed
physician, physician assistant, or nurse practitioner, who is authorized
to practice in the jurisdiction in which the examination was given,
provided that the commissioner has determined that such jurisdiction has
standards of licensure and practice comparable to those of New York.
Each such certificate shall describe the condition of the student when
the examination was made, which shall not be more than twelve months
prior to the commencement of the school year in which the examination is
required, and shall state whether such student is in a fit condition of
health to permit his or her attendance at the public schools. The
examination may include a diabetes risk analysis. Each such certificate
shall also state the student's body mass index (BMI) and weight status
category. For purposes of this section, BMI is computed as the weight in
kilograms divided by the square of height in meters or the weight in
pounds divided by the square of height in inches multiplied by a
conversion factor of 703. Weight status categories for children and
adolescents shall be as defined by the commissioner of health. In all
school districts such physician, physician assistant or nurse
practitioner shall determine whether a one-time test for sickle cell
anemia is necessary or desirable and he or she shall conduct such a test
and the certificate shall state the results.
 2. a. A dental health certificate shall be requested from each
student. Each student is requested to furnish a dental health
certificate at the same time that health certificates are required. An
assessment and dental health history of any child may be requested by
the local school authorities at any time in their discretion to promote
the educational interests of such child. Each certificate shall be
signed by a duly licensed dentist, or a registered dental hygienist who
is authorized by law to practice in this state, and consistent with any
applicable written practice agreement, or by a duly licensed dentist or
registered dental hygienist who is authorized to practice in the
jurisdiction in which the assessment was given, provided that the
commissioner has determined that such jurisdiction has standards of
licensure and practice comparable to those of New York. Each such
certificate shall describe the dental health condition of the student
when the assessment was made, which shall not be more than twelve months
prior to the commencement of the school year in which the assessment is
requested, and shall state whether such student is in fit condition of
dental health to permit his or her attendance at the public schools.
 b. A notice of request for dental health certificates shall be
distributed at the same time that parents or person in parental
relationship to students are notified of health examination requirements
and shall state that a list of dental practices, dentists and registered
dental hygienists to which children may be referred for dental services
on a free or reduced cost basis is available upon request at the child's
school. The department shall, in collaboration with the department of
health, compile and maintain a list of dental practices, dentists and
registered dental hygienists to which children may be referred for
dental services on a free or reduced cost basis. Such list shall be made
available to all public schools and be made available to parents or
person in parental relationship upon request. The department shall
promulgate regulations to ensure the gathering and dissemination of the
proper information to interested parties.
 3. a. Within thirty days after the student's entrance in such schools
or grades, the health certificate shall be submitted to the principal or
his or her designee and shall be filed in the student's cumulative
health record. If such student does not present a health certificate as
required in this section, unless he or she has been accommodated on
religious grounds, the principal or the principal's designee shall cause
a notice to be sent to the parents or person in parental relationship to
such student that if the required health certificate is not furnished
within thirty days from the date of such notice, an examination will be
made of such student, as provided in this article. Each school and
school district chosen as part of an appropriate sampling methodology
shall participate in surveys directed by the commissioner of health
pursuant to the public health law in relation to students' BMI and
weight status categories as reported on the school health certificate
and which shall be subject to audit by the commissioner of health. Such
surveys shall contain the information required pursuant to subdivision
one of this section in relation to students' BMI and weight status
categories in aggregate. Parents or other persons in parental relation
to a student may refuse to have the student's BMI and weight status
category included in such survey. Each school and school district shall
provide the commissioner of health with any information, records and
reports he or she may require for the purpose of such audit. The BMI and
weight status survey and audit as described in this subdivision shall be
conducted consistent with confidentiality requirements imposed by
federal law.
 b. Within thirty days after the student's entrance in such schools or
grades, the dental health certificate, if obtained, shall be filed in
the student's cumulative health record.
 4. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivisions one, two and three
of this section, no examinations for a health certificate or health
history shall be required or dental certificate requested, and no
screening examinations for sickle cell anemia shall be required where a
student or the parent or person in parental relation to such student
objects thereto on the grounds that such examinations or health history
conflict with their genuine and sincere religious beliefs.
 § 904. Examinations by health appraisal. 1. Each principal of a public
school, or his or her designee, shall report to the director of school
health services having jurisdiction over such school, the names of all
students who have not furnished health certificates as provided in
section nine hundred three of this article, or who are children with
disabilities, as defined by article eighty-nine of this chapter, and the
director of school health services shall cause such students to be
separately and carefully examined and tested to ascertain whether any
student has defective sight or hearing, or any other physical disability
which may tend to prevent him or her from receiving the full benefit of
school work, or from requiring a modification of such work to prevent
injury to the student or from receiving the best educational results.
Each examination shall also include a calculation of the student's body
mass index (BMI) and weight status category. For purposes of this
section, BMI is computed as the weight in kilograms divided by the
square of height in meters or the weight in pounds divided by the square
of height in inches multiplied by a conversion factor of 703. Weight
status categories for children and adolescents shall be as defined by
the commissioner of health. In all school districts, such physician,
physician assistant or nurse practitioner shall determine whether a
one-time test for sickle cell anemia is necessary or desirable and he or
she shall conduct such tests and the certificate shall state the
results. If it should be ascertained, upon such test or examination,
that any of such students have defective sight or hearing, or other
physical disability, including sickle cell anemia, as above described,
the principal or his or her designee shall notify the parents of, or
other persons in parental relation to, the child as to the existence of
such disability. If the parents or other persons in parental relation
are unable or unwilling to provide the necessary relief and treatment
for such students, such fact shall be reported by the principal or his
or her designee to the director of school health services, whose duty it
shall be to provide relief for such students. Each school and school
district chosen as part of an appropriate sampling methodology shall
participate in surveys directed by the commissioner of health pursuant
to the public health law in relation to students' BMI and weight status
categories as determined by the examination conducted pursuant to this
section and which shall be subject to audit by the commissioner of
health. Such surveys shall contain the information required pursuant to
this subdivision in relation to students' BMI and weight status
categories in aggregate. Parents or other persons in parental relation
to a student may refuse to have the student's BMI and weight status
category included in such survey. Each school and school district shall
provide the commissioner of health with any information, records and
reports he or she may require for the purpose of such audit. The BMI and
weight status survey and audit as described in this section shall be
conducted consistent with confidentiality requirements imposed by
federal law. Data collection for such surveys shall commence on a
voluntary basis at the beginning of the two thousand seven academic
school year, and by all schools chosen as part of the sampling
methodology at the beginning of the two thousand eight academic school
year. The department shall also utilize the collected data to develop a
report of child obesity and obesity related diseases.
 2. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision one of this section,
no examinations shall be required pursuant to this section where a
student or the parent or person in parental relation to such student
objects thereto on the grounds that such examinations conflict with
their genuine and sincere religious beliefs.
 § 905. Record of screening examinations for vision, hearing and
scoliosis. 1. The director of school health services of each school
district in this state that is required to provide school health
services, or the health department or agency otherwise responsible to
provide such services, shall conduct screening examinations of vision,
hearing, and scoliosis of all students at such times and as defined in
the regulations of the commissioner, and at any time deemed necessary.
 2. Notwithstanding any other provisions of any general, special or
local law, the school authorities charged with the duty of making such
screening examinations of students for the presence of scoliosis
pursuant to this section shall not suffer any liability to any person as
a result of making such screening examination, which liability would not
have existed by any provision of law, statutory or otherwise, in the
absence of this section. The positive results of any such screening
examinations of students for the presence of scoliosis shall be in
writing and the parent of, or person in parental relation to, any child
in whom the presence of scoliosis is found shall be advised of such
results by the school authorities within ninety days after the finding
of the presence of scoliosis is made.
 3. The provisions of this section relative to examination for
scoliosis shall be waived by the commissioner upon the filing, in
accordance with rules and regulations to be established and promulgated
by the commissioner, of a resolution, duly adopted by a board of
education, stating that the school district does not have the capability
to comply with this section relative to the examination for scoliosis
and that such compliance would place a financial cost upon the school
district, provided, however, that such resolution may not be adopted
prior to the holding of a public hearing on such proposed resolution.
Such rules and regulations to be established and promulgated by the
commissioner in accordance with this section shall include, but not be
limited to, the date for filing such resolution by a board of education
and to the dates for filing subsequent resolutions.
 4. Vision screening examinations of students in the schools of this
state made pursuant to subdivision one of this section, or made pursuant
to the by-laws, regulations or practices of the board of education of
the city school district of the city of New York, shall be subject to
the provisions of this subdivision, and where inconsistent herewith, the
provisions of this subdivision shall prevail. In addition to any vision
screening examinations otherwise required by the provisions or practices
cited in this subdivision, all students who enroll in a school of this
state shall be tested for color perception, distance acuity and near
vision within six months of admission to the school, or by such other
date as may be prescribed in the regulations of the commissioner. The
results of any such vision screening examinations, whether made pursuant
to this subdivision or pursuant to the provisions or practices cited in
this subdivision, shall be in writing and shall be made available to the
student's parent or person in parental relation and to any teacher of
the student within the school while the student is enrolled in the
school, and shall be kept in a permanent file of the school for at least
as long as the minimum retention period for such records, as prescribed
by the commissioner pursuant to article fifty-seven-A of the arts and
cultural affairs law.
 5. Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, no
screening examinations for vision, hearing, or scoliosis condition shall
be required where a student or the parent or person in parental relation
to such student objects thereto on the grounds that such examinations
conflict with their genuine and sincere religious beliefs.
 § 906. Existence of communicable diseases; return after illness. 1.
Whenever, upon investigation and evaluation by the director of school
health services or other health professionals acting upon direction or
referral of such director for care and treatment, a student in the
public schools shows symptoms of any communicable or infectious disease
reportable under the public health law that imposes a significant risk
of infection of others in the school, he or she shall be excluded from
the school and sent home immediately, in a safe and proper conveyance.
The director of school health services shall immediately notify a local
public health agency of any disease reportable under the public health
law.
 2. Following absence on account of illness or from unknown cause, the
director of school health services may examine each student returning to
a school without a certificate from a local public health officer, a
duly licensed physician, physician assistant, or nurse practitioner.
 3. The director of school health services, or other health
professionals acting upon direction or referral of such director, may
make such evaluations of teachers and any other school employees, school
buildings and premises as, in their discretion, they may deem necessary
to protect the health of the students and staff.
 § 907. Use of sunscreen. The board of education or trustees of each
school district and board of cooperative educational services, and the
governing body of each private elementary, middle and secondary school,
shall allow students to carry and use topical sunscreen products
approved by the federal Food and Drug Administration for
over-the-counter use for the purpose of avoiding overexposure to the sun
and not for medical treatment of an injury or illness, with the written
permission of the parent or guardian of the student. A record of such
permission shall be maintained by the school. A student who is unable to
physically apply sunscreen may be assisted by unlicensed personnel when
directed to do so by the student, if permitted by a parent or guardian
and authorized by the school.
 § 908. Prohibition against meal shaming. All public school districts,
charter schools and non-public schools in the state that participate in
the national school lunch program or school breakfast program in which
there is a school at which all pupils are not eligible to be served
breakfast and lunch under the community eligibility provision or
provision two of the federal national school lunch act, 42 U.S.C. Sec.
1751 et seq., shall develop a plan to ensure that a pupil whose parent
or guardian has unpaid school meal fees is not shamed or treated
differently than a pupil whose parent or guardian does not have unpaid
school meal fees. The plan shall be submitted to the commissioner by
July first, two thousand eighteen, or sixty days from the effective date
of this section after enactment in conformance with regulations of the
commissioner. After submission of such plan, the school or school
district shall adopt and post the plan on its website. The plan shall
include, but not be limited to, the following elements:
 a. A statement that the school or school district shall provide the
student with the student's meal of choice for that school day of the
available reimbursable meal choices for such school day, if the student
requests one, unless the student's parent or guardian has specifically
provided written permission to the school to withhold a meal, provided
that the school or school district shall only be required to provide
access to reimbursable meals, not a la carte items, adult meals, or
other similar items;
 b. An explanation of how staff will be trained to ensure that the
school or school district's procedures are carried out correctly and how
the affected parents and guardians will be provided with assistance in
establishing eligibility for free or reduced-price meals for their
children;
 c. Procedures requiring the school or school district to notify the
student's parent or guardian that the student's meal card or account
balance is exhausted and unpaid meal charges are due. The notification
procedures may include a repayment schedule, but the school or school
district may not charge any interest or fees in connection with any
meals charged;
 d. A communication procedure designed to support eligible families
enrolling in the national free and reduced price meal program. Such
communication procedures shall also include a process for determining
eligibility when a student owes money for five or more meals, wherein
the school or school district shall:
 i. make every attempt to determine if a student is directly certified
to be eligible for free meals;
 ii. make at least two attempts, not including the application or
instructions included in a school enrollment packet, to reach the
student's parent or guardian and have the parent or guardian fill out a
meal application; and
 iii. require a school or school district to contact the parent or
guardian to offer assistance with a meal application, determine if there
are other issues within the household that have caused the child to have
insufficient funds to purchase a school meal and offer any other
assistance that is appropriate;
 e. A clear explanation of procedures designed to decrease student
distress or embarrassment, provided that, no school or school district
shall:
 i. publicly identify or stigmatize a student who cannot pay for a meal
or who owes a meal debt by any means including, but not limited to,
requiring that a student wear a wristband or hand stamp;
 ii. require a student who cannot pay for a meal or who owes a meal
debt to do chores or other work to pay for meals;
 iii. require that a student throw away a meal after it has been served
because of the student's inability to pay for the meal or because money
is owed for earlier meals;
 iv. take any action directed at a pupil to collect unpaid school meal
fees. A school or school district may attempt to collect unpaid school
meal fees from a student's parent or guardian, but shall not use a debt
collector, as defined in section eight hundred three of the federal
consumer credit protection act, 15 U.S.C. Sec. 1692a or file a lawsuit
against such student's parent or guardian; or
 v. discuss any outstanding meal debt in the presence of other
students;
 f. A clear explanation of the procedure to handle unpaid meal charges,
provided that nothing in this section is intended to allow for the
unlimited accrual of debt;
 g. Procedures to enroll in the free and reduced price lunch program,
provided that such procedures shall include that, at the beginning of
each school year, a school or school district shall provide a free,
printed meal application in every school enrollment packet, or if the
school or school district chooses to use an electronic meal application,
provide in school enrollment packets an explanation of the electronic
meal application process and instructions for how parents or guardians
may request a paper application at no cost;
 h. If a school or school district becomes aware that a student who has
not submitted a meal application is eligible for free or reduced-fee
meals, the school or school district shall complete and file an
application for the student pursuant to title seven, section 245.6(d) of
the code of federal regulations; and
 i. School liaisons required for homeless, foster, and migrant students
shall coordinate with the nutrition department to make sure such
students receive free school meals, in accordance with federal law.
 § 909. School hygiene districts. 1. The board of supervisors of any
county, with the approval of the commissioner of education, shall have
power to establish in such county a school hygiene district which shall
include the supervisory district or districts in such county, as defined
in this chapter. The board of education of any union free school
district of four thousand five hundred or more population, which employs
a superintendent of schools, or of any city having a population of less
than fifty thousand, within such county, may at any time adopt a
resolution requesting that such union free school district or city be
included within such school hygiene district, and after the approval of
such request by the district committee on school hygiene, herein-below
mentioned, and by the commissioner of education, and upon the subsequent
filing by the clerk of such board of education of a certified copy of
such resolution and of a certified copy of such approvals with the clerk
of the board of supervisors, such union free school district or city
shall be included within such school hygiene district.
 2. When such a school hygiene district is established, as hereinabove
provided, the board of supervisors shall appropriate funds for the
salary and necessary expenses of a district director of school hygiene.
Funds may also be appropriated for assistants to the director of school
hygiene. Within thirty days after such appropriation is made the
chairman of the board of supervisors shall call a meeting, to be held at
a date as early as practicable, of the district superintendents and
school superintendents in such school hygiene district together with the
chairman of the board of supervisors, at which meeting such persons
shall organize themselves into a district committee on school hygiene
and shall elect a chairman thereof. In any school hygiene district which
includes part or all of a county health district, as defined in the
public health law, the district health officer of such county health
district shall be a member of such committee. The district director of
school hygiene and assistants shall be appointed by and work under the
direction of such district committee on school hygiene. They shall meet
the qualifications established by the commissioner of education and be
certificated as supervisors of teachers. Any person appointed as such
district director of school hygiene shall be a physician duly licensed
and registered to practice in this state and shall have practiced as a
physician, or been engaged in public health work, for at least two
years.
 3. It shall be the duty of the district director of school hygiene to
advise, assist, and exercise general supervision over, medical
inspectors, dentists and school nurses in the public schools in such
school hygiene district; to keep informed as to their work and require
such reports from them as he may deem necessary; to see that suitable
recommendations based on the findings of the medical inspectors in their
examinations of pupils are brought to the attention of their teachers
and of those in parental relation to such pupils; to aid, and keep
informed as to the work of, oral hygienists, nutrition workers, and
other school employees engaged in health work in such schools; to
inspect, and report to the proper authorities on, the sanitary
conditions of school buildings, and in other ways to promote the
physical welfare and health education of pupils. Whenever the board of
supervisors, or, in a county constituting, in whole or in part, a county
health district, the district health officer thereof, shall, under any
provisions of law now in force or hereafter enacted, assign any public
health nurse to the duties of a school nurse in any school or schools
within a school hygiene district, she may be assigned to perform such
duties under the direct control of the district director of school
hygiene of such school hygiene district. Such district director of
school hygiene shall be subject to supervision by the state medical
inspector of schools.
 4. If it be ascertained upon any test or examination held by a medical
inspector under the provisions of section nine hundred four of this
article in any of the school districts within a school hygiene district
that any of the pupils are afflicted with defective sight or hearing or
other physical disability and the parents have been duly notified as to
the existence of such defects and physical disability and are unable to
provide the necessary relief and treatment for such pupils and such fact
is reported by said medical inspector to the district director of school
hygiene, such district director shall have power and it shall be his
duty to provide relief for such pupils within the amount appropriated
for such purpose by the board of supervisors.
 5. The board of supervisors, after determining the amount of the
appropriation necessary for the salary and expenses of such district
director of school hygiene and assistants, shall levy one-half of such
amount by tax on the towns, union free school districts and cities, if
any, included within such school hygiene district, and shall apportion
such amount, so levied, among such towns, union free school districts
and cities, according to the assessed valuation of the taxable property
therein. Whenever a board of supervisors shall make such an
appropriation and levy such a tax, the commissioner of education shall
apportion to each such town, union free school district and city, an
amount equal to that so levied upon each such respective town, union
free school district or city. The board of supervisors shall likewise,
after determining the amount of the appropriation necessary for expenses
incurred for the relief of pupils under subdivision four of this
section, levy the total amount by tax upon the towns, union free school
districts and cities, if any, included within such school hygiene
district, and shall apportion such amount so levied among such towns,
union free school districts and cities according to the assessed
valuation of the taxable property therein. The sums collected from the
taxes so levied, and the amount apportioned by the commissioner of
education, shall be paid to the county treasurer of such county, who
shall expend such moneys for the purposes hereinabove provided and in
the same manner as other county charges are paid.
 § 910. Choice of method of treatment. Whenever affected by the
requirements of this article, the school employee so affected, and, in
the case of a child, the parent of, or person in parental relation to,
such child, shall have the right to determine the form or manner of
treatment or remedial care to be prescribed or applied, but the
treatment or remedial care must be in accordance with and as allowed
under the provisions of article one hundred thirty-one of this chapter.
 § 911. Enforcement. 1. It shall be the duty of the commissioner to
enforce the provisions of this article, and the commissioner may adopt
rules and regulations not inconsistent herewith, after consultation with
the state commissioner of health, for the purpose of carrying into full
force and effect the objects and intent of this article.
 2. The commissioner may, in his or her discretion, withhold the public
money from a district which willfully refuses or neglects to comply with
this article and the rules and regulations made under this article.
 § 912. Health and welfare services to all children. The voters and/or
trustees or board of education of every school district shall, upon
request of the authorities of a school other than public, provide
resident children who attend such school with any or all of the health
and welfare services and facilities which are made available by such
voters and/or trustees or board of education to or for children
attending the public schools of the district. Such services may include,
but are not limited to all services performed by a physician, physician
assistant, dentist, dental hygienist, registered professional nurse,
nurse practitioner, school psychologist, school social worker or school
speech therapist, and may also include dental prophylaxis, vision and
hearing screening examinations, the taking of medical histories and the
administration of health screening tests, the maintenance of cumulative
health records and the administration of emergency care programs for ill
or injured students. Any such services or facilities shall be so
provided notwithstanding any provision of any charter or other provision
of law inconsistent herewith. Where children residing in one school
district attend a school other than public located in another school
district, the school authorities of the district of residence shall
contract with the school authorities of the district where such
nonpublic school is located, for the provision of such health and
welfare services and facilities to such children by the school district
where such nonpublic school is located, for a consideration to be agreed
upon between the school authorities of such districts, subject to the
approval of the qualified voters of the district of residence when
required under the provisions of this chapter. Every such contract shall
be in writing and in the form prescribed by the commissioner, and before
such contract is executed the same shall be submitted for approval to
the superintendent of schools having jurisdiction over such district of
residence and such contract shall not become effective until approved by
such superintendent.
 § 912-a. Urine analysis; drug detection. 1. The school authorities of
each school district within the state may cause all children attending
grades seven through twelve, inclusive, in the public and private
schools located within such districts, to be separately and carefully
examined in order to ascertain whether any such children are making use
of dangerous drugs.
 2. Such examination may be made only upon the written request or
consent of a parent of, or person in parental relation to, a child. Such
examination shall be conducted without notice to the child and shall
include the supervised taking of a urine sample which shall be analyzed
for such drugs and in accordance with such standards as shall be
acceptable to the New York state office of alcoholism and substance
abuse services, or its successor agency. The results of such examination
shall be promptly forwarded to the school authorities. If it should be
ascertained, upon such test or examination, that any child is making use
of dangerous drugs, the school authorities shall report same to the
social services department for the social services district wherein such
school is located and to the parent of, or person in parental relation
to, such child together with a statement to such parent or person in
parental relation as to available programs and facilities to combat such
dangerous drug usage. The local social services department shall be
empowered, in an appropriate case, to take such action and offer such
protective social services as are prescribed by title six of article six
of the social services law.
 3. Except as required in this section, information resulting from an
examination conducted pursuant to this section shall be kept
confidential and shall not be used for law enforcement purposes but may
be utilized only for statistical, epidemiological or research purposes.
 4. Any record or information compiled from such examination which
identifies an individual student as a user of dangerous drugs shall be
maintained separate and apart from such student's other educational
records and in appropriate confidence and shall be destroyed upon such
student's graduation or final severance from the secondary educational
school system in this state.
 Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, no such
examination shall be required where a student objects thereto on the
grounds that such examinations conflict with their genuine and sincere
religious beliefs.
 § 912-b. Speech and language improvement services. 1. The board of
education or trustees of each school district and the city school
district of the city of New York may provide speech and language
improvement services to students in grades kindergarten through six with
speech impairments of a severity that does not adversely affect the
student's educational performance but does present a barrier to
communication.
 2. Any student, who is determined to be in need of such speech and
language improvement services, shall receive such upon the
recommendation of the building administrator.
 3. A student, whose speech impairment adversely affects the student's
educational performance shall be referred to the committee on special
education for further evaluation and recommendation for special
education services and programs, pursuant to article eighty-nine of this
chapter.
 § 913. Medical examinations of teachers and other employees. In order
to safeguard the health of children attending the public schools, the
board of education or trustees of any school district or a board of
cooperative educational services shall be empowered to require any
person employed by the board of education or trustees or board of
cooperative educational services to submit to a medical examination by a
physician or other health care provider of his or her choice or the
director of school health services of the board of education or trustees
or board of cooperative educational services, in order to determine the
physical or mental capacity of such person to perform his or her duties.
The person required to submit to such medical examination shall be
entitled to be accompanied by a physician or other person of his or her
choice. The determination based upon such examination as to the physical
or mental capacity of such person to perform his or her duties shall be
reported to the board of education or trustees or board of cooperative
educational services and may be referred to and considered for the
evaluation of service of the person examined or for disability
retirement.
 § 914. Immunization of children. 1. Each school shall require of every
child entering or attending such school proof of immunization in
accordance with the provisions of section twenty-one hundred sixty-four
of the public health law.
 2. Each school district shall assist and cooperate with the
municipality in the development of a plan required by section six
hundred thirteen of the public health law.
 3. Each school district shall participate in the surveys directed by
the state commissioner of health pursuant to section six hundred
thirteen of the public health law of the immunization level of the
children entering and attending school within such district, and which
shall be subject to audit by the state commissioner of health. Each
school and school district shall provide the state commissioner of
health with any records and reports required for the purpose of such
audit. In no event shall the state commissioner of health disclose a
student's identity.
 § 915. Prohibiting the sale of certain sweetened foods. From the
beginning of the school day until the end of the last scheduled meal
period, no sweetened soda water, no chewing gum, no candy including hard
candy, jellies, gums, marshmallow candies, fondant, licorice, spun candy
and candy coated popcorn, and no water ices except those which contain
fruit or fruit juices, shall be sold in any public school within the
state.
 § 915-a. Universal free school meals. 1. The department shall require
all school districts, charter schools and non-public schools in the
state that participate in the national school lunch program or school
breakfast program as provided in the Richard B. Russell National School
Lunch Act and the Child Nutrition Act, as amended, to serve breakfast
and lunch at no cost to the student. School districts, charter schools
and non-public schools shall maximize federal reimbursement for school
breakfast and lunch programs by adopting Provision 2, the federal
Community Eligibility Provision, or any other provision under such Act,
the National School Lunch Act or the National Child Nutrition Act that,
in the opinion of the department, maximizes federal funding for meals
served in such programs. Provided that school food authorities that do
not qualify as a single entity to participate in the community
eligibility provision shall be required to group schools within the
school food authority, to the extent possible, for purposes of
maximizing participation in the community eligibility provision, and
provided further that school food authorities shall reapply annually for
the community eligibility provision program in the event that doing so
would result in a higher percentage of meals being reimbursed at the
federal reimbursement rate for a free meal.
 2. Notwithstanding any provision of law, rule or regulation to the
contrary, for the two thousand twenty-five--two thousand twenty-six
school year and each school year thereafter, for each breakfast and
lunch meal served, the department shall reimburse the school food
authority the difference between (a) the combined state and federal
reimbursement rate for a reduced-price or paid meal, respectively, for
the current school year and (b) the combined state and federal
reimbursement rate for a free meal for the current school year, provided
that the total reimbursement rate for each meal served shall equal the
combined state and federal reimbursement rate for a free meal for the
current school year.
 3. The department, in consultation with the office of temporary and
disability assistance, shall promulgate any rule or regulation needed
for school districts, charter schools and non-public schools to promote
the supplemental nutrition assistance program to a student or person in
parental relation to a student by providing either application
assistance or a direct referral to an outreach partner identified to the
department by the office of temporary and disability assistance to
maximize the number of students directly certified for free school
meals.
 4. In addition to fulfilling any other applicable state and federal
requirements, the department shall provide technical assistance to
assist school districts, charter schools, and non-public schools in the
transition to universal school meals to ensure successful program
operations and to maximize federal funding, including but not limited to
the following:
 (a) Assisting school food authorities with one or more schools
qualifying for the community eligibility provision in meeting any state
and federal requirements necessary in order to maximize reimbursement
through the community eligibility provision, including assisting such
school food authorities in maximizing participation in the community
eligibility provision.
 (b) If a school food authority is ineligible to participate in and
receive reimbursement through the community eligibility provision,
assisting the school food authority in achieving and maximizing
eligibility and, if that is not feasible, assisting the school food
authority in determining the viability of using Provision 2 or other
special federal provisions available to schools to maximize federal
reimbursement.
 5. School districts, charter schools, and non-public schools shall
maximize the number of students eligible for free meals by conducting
the Direct Certification Matching Process at a minimum of three times
per year, designating children as "Other Source Categorically Eligible",
as defined by federal regulations, or, for schools not participating in
the Community Eligibility Provision or Provision 2, by annually
collecting the free and reduced-price meal application.
 § 916. Pupils with asthma or another respiratory disease requiring
rescue inhaler treatment. 1. The board of education or trustees of each
school district and board of cooperative educational services shall
allow pupils who have been diagnosed by a physician or other duly
authorized health care provider with an asthmatic condition or another
respiratory disease to carry and use a prescribed inhaler and
self-administer inhaled rescue medications to alleviate respiratory
symptoms or to prevent the onset of exercise induced asthmatic symptoms
during the school day on school property and at any school function as
such terms are defined, respectively, by subdivisions one and two of
section eleven of this chapter, with the written permission of a
physician or other duly authorized health care provider, and written
parental consent. The written permission shall include an attestation by
the physician or the health care provider confirming the following: (a)
the pupil is diagnosed with asthma or another respiratory disease for
which inhaled rescue medications are prescribed to alleviate respiratory
symptoms or to prevent the onset of exercise induced asthmatic symptoms;
and (b) that the pupil has demonstrated that he or she can
self-administer the prescribed inhaled rescue medication effectively.
The written permission shall also include the name of the prescribed
inhaled rescue medication, the dose, the times when the medication is to
be taken, the circumstances which may warrant the use of the medication
and the length of time for which the inhaler is prescribed. A record of
such consent and permission shall be maintained in the student's
cumulative health record. In addition, upon the written request of a
parent or person in parental relation, the board of education or
trustees of a school district and board of cooperative educational
services shall allow such pupils to maintain an extra such inhaler in
the care and custody of a licensed nurse, nurse practitioner, physician
assistant, or physician employed by such district or board of
cooperative educational services, and shall be readily accessible to
such pupil. Nothing in this section shall require a school district or
board of cooperative educational services to retain a licensed nurse,
nurse practitioner, physician assistant, or physician solely for the
purpose of taking custody of a spare inhaler for the treatment of asthma
or a respiratory disease requiring rescue medication treatment, or
require that a licensed nurse, nurse practitioner, physician assistant,
or physician be available at all times in a school building for the
purpose of taking custody of the inhaler. In addition, the medication
provided by the pupil's parents or persons in parental relation shall be
made available to the pupil as needed in accordance with the school
district's or board of cooperative educational services' policy and the
orders prescribed in the written permission of the physician or other
authorized health care provider.
 2. A school district, board of cooperative educational services and/or
their agents or employees shall incur no legal or financial liability as
a result of any harm or injury sustained by a pupil or other person
caused by reasonable and good faith compliance with this section.
 § 916-a. Pupils with allergies. 1. (a) The board of education or
trustees of each school district and board of cooperative educational
services shall allow pupils who have been diagnosed by a physician or
other duly authorized health care provider with an allergy to carry and
use a prescribed epinephrine device for the emergency treatment of
allergic reactions during the school day on school property and at any
school function as such terms are defined, respectively, by subdivisions
one and two of section eleven of this chapter, with the written
permission of a physician or other duly authorized health provider, and
written parental consent. The written permission shall include an
attestation by the physician or the health care provider confirming the
following: (i) the pupil's diagnosis of an allergy for which an
epinephrine device is needed; and (ii) that the pupil has demonstrated
that such pupil can self-administer the prescribed epinephrine device
effectively. The written permission shall also include the circumstances
which may warrant the use of the epinephrine device. A record of such
consent and permission shall be maintained in the student's cumulative
health record. In addition, upon the written request of a parent or
person in parental relation, the board of education or trustees of a
school district and board of cooperative educational services shall
allow such pupils to maintain an extra epinephrine device for the
emergency treatment of allergies in the care and custody of a licensed
nurse, nurse practitioner, physician assistant, or physician employed by
such district or board of cooperative educational services, and shall be
readily accessible to such pupil. Nothing in this section shall require
a school district or board of cooperative educational services to retain
a licensed nurse, nurse practitioner, physician assistant, or physician
solely for the purpose of taking custody of a spare epinephrine device
for the emergency treatment of allergic reactions, or require that a
licensed nurse, nurse practitioner, physician assistant, or physician be
available at all times in a school building for taking custody of the
epinephrine device. In addition, the epinephrine device provided by the
pupil's parents or persons in parental relation will be made available
to the pupil as needed in accordance with the school district's or board
of cooperative educational services' policy and the orders prescribed in
the written permission of the physician or other authorized health care
provider.
 (b) For the purposes of this subdivision, the term "epinephrine
device" shall have the same meaning as set forth in paragraph (b) of
subdivision one of section three thousand-c of the public health law.
 2. A school district, board of cooperative educational services and/or
their agents or employees shall incur no legal or financial liability as
a result of any harm or injury sustained by a pupil or other person
caused by reasonable and good faith compliance with this section.
 § 916-b. Pupils with diabetes. 1. The board of education or trustees
of each school district and board of cooperative educational services
shall allow pupils who have been diagnosed with diabetes to carry
glucagon and carry and use insulin through appropriate medication
delivery devices and equipment and/or to carry and use equipment and
supplies necessary to check blood glucose levels and ketone levels, as
prescribed by a physician or other duly authorized healthcare provider,
during the school day on school property and at any school function as
such terms are defined, respectively, by subdivisions one and two of
section eleven of this chapter, with parental consent and the written
permission of a physician or other duly authorized health care provider.
The written permission shall include an attestation by the physician or
the health care provider confirming the following: (a) the pupil's
diagnosis of diabetes makes the delivery of insulin and glucagon through
appropriate medication delivery devices during the school day on school
property or at any school function necessary and/or makes the use of
equipment and supplies to check blood glucose levels and ketone levels
necessary; and (b) that the pupil has demonstrated that he or she can
self-administer the prescribed insulin effectively and can self check
glucose or ketone levels and can independently follow the treatment
orders prescribed by the physician or other authorized health care
provider in the written permission. The written permission shall
identify prescribed blood glucose tests, ketone tests, insulin and
glucagon to be used by the pupil at school and/or during school
functions. If insulin or glucagon is prescribed, the written permission
shall include the name of the type of insulin, the dose or dose range,
the times when the medication is to be taken, the type of insulin
delivery system and any other information prescribed by the commissioner
in regulation, after consultation with the commissioner of health. A
record of such consent and permission shall be maintained in the
student's cumulative health record. In addition, upon the written
request of a parent or person in parental relation, the board of
education or trustees of a school district and board of cooperative
educational services shall allow such pupils to maintain extra insulin
and an insulin delivery system, glucagon, blood glucose meters and
related supplies used to treat such pupil's diabetes in the care and
custody of a licensed nurse, nurse practitioner, physician assistant, or
physician employed by such district or board of cooperative educational
services, and shall be readily accessible to such pupil. Nothing in this
section shall require a school district or board of cooperative
educational services to retain a licensed nurse, nurse practitioner,
physician assistant, or physician solely for the purpose of taking
custody of extra insulin and an insulin delivery system, glucagon, blood
glucose meters and related supplies used to treat such pupil's diabetes,
or require that a licensed nurse, nurse practitioner, physician
assistant, or physician be available at all times in a school building
for the purpose of taking custody of extra insulin and an insulin
delivery system, glucagon, blood glucose meters and related supplies. In
addition, the medication and devices, equipment and supplies provided by
the pupil's parents or persons in parental relation shall be made
available to the pupil as needed in accordance with the school
district's or board of cooperative educational services' policy and the
orders prescribed in the written permission of the physician or other
authorized health care provider. Pupils with diabetes may also carry any
food necessary to treat hypoglycemia pursuant to the school district
policy, provided, however, such school district policy shall not
unreasonably interfere with a pupil's ability to treat hypoglycemia.
 2. A school district, board of cooperative educational services and/or
their agents or employees shall incur no legal or financial liability as
a result of any harm or injury sustained by a pupil or other person
caused by reasonable and good faith compliance with this section.
 § 917. On-site cardiac automated external defibrillator. 1. School
districts, boards of cooperative educational services, county vocational
education and extension boards and charter schools shall provide and
maintain on-site in each instructional school facility automated
external defibrillator (AED) equipment, as defined in paragraph (a) of
subdivision one of section three thousand-b of the public health law, in
quantities and types deemed by the commissioner in consultation with the
commissioner of health to be adequate to ensure ready and appropriate
access for use during emergencies. Such automated external
defibrillators shall be clearly marked, accessible, and maintained
consistent with guidelines set by the American Heart Association, or
other nationally recognized guidelines focused on emergency
cardiovascular care.
 2. Whenever public school facilities pursuant to subdivision one of
this section are used for school sponsored or school approved curricular
or extracurricular events or activities and whenever a school-sponsored
athletic contest is held at any location, the public school officials
and administrators responsible for such school facility or athletic
contest shall ensure the presence of at least one staff person who is
trained, pursuant to paragraph (a) of subdivision three of section three
thousand-b of the public health law, in the operation and use of an AED.
Where a school-sponsored competitive athletic event is held at a site
other than a public school facility, the public school officials shall
assure that automated external defibrillator equipment is provided
on-site.
 3. Public school facilities and staff pursuant to subdivisions one and
two of this section shall be deemed a "public access defibrillation
provider" as defined in paragraph (c) of subdivision one of section
three thousand-b of the public health law and shall be subject to the
requirements and limitations of such section.
 4. Pursuant to section three thousand-a and three thousand-b of the
public health law, any public access defibrillation provider, or any
employee or other agent of the provider who, in accordance with the
provisions of this section, voluntarily and without expectation of
monetary compensation renders emergency medical or first aid treatment
using an AED which has been made available pursuant to this section, to
a person who is unconscious, ill or injured, shall be liable only
pursuant to section three thousand-a of the public health law.
 * § 917-a. On-site cardiac automated external defibrillator in
nonpublic schools. 1. Nonpublic schools shall provide and maintain
on-site in each instructional school facility automated external
defibrillator (AED) equipment, as defined in paragraph (a) of
subdivision one of section three thousand-b of the public health law, in
quantities and types deemed by the commissioner in consultation with the
commissioner of health to be adequate to ensure ready and appropriate
access for use during emergencies. Nonpublic schools shall cause such
AED to be maintained and tested according to such applicable standards
of the manufacturer and any appropriate government agency.
 2. Whenever nonpublic school facilities pursuant to subdivision one of
this section are used for school-sponsored or school-approved curricular
or extracurricular events or activities and whenever a school-sponsored
athletic contest is held at any location, the nonpublic school officials
and administrators responsible for such school facility or athletic
contest shall ensure the presence of at least one staff person who is
trained, pursuant to subdivision three of this section in the operation
and use of an AED. Where a school-sponsored competitive athletic event
is held at a site other than a nonpublic school facility, the nonpublic
school officials shall ensure that AED equipment is provided on-site.
 3. No person may operate an AED in a nonpublic school facility unless
the person has successfully completed a training course in the operation
of an AED approved by a nationally-recognized organization as defined in
paragraph (d) of subdivision one of section three thousand-b of the
public health law or the state emergency medical services council.
However, this section shall not prohibit operation of an AED:
 (a) by a health care practitioner licensed or certified under title
eight of this chapter or a person certified under article thirty of the
public health law acting within their lawful scope of practice;
 (b) by a person acting pursuant to a lawful prescription; or
 (c) by a person who operates the AED other than as part of or
incidental to their employment or regular duties, who is acting in good
faith, with reasonable care, and without expectation of monetary
compensation, to provide first aid that includes operation of an AED;
nor shall this section limit any good samaritan protections provided in
section three thousand-a of the public health law.
 4. Every use of an AED on a patient in a nonpublic school shall be
immediately reported to the appropriate local emergency medical services
system, emergency communications center or emergency vehicle dispatch
center, as appropriate.
 5. Nonpublic schools shall notify the appropriate regional emergency
services council of the existence, location and type of any AED they
possess.
 6. A nonpublic school shall post a sign or notice at the main entrance
to the facility or building in which the automated external
defibrillator is stored, indicating the location where any such
automated external defibrillator is stored or maintained in such
building or facility on a regular basis.
 7. (a) Operation of an AED pursuant to this section in a nonpublic
school shall be considered first aid or emergency treatment for the
purpose of any statute relating to liability; and
 (b) Operation of an AED pursuant to this section in a nonpublic school
shall not constitute the unlawful practice of a profession under title
eight of this chapter.
 * NB Effective July 1, 2026
 § 918. School district nutrition advisory committees. 1. a. Every
school district is hereby authorized and encouraged to establish a child
nutrition advisory committee.
 b. The district advisory committee is encouraged to meet at least
quarterly.
 c. The committee is encouraged to include, but not be limited to, a
representative of the school board, the food preparation staff, the
physical education departments, the school nurse or health staff, a
registered dietitian, if available, the faculty of the district, the
parent teacher associations in the district, the students enrolled in
the district, and the parents or guardians of students enrolled in the
district.
 d. If, due to special circumstances of a district, it is impossible or
impracticable for all groups recommended to have members on the
committee to be represented, the district may approve a committee that,
to the greatest extent possible, represents the interests of the
aforementioned groups.
 2. The district is encouraged to give, in such newsletter, if any,
that precedes the commencement of school in the fall, written notice to
all parents or guardians of enrolled students of the existence of a
school district nutrition advisory committee and supply information as
to how such interested parents or guardians may participate on such
committee.
 3. The district is encouraged, to the extent practicable, to give
notice to all parents or guardians and students through its regular
newsletters or other regular forms of written communication as to the
scheduled dates of all meetings of the advisory committee.
 4. The committee is encouraged to study and make recommendations on
all facets of the current nutritional policies of the district
including, but not limited to, the goals of the district to promote
wellness and proper nutrition, vending machine sales; menu criteria;
educational curriculum teaching healthy nutrition; promote the
achievement and maintenance of healthy weight; educational information
provided to parents or guardians regarding healthy nutrition and the
health risks associated with obesity, asthma, chronic bronchitis and
other chronic respiratory disease; opportunities offered to parents or
guardians on how to encourage healthier eating habits to students; and
the education provided to teachers and other staff as to the importance
of healthy nutrition and the health risks associated with a student's
weight. In addition the committee shall consider recommendations and
practices of other districts and nutrition studies.
 5. The committee is encouraged to report periodically to the district
regarding practices that will educate teachers, parents or guardians and
children about healthy nutrition and raise awareness of the dangers of
obesity, asthma, chronic bronchitis and other chronic respiratory
diseases. The committee is encouraged also to provide any parent teacher
associations in the district with such findings and recommendations.
 6. Each June, the committee shall report to the board of the local
school district regarding the status of the implementation of the
district's programs to improve students' nutritional awareness and
healthy diet.
 * § 919. On-site nebulizers. 1. The board of education or trustees of
the school district responsible for providing health services in a
school, or the board of cooperative educational services in the case of
programs under its jurisdiction, shall make a nebulizer available
on-site in every public and private school building in which full or
part time nurse services are provided. Nebulizers in such school
buildings shall be made available to allow reasonable access to all
public and private school students with a patient specific order, who
require inhaled medications administered by a nebulizer, provided,
however, that nebulizers shall be administered by a school nurse or
physician pursuant to the student's patient specific order. Every
nebulizer shall be maintained in working order by the school district or
board of cooperative educational services that provides school health
services to the school building where the nebulizer is located.
 2. The commissioner shall be authorized to promulgate regulations for
the implementation of this section.
 * NB Not effective pursuant to confirmation from DOB stating no
funding has been provided for nebulizers (see ch. 672/2007).
Confirmation received 1/24/2012.
 § 920. Public schools; infestation of bedbugs (Cimex lectularius). 1.
In a city school district having a population of one million or more
inhabitants, the principal of each public school shall provide immediate
notification to parents, persons in parental relation or guardians of
potentially affected students attending the school, disclosing a finding
relating to the infestation of bedbugs (Cimex lectularius) in such
school; provided, however, that if pursuant to regulations of the
commissioner it is determined that any infestation is contained within a
discrete area, the principal may limit such notification to parents,
persons in parental relationship or guardians of all potentially
affected students within such area, and shall advise the parents'
association of the scope of such notification.
 2. Along with the notification required pursuant to subdivision one of
this section, the principal of such public school shall also include
information regarding proper procedures to prevent further infestations
at the school and to prevent the transfer of bedbugs from the school to
the residences of students. Such information shall be developed by the
board of education in consultation with other city agencies and shall be
available in various languages as deemed necessary.
 3. The principal shall ensure that the bedbug infestation at the
school is properly addressed in the most effective and safe manner.
 § 921. Training of unlicensed school personnel to administer certain
medications. 1. (a) The board of education or trustees of each school
district and board of cooperative educational services and nonpublic
schools are authorized, but not obligated to have licensed registered
professional nurses, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and
physicians train unlicensed school personnel to administer prescribed
glucagon or epinephrine devices in emergency situations, where an
appropriately licensed health professional is not available, to pupils
who have the written permission of a physician or other duly authorized
health care provider for the administration of glucagon or an emergency
epinephrine device, along with written parental consent, during the
school day on school property and at any school function as such terms
are defined, respectively, by subdivisions one and two of section eleven
of this chapter. Training must be provided by a physician or other duly
authorized licensed health care professional in a competent manner and
must be completed in a form and manner prescribed by the commissioner in
regulation.
 (b) For the purposes of this subdivision, the term "epinephrine
device" shall have the same meaning as set forth in paragraph (b) of
subdivision one of section three thousand-c of the public health law.
 2. A school district, board of cooperative educational services,
nonpublic schools and/or their agents or employees shall incur no legal
or financial liability as a result of any harm or injury sustained by a
pupil or other person caused by reasonable and good faith compliance
with this section.
 § 921-a. On-site epinephrine device. 1. School districts, boards of
cooperative educational services, county vocational education and
extension boards, charter schools, and non-public elementary and
secondary schools in this state may provide and maintain on-site in each
instructional school facility epinephrine devices in quantities and
types deemed by the commissioner, in consultation with the commissioner
of health, to be adequate to ensure ready and appropriate access for use
during emergencies to any student or staff having anaphylactic symptoms
whether or not there is a previous history of severe allergic reaction.
 2. School districts, boards of cooperative educational services,
county vocational education and extension boards, charter schools, and
non-public elementary and secondary schools in this state, any person
employed by any such entity, or employed by a contractor of such an
entity while performing services for the entity may administer
epinephrine devices in the event of an emergency pursuant to the
requirements of section three thousand-c of the public health law.
 3. School districts, boards of cooperative educational services,
county vocational education and extension boards, charter schools, and
non-public elementary and secondary schools in this state that are
authorized to provide and maintain epinephrine devices on-site pursuant
to this section shall provide all teachers with written informational
material on the use of an epinephrine device that has been created and
approved by the commissioner of health.
 4. For the purposes of this section, the term "epinephrine device"
shall have the same meaning as set forth in paragraph (b) of subdivision
one of section three thousand-c of the public health law.
 § 922. Opioid overdose prevention. 1. School districts, public
libraries, boards of cooperative educational services, county vocational
education and extension boards, charter schools, and non-public
elementary and secondary schools in this state may provide and maintain
on-site in each instructional school facility or library, opioid
antagonists, as defined in section three thousand three hundred nine of
the public health law, in quantities and types deemed by the
commissioner, in consultation with the commissioner of health, to be
adequate to ensure ready and appropriate access for use during
emergencies to any student, individual on library premises or staff
suspected of having opioid overdose whether or not there is a previous
history of opioid abuse.
 2. School districts, public libraries, boards of cooperative
educational services, county vocational education and extension boards,
charter schools, and non-public elementary and secondary schools in this
state may elect to participate as an opioid antagonist recipient and any
person employed by any such entity that has elected to participate may
administer an opioid antagonist in the event of an emergency, provided
that such person shall have been trained by a program approved under
section three thousand three hundred nine of the public health law. Any
school district, public library, board of cooperative educational
services, county vocational education and extension board, charter
school, and non-public elementary and secondary school that has
employees trained in accordance with this section shall comply with the
requirements of section three thousand three hundred nine of the public
health law including, but not limited to, appropriate clinical
oversight, record keeping and reporting. No person shall be required to
participate in the program and any participation by an individual shall
be voluntary.
 § 923. Sudden cardiac arrest. a. The commissioner shall review the
information developed by the commissioner of health required by
subdivision thirty-one of section two hundred six of the public health
law to assist in the education and awareness of the signs and symptoms
of pending or increased risk of sudden cardiac arrest. Such information
shall be posted on the department's website. In addition, each school
shall be required to include such information developed by the
department of health, in conjunction with the department, in any
permission form or parent or person in parental relation consent form or
similar document that may be required for a student's participation in
interscholastic athletics and shall also include such information, or
reference how to obtain such information from the department and the
department of health's websites, on the school's website, if one exists.
 b. The commissioner shall promulgate rules and regulations requiring
that any student displaying signs or symptoms of pending or increased
risk of sudden cardiac arrest shall be immediately removed from athletic
activities and shall not resume athletic activity until he or she has
been evaluated by and received written and signed authorization from a
licensed physician. Such authorization shall be kept on file in the
pupil's permanent health record.
 § 924. Ingredient and nutritional information requirements. a. All
contracts entered into for the two thousand twenty-three--two thousand
twenty-four school year, and thereafter, to provide, maintain and
operate cafeteria or restaurant service by a private food service
management company shall include provisions requiring such private food
service management company to disclose ingredients lists and nutritional
information to school districts for all meals that such company
provides. The private food service management company shall be required
to consolidate nutritional information for any meal that is comprised of
separate individual ingredients. School districts and boards of
cooperative educational services shall have no responsibility to provide
nutritional information except pursuant to subdivision b of this
section.
 b. All ingredients lists and nutritional information provided to
school districts shall be published and publicly shared on such school
district's website.
 * § 926. Water safety information. 1. At the beginning of the two
thousand twenty-six--two thousand twenty-seven school year, each school
district shall provide, to the parent or guardian of each student
enrolled in such school district, information on drowning prevention,
water safety, and safe and healthy swimming. Each school year thereafter
such information shall be provided to the parent or guardian of a
student upon enrollment in the school district. If the student is
eighteen years of age or older, such information shall be provided to
the student. Such information may be provided electronically or in paper
form. Translation of such information into any of the twelve most common
non-English languages spoken by limited-English proficient individuals
in the state, based on the data in the most recent American community
survey published by the United States census bureau, shall be provided
upon request by a parent or guardian.
 2. The commissioner of health shall produce and update, as deemed
necessary, such information in consultation with the commissioner. The
commissioner shall provide such information to each school district.
Each school district shall publish such information on its website in a
clearly visible and accessible location.
 * NB Effective July 1, 2026
 ARTICLE 21
 VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION
Section 1001. Short title.
 1002. Definitions.
 1003. Application for vocational rehabilitation.
 1004. Powers and duties of the education department.
 1004-a. Sheltered workshops for individuals with developmental
 disabilities, mental illness or a severe physical
 handicap.
 1004-b. Integrated employment opportunities for individuals with
 severe disabilities.
 1005. Gifts and donations.
 1006. Acceptance of law of the United States.
 1007. Vocational rehabilitation records.
 1008. Use of appropriations.
 1009. Powers and duties of department of social services
 relating to vocational rehabilitation of blind
 persons.
 § 1001. Short title. This article shall be known and may be cited as
"The Vocational Rehabilitation Law."
 § 1002. Definitions. As used in this article:
 1. "Handicapped person" means any person who in the judgment of the
department is under a physical or mental disability which constitutes a
substantial handicap to employment but which is of such a nature that
vocational rehabilitation services may reasonably be expected to render
him fit to engage in gainful employment, and also any person under a
physical or mental disability which constitutes a substantial handicap
to employment and for whom vocational rehabilitation services are
necessary to ascertain his rehabilitation potential.
 2. "Person who is under a physical or mental disability" means an
individual who has a physical or mental condition which in the judgment
of the department limits, contributes to limiting, or, if not corrected,
will result in limiting his activities or functioning.
 3. "Substantial handicap to employment" means that a physical or
mental disability (in the light of attendant medical, psychological,
vocational, educational, cultural, social or environmental factors)
impedes an individual's occupational performance, by preventing his
obtaining, retaining, or preparing for a gainful occupation consistent
with his capacities and abilities.
 4. "Gainful occupation" includes any employment for which a
compensation is paid either in goods and/or in services; practice of a
profession; self-employment; homemaking, farm or family work (including
work for which payment is in kind rather than in cash); sheltered
employment; and home industries or other gainful homebound work.
 5. "Vocational rehabilitation services" means:
 a. Any goods and services necessary to render a handicapped person fit
to engage in a gainful occupation and includes:
 (1.) Evaluation, including diagnostic and related services;
 (2.) Counseling and Guidance;
 (3.) Training;
 (4.) Placement;
 (5.) Reader service where necessary for individuals who are visually
handicapped and interpreter services in the case of individuals who are
deaf;
 (6.) Attendants and amanuenses where required;
 (7.) Occupational and business licenses;
 (8.) Books, training supplies and fees;
 (9.) Transportation;
 (10.) Physical restoration services;
 (11.) Maintenance payments to cover the handicapped person's expenses
essential to achievement of his vocational rehabilitation objective;
 (12.) Tools, equipment, initial stocks and supplies;
 (13.) Training allowances which may be paid to individuals receiving
training and related services in public and other non-profit workshops
and rehabilitation facilities to the extent that funds may be made
available for this purpose;
 (14.) Other goods and services, not enumerated in this subdivision,
necessary to render a handicapped person fit to engage in a gainful
occupation.
 b. The establishment of public and other nonprofit rehabilitation
facilities for handicapped persons; the establishment of public and
other nonprofit workshops for the severely handicapped; and the staffing
of public and other nonprofit workshops for the severely handicapped so
that workshops may be established, extended, improved or continued.
 6. "Physical restoration services" mean those medical and medically
related services which are necessary to correct or substantially modify
within a reasonable period of time a physical or mental condition which
is stable or slowly progressive and which constitutes a substantial
handicap to employment, and includes (but is not limited to):
 a. corrective surgery or therapeutic treatment;
 b. necessary hospitalization in connection with surgery or treatment
specified in (a);
 c. prosthetic devices essential to obtaining or retaining employment;
and
 d. other necessary medical or medically related services.
 7. "Rehabilitation facility" means a facility, operated for the
principal purpose of assisting in the rehabilitation of handicapped
persons and
 a. provides one or more than one of the following types of services:
 1. prevocational or conditioning therapy;
 2. adjustment training;
 3. testing, fitting or training in the use of prosthetic devices;
 4. physical or occupational therapy;
 5. evaluation, treatment or control of special disabilities; or
 b. through which is provided an integrated program of medical,
psychological, social and vocational evaluation and services under
appropriate professional supervision, provided that the major portion of
such evaluation and services is furnished within the facility, and that
all medical and related health services are prescribed by and are under
the supervision of persons licensed to practice medicine in the state.
 8. "Workshop" means a place where any manufacture or handiwork is
carried on and which is operated for the principle purpose of providing
gainful employment to severely handicapped persons (a) as an interim
step in the rehabilitation process for those who cannot be absorbed in
the competitive labor market; or (b) during such time as employment
opportunities for them in the competitive labor market do not exist.
 9. "Establishment of a workshop" or "rehabilitation facility" means:
 a. In the case of a workshop, the expansion, remodeling, or alteration
of existing buildings, necessary to adapt such buildings to workshop
purposes or to increase the employment opportunities in workshops, and
the acquisition of initial equipment necessary for new workshops or to
increase the employment opportunities in workshops; and
 b. In the case of a rehabilitation facility, the expansion,
remodeling, or alteration of existing buildings, and initial equipment
of such buildings, necessary to adapt such buildings to rehabilitation
facility purposes or to increase their effectiveness for such purposes
and initial staffing thereof for a period not exceeding one year.
 10. With respect to the construction of workshops and rehabilitation
facilities, the following definitions shall apply:
 a. "Construction" includes construction of new buildings, acquisition
of existing buildings, and expansion, remodeling, alteration, and
renovation of existing buildings, and initial equipment of such new,
newly acquired, expanded, remodeled, altered or renovated buildings;
 b. The "cost" of construction may include the cost of architects' fees
and acquisition of land in connection with construction, but does not
include the cost of offsite improvements.
 c. A "project for construction of a workshop" may include provisions
for residential accommodations to be used by and in conjunction with the
rehabilitation of categories of handicapped individuals as may be
hereafter designated.
 11. "Supported employment" means paid competitive work performed by
individuals with severe disabilities who require intensive support
services to obtain such employment and extended support to sustain such
employment, and which is performed in an integrated setting which
provides regular interactions with individuals who do not have
disabilities, other than paid caregivers.
 12. "Supported employment services" means support services needed by
individuals with severe disabilities to obtain and sustain supported
employment. Such term shall also include transitional employment
services for individuals with severe and persistent mental illness, as
defined by the commissioner in consultation with the commissioner of the
office of mental health.
 13. "Paid competitive work", as used in the definition of supported
employment pursuant to subdivision eleven of this section means work
that is performed on a full-time or part-time basis, with a minimum
expectation of averaging at least twenty hours per week as an employment
goal, except that such requirement may be waived for good cause by the
commissioner, and for which an individual is compensated in accordance
with the federal fair labor standards act and the state department of
labor wage and hour regulations.
 14. "Individuals with severe disabilities" means persons for whom
competitive employment has either not traditionally occurred or has been
interrupted or intermittent as a result of having a permanent and
substantially disabling physical, sensory, or mental condition.
 § 1003. Application for vocational rehabilitation. a. Any handicapped
person available for vocational rehabilitation services may apply to the
department for advice and assistance regarding his vocational
rehabilitation.
 b. The state may, to the extent that funds are made available pursuant
to the federal social security act, furnish vocational rehabilitation
services to applicants for and beneficiaries of disability benefits
under the social security act as provided in the act and any rules or
regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
 § 1004. Powers and duties of the education department.
 The education department shall have the responsibility of and is
hereby authorized:
 1. To adopt and promulgate such rules and regulations and take such
action as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this article.
 2. To provide vocational rehabilitation services directly or through
public or private instrumentalities for handicapped persons (excepting
blind persons and, with respect to physical restoration services, those
persons who are entitled to such services pursuant to the workers'
compensation law and the volunteer firefighters' benefit law) whose
vocational rehabilitation the department determines after full
investigation may be satisfactorily achieved. In the course of its
investigation of an individual applicant's vocational rehabilitation
potential the department may conduct an extended evaluation program
including utilization of such vocational rehabilitation services as it
deems necessary.
 3. To enter into reciprocal agreements with other states to provide
for the vocational rehabilitation of handicapped persons.
 4. To engage in and contract for the making of studies,
investigations, demonstrations, research and reports, and the provision
of training and instruction (including the establishment and maintenance
of fellowships and traineeships with such stipends and allowances as may
be deemed necessary) the assessment of existing facilities and services
and the evaluation of present and future requirements, including plans
for the purposes enumerated above in matters relating to vocational
rehabilitation.
 5. To arrange and pay part of the cost of projects leading to the
construction of workshops and rehabilitation facilities and the
extension and improvement or the establishment of vocational
rehabilitation services for handicapped persons, including the
furnishing of equipment or the furnishing of funds for the purchase of
equipment and supplies, personnel and other necessary and proper
expenses in the construction, establishment, improvement, continuation
or extension of rehabilitation facilities and workshops operated by
public or nonprofit organizations and agencies.
 6. To cooperate in the operation of this article with the state agency
or agencies administering the state's public assistance program,
workmen's compensation program, the departments of health, mental
hygiene, the federal agencies charged with the administration of the
federal social security act and the federal fair labor standards act or
other appropriate federal legislation and with other public and private
agencies providing services related to vocational rehabilitation, and
with the state system of public employment offices in the state, making
maximum feasible utilization of the job placement and employment
counseling services and other services and facilities of such offices,
and to issue such certifications as are required or indicated thereby.
 7. Within its discretion, to consider financial need of handicapped
individuals for the purposes of determining the extent of their
respective participation in the costs of vocational rehabilitation
services and to promulgate rules and regulations establishing financial
need as a condition to the availability of any of the services specified
in paragraph a of subdivision five of section one thousand two of this
chapter except that no economic need test will be applied as a condition
for furnishing the following vocational rehabilitation services: (a)
evaluation, including diagnostic and related services; (b) counseling
and guidance; and (c) placement.
 8. To supervise and monitor service centers for independent living
pursuant to article twenty-three-A of this chapter.
 9. To contract with not-for-profit organizations for the provision of
supported employment services, as defined in subdivision twelve of
section ten hundred two of this article, to individuals having severe
disabilities defined in subdivision fourteen of section one thousand two
of this article in integrated work settings. The commissioner shall
ensure that funds provided pursuant to this subdivision are not used for
the provision of services that are the responsibility of other state
agencies pursuant to the plan developed pursuant to subdivision two of
section one thousand four-b of this article. Services shall be provided
at a cost not to exceed that which is necessary and reasonable, and
shall include short-term intensive and extended support mechanisms
within an integrated work setting. The commissioner shall require
service providers to develop appropriate policies and procedures for
directing their supported employment programs, and to provide such
reports as the commissioner deems to be appropriate.
 § 1004-a. Sheltered workshops for individuals with developmental
disabilities, mental illness or a severe physical handicap. 1.
Declaration of purpose. The conditions associated with a developmental
disability, mental illness and severe physical handicap are such that
many young people, after laborious training in the schools and
otherwise, reach the point in their lives where they can and should,
under proper and continued guidance, engage in sheltered employment. The
effects of such employment are salutary in many ways. The affected
individual is helped to become a contributing member of society. The
state is saved the expense of his or her institutionalization in already
overcrowded state schools and facilities. The family retains closer
contact with him or her and is spared the anxieties naturally attaching
to separation and institutionalization. All of these factors have also
been shown to reflect tangible benefit upon individuals with
developmental disabilities, mental illness or a severe physical handicap
in improving his or her overall condition. The purpose of this measure
is to specifically encourage the development, improvement and expansion
of such sheltered employment facilities by non-profit agencies, so that
the salutary effects mentioned can be expediently accomplished.
 2. Special provisions relating to individuals with a developmental
disabilities, mental illness or a severe physical handicap in extended
sheltered employment in workshops. Notwithstanding any other provision
of this article, when it shall appear to the satisfaction of the
department that an individual with a developmental disability, mental
illness or a severe physical handicap over the chronological age of
seventeen years can reasonably be expected to benefit from, or in his or
her best interests reasonably requires extended sheltered employment in
a workshop as defined in subdivision eight of section ten hundred two of
this article, furnished by an approved non-profit organization, the
department is authorized to contract with such organization for the
furnishing of such sheltered employment to such individual with a
developmental disability, mental illness or a severe physical handicap;
and the department is further authorized to expend for such purpose a
sum or sums not less than one thousand five hundred dollars per annum
for each such individual with a developmental disability, mental illness
or a severe physical handicap, for or towards the cost of providing such
sheltered employment for each such individual with a developmental
disability, mental illness or a severe physical handicap.
 The department shall pay at least quarterly during the state fiscal
year such sums as are authorized to such organizations for such
sheltered employment immediately upon the completion of evaluation and
personal adjustment services under the sponsorship of the department.
 3. The department shall maintain a register of such nonprofit
organizations which, after inspection of the facilities for sheltered
employment provided by them, it deems qualified to meet the needs of
such individuals with developmental disabilities, mental illness or a
severe physical handicap. Such inspection shall also determine the
eligibility of such organization to receive the funds hereinbefore
specified.
 4. The department is authorized to contract with such nonprofit
organizations for the provision of vocational rehabilitation services
which lead to sheltered employment.
 5. The department shall assure that individuals in long-term sheltered
employment operated by not-for-profit agencies are periodically reviewed
to determine the feasibility of their employment, or training for
employment, in integrated work settings and that maximum efforts toward
such employment occur, whenever it is determined to be feasible.
 6. The commissioner is authorized to promulgate such reasonable rules
and regulations as he may deem necessary or proper to carry out the
provisions of this section.
 § 1004-b. Integrated employment opportunities for individuals with
severe disabilities. 1. The department shall have the responsibility to
stimulate the development of programs intended to furnish opportunities
for integrated employment including but not limited to, supported
employment and paid competitive work, to individuals with severe
disabilities, and to coordinate with state agencies responsible for
furnishing necessary services to individuals with severe disabilities
related to such opportunities.
 2. State integrated employment implementation plan. a. The
commissioner, in consultation with and with the agreement of the
commissioners of mental health, the office for people with developmental
disabilities and social services shall develop a state interagency plan
for the implementation of integrated employment opportunities for
individuals with severe disabilities, including supported employment.
Such plan shall be designed so as to ensure that the state's integrated
employment efforts, including the supported employment program, are
planned, developed and implemented comprehensively, with roles and
responsibilities of the respective agencies well-defined. Such plan
shall reflect the department's primary responsibility for the
development of integrated employment opportunities for individuals with
severe disabilities, including short-term and intensive supported
employment services, as well as appropriate responsibilities for long
term extended support services. Such plan shall specify the role and
responsibilities of each such agency in assuring that:
 (i) services are provided fully and equitably;
 (ii) an array of services is established and appropriate procedures
are developed to allow persons with severe disabilities timely access to
appropriate support services;
 (iii) compatible definitions, program evaluation and accounting
standards and reporting documents are implemented;
 (iv) services and eligibility requirements are integrated and
coordinated between agencies, including the manner in which appropriate
responsibilities for funding and administering both short-term intensive
and long-term extended support services for supported employment are to
be implemented;
 (v) funding sources are clearly defined and amounts are adequate to
support persons with short-term intensive and long-term extended support
needs;
 (vi) all necessary steps are taken to maximize the success and cost
effectiveness of such programs and the potential of persons served by
such programs;
 (vii) continuity of support services is not broken for individuals
placed in an integrated employment setting in the event such placement
is interrupted; and
 (viii) eligibility standards are consistent regarding the placement of
individuals in integrated work settings, including supported employment
and other competitive work placements.
 b. In addition, the plan shall address the manner in which continued
support for current programs will be maintained; and establishment
grants will be provided. Such establishment grants shall include, but
not be limited to, special projects which enhance the provision of
supported employment and new integrated employment program initiatives
which would target individuals who have severe disabilities who have
aged-out or have otherwise exited the school system. In addition, such
grants may be used to provide additional resources to existing programs
for the purposes of increasing the numbers of persons served who have
been determined by the commissioner to have been unserved or
underserved. Such grants may also be used for new programs for these
populations.
 c. The commissioner, in consultation with the commissioners of the
office of mental health, the office for people with developmental
disabilities and the department of social services, shall develop an
audit protocol to verify the actual costs of providing such programs.
 3. Reporting. a. It shall be the primary responsibility of the
commissioner to provide annual reports on the progress of achieving the
components of the implementation plan as contained in subdivision two of
this section. In addition, such reports shall include:
 (i) a current description of individuals served, and services and
technical assistance provided;
 (ii) employment status of persons transitioned from sheltered
workshops, special education programs, day treatment centers, and day
services programs into integrated employment programs, including
supported employment programs and other competitive work placements;
 (iii) incidence of persons in reverse transition between integrated
employment programs, including supported employment programs and paid
competitive work, and sheltered workshops, day treatment programs and
day services programs; and
 (iv) number of persons for whom employment in an integrated work
setting has been requested and who are waiting for placement.
 The commissioners of the office of mental health, the office for
people with developmental disabilities, and the department of social
services shall provide any information required to assist the
commissioner in making such report.
 b. The implementation plan shall be transmitted to the state's board
of regents, the governor, the temporary president of the senate, the
speaker of the assembly and the senate committee on finance, the
assembly committee on ways and means, the senate committee on education
and the assembly committee on education on or before October first,
nineteen hundred ninety-three with a report on the status of the
implementation plan transmitted on or before October first of each
succeeding year.
 § 1005. Gifts and donations. The department is authorized to receive,
accept and use gifts and donations for the purpose of this article which
may be offered, conditionally or unconditionally, notwithstanding
section eleven of the state finance law or any other provision of law.
All money received as gifts or donations shall be paid to the
commissioner of taxation and finance, who together with the state
comptroller is hereby constituted and appointed the joint custodian
thereof and shall constitute a special fund to be used under the
direction of the department for the purpose of this article. A full
report of all such gifts and donations, together with the names of the
donors, the amounts contributed by each and all disbursements therefrom
shall be submitted annually to the legislature as part of the report of
the department.
 § 1006. Acceptance of law of the United States. The state of New
York, through its legislative authority:
 1. Accepts the provisions of any law of the United States making
appropriation to be apportioned among the states for vocational
rehabilitation of disabled persons, and accepts the provisions of any
law of the United States making appropriation for apportionment or
grants among the states for services for disabled persons.
 2. Empowers and directs the board of regents of the university, hereby
designated the New York state board for vocational education, to
cooperate with such agency as the federal government shall designate to
carry out the purposes of such law.
 3. Appoints the commissioner of taxation and finance and the state
comptroller as joint custodians of all money given to the state by the
United States under the authority of such law, and such money shall be
paid out in the manner provided by such act for the purposes therein
specified.
 § 1007. Vocational rehabilitation records. 1. It shall be unlawful,
except for purposes directly connected with the administration of the
vocational rehabilitation program, for any person or persons to solicit,
disclose, receive, or make use of, or authorize, knowingly permit,
participate in, or acquiesce in the use of any list of, or names of, or
any information concerning, persons applying for or receiving vocational
rehabilitation, directly or indirectly derived from the record, papers,
files, communications of the state or subdivisions or agencies thereof,
or acquired in the course of the performance of official duties without
the consent of each such applicant or recipient. Such records, papers,
files and communications shall be regarded as confidential information
and privileged within the meaning of section forty-five hundred four of
the civil practice law and rules.
 2. Wage reporting information obtained by the office of vocational and
educational services for individuals with disabilities of the department
from the state department of taxation and finance pursuant to the tax
law shall be considered confidential and shall not be disclosed to
persons or agencies other than those considered entitled to such
information when such disclosure is necessary for the proper
administration of the department's vocational rehabilitation program.
 § 1008. Use of appropriations. Any appropriation made to carry out the
provisions of this article, in addition to any moneys allotted to the
state for a similar purpose by the government of the United States may
be used for the payment of salaries, travel, maintenance and operation,
and other administrative expenses including the purchase of necessary
office furniture, supplies, et cetera, the necessary costs for persons
being evaluated for or undergoing vocational rehabilitation including
tuition, fees, books and other training supplies, maintenance and
traveling expenses, occupational examinations and license fees, medical,
psychiatric and psychological examinations and other diagnostic and
related services, tools and equipment, initial stocks and supplies,
surgical fees, hospitalization, therapeutic treatment and prosthetic
appliances, the establishment and construction of public and other
nonprofit rehabilitation facilities to provide services for handicapped
individuals and the establishment and construction of public and other
nonprofit workshops for the severely handicapped, including the
furnishing of equipment or the providing of grants of funds to such
public and other nonprofit rehabilitation facilities and workshops to be
utilized for the acquisition of equipment, supplies, personnel and other
necessary and proper items to be utilized in such facilities.
 § 1009. Powers and duties of department of social services relating to
vocational rehabilitation of blind persons. 1. The board of social
services, the department of social services and the New York state
commission for the visually handicapped shall retain, and shall continue
to exercise, all the powers and duties relating to blind persons
conferred on them by the provisions of any other law.
 2. The department of social services is empowered to perform any and
all acts that may be required to be performed by it by any law of the
United States in order to obtain funds through the New York state board
for vocational education, or otherwise, from any federal department or
agency, for use in the vocational rehabilitation of blind persons; such
department is further empowered to use and expend such funds for the
purpose herein mentioned in accordance with the provisions of any law of
the United States making such funds available to the state.
 3. (a) Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this article,
funds made available to the state by the United States to be used for
vocational rehabilitation of blind persons shall be accepted and used by
the state for such purposes provided the department of social services
shall determine to accept and to use the same in accordance with the
provisions of any law of the United States.
 (b) Provided the federal government shall make funds available, the
department of social services and its commission for the visually
handicapped are empowered to accept gifts for the extension and
improvement of non-profit facilities and workshops for the training and
rehabilitation of blind persons, and to match the value of such gifts
made to such department or commission for such purposes by or on behalf
of such non-profit facilities or workshops. The department may utilize
such federal funds and gifts for such purposes and may make appropriate
agreements therefor with suitable non-profit agencies serving the blind.
 ARTICLE 23
 CAREER EDUCATION IN COUNTIES
 PART I
 VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND EXTENSION BOARDS
Section 1101. Establishment of county vocational education and extension
 boards.
 1102. Powers and duties of vocational education and extension
 boards.
 1103. Courses of study and qualifications of teachers.
 1104. State aid.
 1105. Exemption of certain districts.
 1106. Transportation.
 1107. County bonds for land and buildings.
 PART II
 COUNTY COMMISSION FOR SPECIAL EDUCATION IN WESTCHESTER COUNTY
Section 1110. Establishment of a special education district.
 1111. Powers and duties of county commission for special
 education.
 1112. Courses of study and qualifications of teachers.
 1113. State aid.
 1114. Appropriations by board of supervisors.
 1115. Indebtedness of special education district.
 1116. County treasurer to act as treasurer of the county
 commission for special education.
 PART I
 VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND EXTENSION BOARDS
 § 1101. Establishment of county vocational education and extension
boards.
 1. The board of supervisors or other governing elective body of any
county may adopt a resolution by a majority vote of the members of the
board establishing a county vocational education and extension board for
the purpose of giving instruction in agriculture and home economics and
such other special subjects as may be approved by the commissioner of
education.
 2. Upon the adoption of the resolution as provided in the preceding
subdivision the board of supervisors or other governing elective body
shall appoint a board which shall be known as "The Vocational Education
and Extension Board of the County of .................... " (insert here
the name of the county). Such board shall consist of nine members who
shall serve for a period of nine years each except that members first
appointed shall be appointed for such terms that the term of one member
will expire each year, and their successors shall thereafter each be
appointed for a full term of nine years respectively. At least three
members of this board shall be appointed upon recommendations made by
the farm and home bureau associations of the county and at least three
members upon recommendations made by the district superintendents of the
county. Vacancies occurring in such office shall be filled by the board
of supervisors or other governing elective body for the unexpired term.
 3. The fiscal year of the vocational education and extension board of
each county shall begin on July first and end on June thirtieth.
 4. A county vocational education and extension board established
pursuant to this section is hereby created a body corporate. All
property which is now vested in, or shall hereafter be transferred to, a
county vocational education and extension board shall be held by it as a
corporation.
 § 1102. Powers and duties of vocational education and extension
boards. A vocational education and extension board shall, subject to
the provisions of part one of this article, have the following powers
and duties:
 1. It may make or cause to be made a survey to determine the career
education and extension needs of the county.
 2. It may make and establish and from time to time alter and amend
rules and regulations for the transaction of its business and for the
administration of the work under its charge.
 3. It shall have full power and authority to employ supervisors and
teachers and all other persons necessary to carry on career education
and extension work and to determine the salaries to be paid. Members of
the teaching and supervisory staff shall be appointed by a majority vote
of the vocational education and extension board upon recommendation of
the director for a probationary period not to exceed three years except
that no recommendation shall require for the appointment of a director
of career education. Services of members of the teaching and
supervisory staff so employed may be discontinued at any time during the
probationary period, upon the recommendation of the director, by
majority action of such board. On or before the expiration of the
probationary period such board, upon recommendation of the director, may
appoint on tenure those persons who have been found competent, efficient
and satisfactory. Such persons shall hold their respective positions
during good behavior and competent and efficient service and shall not
be removed except for any of the following causes, after a hearing, as
provided by section three thousand twenty-a of this chapter: (a)
insubordination, immoral character or conduct unbecoming a teacher; (b)
inefficiency, incompetency, physical or mental disability or neglect of
duty.
 4. It shall make an annual report in writing to the regents of The
University of the State of New York and to the board of supervisors or
other governing elective body on or before the first day of October. It
shall also make such other reports as may be required by the
commissioner of education or by the board of supervisors or other
governing elective body.
 5. It may appoint any advisory committees deemed necessary.
 6. It shall cooperate with existing public agencies in conducting
career education and extension work in the county.
 7. It shall have such other powers and shall perform such other duties
as may be necessary to carry into effect the purposes of part one of
this article.
 8. It may request the board of supervisors to contribute the use of or
lease land, buildings and other facilities to it, and to contribute to
the cost of operating and maintaining the program of the county
vocational education and extension board, and a board of supervisors
shall have power to make appropriations toward such cost and to
contribute the use of or lease land, buildings, and other facilities to
it.
 9. It shall appoint one of its members as president, one of its
members or another qualified school district voter in the county as
clerk and another qualified school district voter in the county as
treasurer. All moneys accruing or appropriated to the board shall be
paid to the treasurer of the board. The clerk and treasurer may be paid
such compensation as may be fixed by the board. The treasurer shall
furnish a surety bond of a surety company authorized to do business in
the state of New York. The form and amount of such bond shall be
approved by the board and the cost thereof shall be a charge against the
funds of said board.
 10. It shall designate a bank or banks for the deposit of money. Such
designation shall be made of a bank within the county unless no bank
exists in the county. It shall notify the treasurer of all bank
designations and require him to deposit all money in such designated
banks. Accruing funds, balances, resources and assets shall become the
property of any succeeding agency or, in the event of termination of the
program of shared services, such accruing funds, balances, resources and
assets shall be prorated among the districts having been served during
the last year of operation and the county in proportion to the amount
which each paid to the vocational education and extension board.
 11. All accounting procedures shall be in accordance with regulations
that apply to union free school districts.
 12. It shall have the authority to make contracts with the school
authorities of school districts within the county, or without the county
where such contract will result in no additional expense being incurred
by such county, for services to be rendered by it to such school
districts, and such school authorities shall have the authority to enter
into such contracts. Payments shall be made by the school districts at
least as often as quarterly. Any amount so paid to the board by a school
district shall not be included in computing the apportionment of state
aid to such district.
 13. It may transport pupils under twenty-one years of age to and from
schools and classes maintained by such vocational education and
extension board for instruction in career education. In providing such
transportation, the board may transport pupils residing outside the
county who are attending such schools and classes maintained by such
board pursuant to subdivision twelve of this section.
 14. It may purchase and maintain a motor vehicle or vehicles to be
used for the transportation of school children under twenty-one years of
age to schools and classes maintained by the county vocational education
and extension board. Such motor vehicle or vehicles may be leased to a
school district when not needed for such transportation. When such
motor vehicle shall be leased as provided in this subdivision, public
liability and property damage insurance, fire insurance and compensation
insurance of drivers shall be provided in the amount stated in section
thirty-six hundred twenty-seven of this chapter and collision insurance
shall be provided in the amount of value of the vehicle to protect the
lessor. No part of the cost and expenses resulting from operation,
maintenance and repair of such vehicles during the leasing thereof shall
be included in determining the amount of any form of state aid received
by such county vocational education and extension board.
 15. It may lease land, buildings, and other facilities as may be
necessary to carry into effect the purposes of part one of this article.
 § 1103. Courses of study and qualifications of teachers. The courses
of instruction to accomplish the purposes of part one of this article
are to be approved by the commissioner of education. Such courses when
conducted in elementary or secondary schools are to be approved by the
superintendent in whose jurisdiction such instruction is given. The
qualifications of the teachers, directors, assistants and supervisors
employed by a vocational education and extension board must conform to
the regulations of the regents of the university and the commissioner of
education.
 § 1104. State aid. 1. The commissioner of education in the annual
apportionment of public moneys shall apportion therefrom to each county
maintaining approved vocational education and extension work, a quota
amounting to one-half of the salary paid each teacher, director,
assistant, and supervisor, but not to exceed ten thousand five hundred
dollars on account of the employment of such teacher, director,
assistant or supervisor.
 2. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision one of this section
or chapters fifty-three and three hundred ninety-one of the laws of
nineteen hundred eighty-nine or any other provision of law to the
contrary, aid payable to county vocational education and extension
boards in the spring of nineteen hundred ninety shall be reduced by an
amount equal to the amount that would have been paid pursuant to section
five hundred twenty-one of this chapter to the New York state teachers'
retirement system on behalf of such board.
 § 1105. Exemption of certain districts. Upon the recommendation of
the county vocational education and extension board, the board of
supervisors or other governing elective body of any county may exempt
any city or union free school district from the raising of moneys for
the purpose of paying the cost of operating and maintaining the program
of the county vocational education and extension board.
 § 1106. Transportation. 1. In a county which has a vocational
education and extension board which does not furnish transportation to
pupils pursuant to subdivision thirteen of section eleven hundred two of
this chapter the cost of the transportation of pupils under twenty-one
years of age to schools and classes maintained by such county vocational
education and extension board shall be a charge upon the district in
which such pupils reside, or are attending as non-resident pupils. Such
transportation shall be considered as other transportation of school
pupils in accordance with the provisions of part two of article
seventy-three of the education law and the district of residence, or the
district in which non-resident pupils are attending, shall be entitled
to a transportation quota.
 2. In a county which has a vocational education and extension board
which furnishes transportation to pupils pursuant to subdivision
thirteen of section eleven hundred two of this chapter, such vocational
education and extension board shall receive a transportation quota which
shall be one-half of the cost of the transportation of pupils under
twenty-one years of age to schools and classes maintained by such
vocational education and extension board.
 § 1107. County bonds for land and buildings. A county vocational
education and extension board established by a board of supervisors
pursuant to the provisions of part one of this article shall be deemed
to be a department of the county for the purposes of this section, and
the board of supervisors of such county may acquire land, construct
buildings and other facilities for the use of the vocational education
and extension board of the county and shall have the power to expend
moneys for and make appropriations to pay the cost thereof and to
finance the cost thereof pursuant to the local finance law.
 PART II
 COUNTY COMMISSION FOR SPECIAL EDUCATION IN WESTCHESTER COUNTY
 § 1110. Establishment of a special education district.
 1. The board of supervisors or other governing elective body of
Westchester county shall have power to adopt a resolution by a majority
vote of the members of such board to establish within the county a
special education district which shall include all the territory within
the county. A city school district in such county having a population of
fifty thousand or more inhabitants shall be excluded from such special
education district provided the board of education of such city shall
adopt a resolution requesting that such city school district be so
excluded and file such resolution with the board of supervisors or other
governing elective body within sixty days after the establishment of
such special education district. With the approval of the county
commission for special education to be appointed as hereinafter
provided, a city school district so excluded may later become a part of
such special education district upon the written application by the
board of education of such city school district.
 2. Upon the establishment of such special education district the board
of supervisors or other governing elective body shall appoint a board
which shall be known as the county commission for special education.
Such commission shall consist of five members who shall serve for a
period of five years each, except that members first appointed shall be
appointed for such terms that the term of one member will expire each
year, and their successors shall thereafter each be appointed for a full
term of five years, respectively. Vacancies occurring in such office
shall be filled by the board of supervisors or other governing elective
body for the unexpired term.
 3. Members of such commission shall serve without compensation except
their actual and necessary travelling expenses incurred in the
performance of their official duties.
 § 1111. Powers and duties of county commission for special education.
The county commission for special education shall have power:
 1. To make or cause to be made a survey to determine the special
educational needs of the district.
 2. To establish schools or classes for physically handicapped children
and to provide other necessary educational services, including
transportation and home teaching.
 3. To establish and maintain vocational schools and classes for the
purpose of providing instruction in agricultural, industrial,
commercial, technical and home making subjects.
 4. To provide vocational and educational guidance service.
 5. To establish such other special educational services as may meet
the approval of the commissioner of education.
 6. To employ a director of special education, who shall be the
executive officer and secretary of the commission, and upon the
recommendation of such director to employ directors, supervisors and
teachers and all other persons necessary to carry on such special
education projects as it may establish, and to determine the salaries to
be paid.
 7. To purchase, lease, rent, improve or sell land, and build, repair,
improve, lease, rent, buy and sell buildings.
 8. To acquire real property by condemnation for the purposes of such
special education district. Such condemnation proceedings shall be
instituted and conducted by such commission in the name of the district,
under the provisions of the statutes relating to the condemnation of
real property.
 9. To purchase all necessary furniture, implements, books, materials,
equipment and supplies.
 10. To make contracts with cities, villages, school districts or other
agencies for carrying out the purposes of part two of this article.
 11. To appoint advisory committees.
 12. To make and establish, and from time to time alter and amend,
rules and regulations for the transaction of its business and for the
administration of the work under its charge.
 13. It shall be the duty of the commission to make an itemized
estimate of the money needed for the ensuing year for the purposes of
part two of this article and file the same with the clerk of the board
of supervisors or other governing elective body at least sixty days
before the annual meeting of such board.
 14. It shall be the duty of the commission to make an annual report in
writing to the regents of The University of the State of New York and to
the board of supervisors or other governing elective body on or before
the first day of October in each year. It shall also be its duty to make
such other reports as may be required by the commissioner of education
and by such board or body.
 15. It shall have such other powers and shall perform such other
duties as may be necessary to carry into effect the purposes of part two
of this article.
 16. It shall not incur liabilities against county funds in excess of
the amounts appropriated by the board of supervisors or other governing
elective body.
 § 1112. Courses of study and qualifications of teachers. The courses
of instruction to accomplish the purposes of part two of this article
are to be approved by the commissioner of education. The qualifications
of the teachers, directors, assistants and supervisors employed by the
county commission for special education must conform to the regulations
of the regents of the university and the commissioner of education.
 § 1113. State aid. The commissioner of education in the annual
apportionment of public moneys shall apportion therefrom to such county
the quotas provided in section eleven hundred four of this chapter.
 § 1114. Appropriations by board of supervisors. The board of
supervisors or other governing elective body may make appropriations and
levy taxes upon all the taxable property included within the boundaries
of the special education district to carry out the purposes of part two
of this article, and such taxes shall be assessed, levied and collected
at the same time and in the same manner as county taxes are assessed,
levied and collected within the boundaries of such special education
district.
 § 1115. Indebtedness of special education district. For the purpose
of giving effect to the provisions of part two of this article the board
of supervisors or other governing elective body of such county may issue
obligations of the county pursuant to the provisions of the local
finance law, which obligations shall be a charge upon the special
education district. Whenever at the time of its enlargement the special
education district shall have an outstanding bonded indebtedness, such
outstanding indebtedness shall become a charge against the enlarged
district.
 § 1116. County treasurer to act as treasurer of the county commission
for special education. All moneys collected from taxes levied in
accordance with the provisions of part two of this article and all
moneys apportioned by the commissioner of education, and any and all
moneys received from any and all sources whatsoever for carrying out the
provisions of part two of this article, shall be paid to the county
treasurer. Such funds shall be disbursed by such county treasurer upon
audit by the special education commission.
 ARTICLE 23-A
 SERVICE CENTERS FOR INDEPENDENT LIVING
Section 1120. Declaration of intent.
 1121. Service centers for independent living; purpose and
 duties.
 1122. Education department; responsibilities.
 1123. Regulations.
 1124. Distribution of funds.
 § 1120. Declaration of intent. Persons with disabilities comprise a
large percentage of New York's total population. The legislature hereby
finds and declares that action is necessary to assist these individuals
to integrate and live more independently in the community. Since their
inception, service centers for independent living have enhanced the
ability of persons with disabilities to pursue an independent and active
lifestyle within their community. In order to achieve this, it is
necessary for the state to provide funding to maintain existing service
centers designed to promote independent living and to encourage the
establishment of new centers. In addition, the office of vocational
rehabilitation should have the responsibility and authority for the
encouragement of the planning, development, funding, evaluation and
monitoring of such service centers.
 § 1121. Service centers for independent living; purpose and duties.
1. A service center for independent living shall be a community based
non-residential program designed to promote independent living for
persons with disabilities.
 (a) Such center shall:
 (i) be a private not-for-profit corporation, pursuant to subdivision
five of paragraph a of section one hundred two of the not-for-profit
corporation law; provided, however, that persons with disabilities
comprise at least fifty-one percent of the membership of the board of
directors;
 (ii) be staffed by persons experienced in assisting persons with
disabilities;
 (iii) provide services designed to meet the needs of persons with
disabilities, including such services as assisting persons with
disabilities to obtain housing, employment referral, transportation
referral, attendant care, independent living skills, peer counseling,
advocacy services, job training, health care, homemaker services, and
other such services as approved by the commissioner;
 (iv) train personnel for the purpose of attendant care in assisting
and serving persons with disabilities; and
 (v) serve persons with disabilities.
 (b) Such center may also, but need not limit itself to, provide
disability awareness programs, peer counseling, role modeling and any
other appropriate services within elementary and secondary schools.
 2. Such service centers shall not be established or operated as a
residential or housing facility.
 3. Such service centers shall make maximum use of existing resources
available to persons with disabilities and shall not duplicate any
existing services or programs, to the extent that such services or
programs are available through other state sources to meet the needs of
persons with disabilities. Such centers shall however provide necessary
information and referral to assist a person with a disability in
obtaining such services and coordinate where possible the delivery of
such services to persons with disabilities.
 4. Such service centers shall be in compliance with all applicable
local laws and ordinances.
 § 1122. Education department; responsibilities. The department shall
assist individuals and organizations in the planning and establishment
of such service centers. The department shall ensure program
accountability and shall monitor and evaluate such centers.
 § 1123. Regulations. The commissioner shall promulgate rules and
regulations necessary for the implementation of this article.
 § 1124. Distribution of funds. 1. Service centers for independent
living shall be funded out of appropriations available for such purposes
to the extent of the entire approved budget of such centers.
 2. Budgets submitted by service centers shall be approved in
accordance with regulations of the commissioner, subject to approval of
the director of the budget.
 3. Service centers shall be located in the cities of Albany, Buffalo,
Rochester, Syracuse, Utica, White Plains, Binghamton, Kingston,
Poughkeepsie, Jamestown, Yonkers, the counties of Queens, Kings, Nassau,
Bronx, Richmond, New York and Suffolk.
 4. Additional service centers shall be located in the cities of
Niagara Falls, Olean, Troy, Amsterdam, Newburgh, Corning, Ithaca,
Cortland, Auburn, Watertown, Plattsburgh, Batavia, Massena and Glens
Falls, the counties of Delaware and Rockland, the county of Orange, in
either the city of Middletown or Port Jervis or in the town of Deerpark,
Greenville, Mount Hope, Warwick or Wawayanda or in the village of
Goshen, in the county of New York to serve the Harlem community, and in
the counties of Putnam, Sullivan and Herkimer.
 ARTICLE 23-B
 CHILD ABUSE IN AN EDUCATIONAL SETTING
Section 1125. Definitions.
 1126. Duties of employees specifically enumerated in this
 section upon receipt of an allegation of child abuse
 in an educational setting.
 1127. Confidentiality of records.
 1128. Duties of school administrators and superintendents upon
 receipt of a written report alleging child abuse in an
 educational setting.
 1128-a. Additional duties of school administrators and
 superintendents.
 1129. Penalties for failure to comply.
 1130. Notification by district attorney.
 1131. Actions upon criminal conviction of a licensed or
 certified school employee.
 1132. Duties of the commissioner; child abuse in an
 educational setting.
 1133. Unreported resignation against public policy.
 1134. Reporting to the vulnerable persons' central register
 and the statewide central register of child abuse and
 maltreatment.
 § 1125. Definitions. For the purposes of this article the following
terms shall have the following meanings:
 1. "Child abuse" shall mean any of the following acts committed in an
educational setting by an employee or volunteer against a child: (a)
intentionally or recklessly inflicting physical injury, serious physical
injury or death, or (b) intentionally or recklessly engaging in conduct
which creates a substantial risk of such physical injury, serious
physical injury or death, or (c) any child sexual abuse as defined in
this section, or (d) the commission or attempted commission against a
child of the crime of disseminating indecent materials to minors
pursuant to article two hundred thirty-five of the penal law, or (e)
using corporal punishment as defined by the commissioner.
 2. "Child" shall mean a person under the age of twenty-one years
enrolled in a school.
 3. "Employee" shall mean any person: (i) who is receiving compensation
from a school or (ii) whose duties involve direct student contact and
(a) who is receiving compensation from any person or entity that
contracts with a school to provide transportation services to children,
or (b) who is an employee of a contracted service provider or worker
placed within the school under a public assistance employment program,
pursuant to title nine-B of article five of the social services law, and
consistent with the provisions of such title for the provision of
services to such school, its students or employees, directly or through
contract.
 4. "Volunteer" shall mean any person, other than an employee, who has
direct student contact and: (i) provides services to a school, or (ii)
provides services to any person or entity that contracts with a school
to provide transportation services to children.
 5. "Educational setting" shall mean the building and grounds of a
school, the vehicles provided directly or by contract by the school for
the transportation of students to and from school buildings, field
trips, co-curricular and extra-curricular activities both on and off
school grounds, all co-curricular and extra-curricular activity sites,
and any other location where direct contact between an employee or
volunteer and a child has allegedly occurred.
 6. "Administrator" or "school administrator" shall mean a principal,
or the equivalent title, in a school, or other chief school officer.
 7. "Law enforcement authorities" shall mean a municipal police
department, sheriff's department, the division of state police or any
officer thereof. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, law
enforcement authorities shall not include any child protective service
or any society for the prevention of cruelty to children as such terms
are defined in section four hundred twenty-three of the social services
law.
 8. "Parent" shall mean either or both of a child's parents or other
persons legally responsible for the child.
 9. "Child sexual abuse" shall mean conduct prohibited by article one
hundred thirty or two hundred sixty-three of the penal law.
 10. "School" shall include a school district, public school, charter
school, nonpublic school, board of cooperative educational services,
special act school district as defined in section four thousand one of
this chapter, approved preschool special education program pursuant to
section forty-four hundred ten of this chapter, approved private
residential or non-residential school for the education of students with
disabilities including private schools established under chapter eight
hundred fifty-three of the laws of nineteen hundred seventy-six, or
state-operated or state-supported school in accordance with article
eighty-five, eighty-seven or eighty-eight of this chapter.
 § 1126. Duties of employees specifically enumerated in this section
upon receipt of an allegation of child abuse in an educational setting.
1. In any case where an oral or written allegation is made to a teacher,
school nurse, school guidance counselor, school psychologist, school
social worker, school administrator, school board member or other school
personnel required to hold a teaching or administrative license or
certificate, as well as a licensed and registered physical therapist,
licensed and registered occupational therapist, licensed and registered
speech-language pathologist, teacher aide or school resource officer,
that a child has been subjected to child abuse by an employee or
volunteer in an educational setting, such person shall upon receipt of
such allegation:
 (a) promptly complete a written report of such allegation including
the full name of the child alleged to be abused; the name of the child's
parent; the identity of the person making the allegation and their
relationship to the alleged child victim; the name of the employee or
volunteer against whom the allegation was made; and a listing of the
specific allegations of child abuse in an educational setting. Such
written report shall be upon a form as prescribed in section eleven
hundred thirty-two of this article.
 (b) except where the school administrator is the person receiving such
oral or written allegation, promptly personally deliver a copy of such
written report to the school administrator of the school in which the
child abuse allegedly occurred.
 1-a. (i) In any case where an oral or written allegation is made to a
school bus driver employed by a school or a person or entity that
contracts with a school to provide transportation services to children
that a child has been subjected to child abuse by an employee or
volunteer in an educational setting, such driver shall upon receipt of
such allegation, promptly report or cause a report to be made to his or
her supervisor employed by such school or contracting person or entity.
 (ii) In any case where an oral or written report or allegation is made
to a supervisor who is employed by a school or a person or entity that
contracts with a school to provide transportation services to children
from a person employed by the school or the contracted person or entity,
that a child in such school has been subjected to child abuse by an
employee or volunteer in an educational setting, such supervisor shall
upon receipt of such allegation promptly complete a written report of
such allegation including the full name of the child alleged to be
abused; the name of the child's parent or guardian; the identity of the
person making the allegation and their relationship to the alleged child
victim; the name of the employee or volunteer against whom the
allegation was made; and a listing of the specific allegations of child
abuse in an educational setting. Such written report shall be upon a
form as prescribed in section eleven hundred thirty-two of this article,
and shall be personally delivered to the school district superintendent
employed by the school district where the child abuse occurred or, for a
school other than a school district or public school, the school
administrator employed by the school where the child abuse occurred.
 2. In any case where it is alleged that a child was abused by an
employee or volunteer of a school other than a school within the school
district of the child's attendance, the report of such allegations shall
be promptly forwarded to the superintendent of schools of the school
district of the child's attendance and the school district where the
abuse allegedly occurred, whereupon both school superintendents shall
comply with sections eleven hundred twenty-eight and eleven hundred
twenty-eight-a of this article. If such case involves a school that is
not a school district or public school, the appropriate school
administrator or administrators, in addition to any appropriate
superintendent of schools, shall be notified whereupon all such
individuals shall comply with sections eleven hundred twenty-eight and
eleven hundred twenty-eight-a of this article.
 3. Any employee, volunteer, or supervisor who is employed by a person
or entity that contracts with a school to provide transportation
services to children who reasonably and in good faith makes a report of
allegations of child abuse in an educational setting to a person and in
a manner described in this section shall have immunity from civil
liability which might otherwise result by reason of such actions.
 4. In any case where the employee against whom the allegation is made
is the superintendent or the administrator, the report of such
allegations shall be made to another administrator designated by the
school.
 § 1127. Confidentiality of records. Reports and other written material
submitted pursuant to this article, and photographs taken concerning
such reports in the possession of any person authorized to receive such
information, pursuant to this article, shall be confidential and shall
not be redisclosed except to law enforcement authorities involved in an
investigation of child abuse in an educational setting or as expressly
authorized by law or pursuant to a court-ordered subpoena. A school
administrator or a school superintendent shall exercise reasonable care
in preventing such unauthorized disclosure. Willful disclosure of a
written record required to be kept confidential pursuant to this section
to a person not authorized to receive or review such record is a class A
misdemeanor.
 § 1128. Duties of school administrators and superintendents upon
receipt of a written report alleging child abuse in an educational
setting. Upon receipt of a written report described in paragraph (a) of
subdivision one or subdivision one-a of section eleven hundred
twenty-six of this article alleging that a child has been abused in an
educational setting, a school administrator or superintendent shall
where there is a reasonable suspicion to believe that an act of child
abuse has occurred:
 1. Where the subject child has made the allegation: (a) promptly
notify the parent of such child that an allegation of child abuse in an
educational setting has been made regarding such child and promptly
provide the parent with a written statement prepared pursuant to
regulations of the commissioner setting forth parental rights,
responsibilities and procedures under this article; (b) where a school
administrator receives a written report, promptly provide a copy of such
report to the superintendent; and (c) promptly forward such report to
appropriate law enforcement authorities. In no event shall reporting to
law enforcement be delayed by reason of an inability to contact the
superintendent.
 2. Where a parent of the child has made the allegation: (a) promptly
provide the parent of such child with a written statement prepared
pursuant to regulations of the commissioner setting forth parental
rights, responsibilities and procedures under this article; (b) where a
school administrator receives a written report, promptly provide a copy
of such report to the superintendent; and (c) promptly forward such
report to appropriate law enforcement authorities. In no event shall
reporting to law enforcement be delayed by reason of an inability to
contact the superintendent.
 3. Where a person other than the subject child or the parent of a
subject child has made the allegation: (a) promptly notify the parent of
the subject child that an allegation of child abuse in an educational
setting has been made regarding his or her child and promptly provide
the parent with a written statement prepared pursuant to regulations of
the commissioner setting forth parental rights, responsibilities and
procedures under this article; (b) ascertain from the person making such
report the source and basis for such allegation; (c) where a school
administrator receives a written report, promptly provide a copy of such
report to the superintendent; and (d) promptly forward such report to
appropriate law enforcement authorities. In no event shall reporting to
law enforcement be delayed by reason of an inability to contact the
superintendent.
 4. Any school administrator or superintendent who reasonably and in
good faith makes a report of allegations of child abuse in an
educational setting or reasonably and in good faith transmits such a
report to a person or agency as required by this article and in a manner
described in section eleven hundred twenty-six of this article and this
section shall have immunity from civil liability which might otherwise
result by reason of such actions.
 § 1128-a. Additional duties of school administrators and
superintendents.
 1. Where a superintendent of schools or, in a school other than a
school district or public school, the school administrator forwards to
law enforcement a report as described in paragraph (a) of subdivision
one or subdivision one-a of section eleven hundred twenty-six of this
article, he or she shall refer such report to the commissioner where the
employee or volunteer alleged to have committed an act of child abuse as
defined in this article holds a certification or license issued by the
department.
 2. A report which is made pursuant to this article and does not, after
investigation, result in a criminal conviction shall be expunged from
any record which may be kept by a school or school district with respect
to the subject of such a report after a period of five years from the
date of the making of such report or at such earlier time as such
school, or school district, as the case may be, determines.
 § 1129. Penalties for failure to comply. 1. Willful failure of an
employee to prepare and submit a written report of an allegation of
child abuse as required by this article shall be a class A misdemeanor.
 2. (a) Willful failure of a school administrator or superintendent to
submit a written report of child abuse to an appropriate law enforcement
authority, as required by this article, shall be a class A misdemeanor.
 (b) Notwithstanding paragraph (a) of this subdivision, any failure to
submit a written report of child abuse to an appropriate law enforcement
authority as required by this article, shall be punishable by a civil
penalty not to exceed five thousand dollars upon an administrative
determination by the commissioner.
 § 1130. Notification by district attorney. Where a criminal
investigation of an allegation of child abuse by an employee or
volunteer is undertaken in response to a report forwarded by a school
administrator or superintendent to law enforcement authorities pursuant
to section eleven hundred twenty-eight of this article, and where law
enforcement authorities have provided such report to the district
attorney and have requested assistance, as soon as practicable, it shall
be the responsibility of the district attorney to notify the
superintendent of schools of the district where the acts of child abuse
allegedly occurred and of the school district where the child is
attending, if different, of an indictment or the filing of an accusatory
instrument against the employee or volunteer against whom an allegation
of child abuse in an educational setting was made. The district attorney
shall notify the superintendent of schools of the district where the
acts of child abuse allegedly occurred and of the school district, if
different, where the child is attending of the disposition of the
criminal case against such employee or volunteer or the suspension or
termination of the criminal investigation of such employee or volunteer.
The aforementioned notifications to the superintendent of schools shall
be made to the appropriate school administrator where the acts of child
abuse allegedly occurred in a school other than a school district or
public school.
 § 1131. Actions upon criminal conviction of a licensed or certified
school employee. 1. In the event that a licensed or certified school
employee against whom an allegation of child abuse in an educational
setting has been made, is convicted of any crime involving child abuse
in an educational setting, the district attorney shall provide notice
thereof to the commissioner and the superintendent of schools of the
district or, in a school other than a school district or public school,
the school administrator where the acts of child abuse occurred and to
the school where the child is attending, if different.
 2. Upon receiving notice of a conviction from a district attorney
pursuant to subdivision one of this section, the commissioner shall,
without delay, proceed to determine whether the individual possesses
good moral character, in accordance with the regulations of the
commissioner governing such a determination.
 3. Nothing in this article shall be construed as creating any
authority to take an adverse action against an employee or volunteer by
virtue of a report pursuant to this article which has not been
substantiated.
 4. An employee or volunteer who has adverse action taken against him
or her by virtue of or in connection with any report made pursuant to
this article shall be entitled to receive a copy of such report and
respond to the allegations of child abuse made therein. Any employee or
volunteer shall, in addition, be entitled to seek disclosure of such
report pursuant to article six of the public officers law.
 § 1132. Duties of the commissioner; child abuse in an educational
setting. 1. The commissioner shall prepare a form for the recording and
transmitting of allegations of child abuse in an educational setting.
Such form shall include: (i) all definitions set out in section eleven
hundred twenty-five of this article; and (ii) adequate space for the
inclusion of any other information which the person making or filing the
report believes would be helpful in describing or explaining the
circumstances surrounding an allegation of child abuse in an educational
setting in accordance with the provisions of this article.
 2. The commissioner shall promulgate rules and regulations for
training necessary for the implementation of this article provided all
employees specifically described in section eleven hundred twenty-six of
this article shall be required to complete training pursuant to such
rules and regulations. Such training shall include, at a minimum,
information regarding the physical and behavioral indicators of child
abuse and maltreatment and the statutory reporting requirements set out
in sections four hundred thirteen, four hundred fourteen, four hundred
fifteen, four hundred sixteen, four hundred seventeen, four hundred
eighteen, four hundred nineteen and four hundred twenty of the social
services law, including but not limited to, when and how a report must
be made, what other actions the reporter is mandated or authorized to
take, the legal protections afforded reporters, and the consequences for
failing to report.
 3. All persons employed on or after July first, two thousand nineteen
by a school, other than a school district or public school, in titles
equivalent to a teacher or administrator as defined in the regulations
of the commissioner, and any school bus driver employed by a school or
any person or entity that contracts with a school to provide
transportation services to children shall be required to complete two
hours of coursework or training regarding the identification and
reporting of child abuse and maltreatment. The coursework or training
shall be obtained from an institution or provider that has been approved
by the department to provide such coursework or training. The coursework
or training shall include information regarding the physical and
behavioral indicators of child abuse and maltreatment and the statutory
reporting requirements set out in sections four hundred thirteen through
four hundred twenty of the social services law, including but not
limited to, when and how a report must be made, what other actions the
reporter is mandated or authorized to take, the legal protections
afforded reporters, and the consequences for failing to report. Each
employee in such titles shall provide the school administrator of the
school with documentation showing that he or she completed the required
training. In addition, each school bus driver shall provide such school
or contracting person or entity with documentation showing that he or
she completed the required training. The department shall be authorized
to request such records on a periodic basis and may publish a list of
any persons or schools who are not in compliance with this subdivision
on its website.
 4. The coursework or training required by this section shall not apply
to those persons already required to undergo coursework or training
regarding the identification and reporting of child abuse and
maltreatment pursuant to sections three thousand three and three
thousand four of this chapter.
 § 1133. Unreported resignation against public policy. 1. A school
administrator or superintendent shall not make any agreement to withhold
from law enforcement authorities, the superintendent or the
commissioner, where appropriate, the fact that an allegation of child
abuse in an educational setting on the part of any employee or volunteer
as required by this article in return for the resignation or voluntary
suspension from his or her position of such person, against whom the
allegation is made.
 2. Each violation of subdivision one of this section shall constitute
a class E felony, and shall also be punishable by a civil penalty not to
exceed twenty thousand dollars.
 3. Any superintendent of schools or school administrator who
reasonably and in good faith reports to law enforcement officials
information regarding allegations of child abuse or a resignation as
required by this article shall have immunity from any liability, civil
or criminal, which might otherwise result by reason of such actions.
 § 1134. Reporting to the vulnerable persons' central register and the
statewide central register of child abuse and maltreatment. Where a
person employed by a school is required to report an incident of child
abuse in an educational setting to the vulnerable persons' central
register pursuant to article eleven of the social services law or the
statewide central register of child abuse and maltreatment pursuant to
article six of the social services law and he or she reports such
incident thereto, such person shall have been deemed to have complied
with the reporting requirements of this article.
 ARTICLE 24
 NEW YORK STATE RURAL EDUCATION PROGRAM ACT
Section 1201. Short title.
 1202. Legislative findings and intent.
 1203. Definitions.
 1204. New York state center for rural schools established.
 1205. Rural education advisory committee established.
 1206. Contract authority.
 1207. Functions, powers and duties of other state agencies.
 § 1201. Short title. This article shall be known and may be cited as
the "New York state rural education program act".
 § 1202. Legislative findings and intent. The legislature hereby finds,
determines and declares that:
 1. Rural education is a critical factor and dominant force in
stimulating and maintaining socioeconomic development, economic
viability, social activity and cultural enrichment in rural regions of
New York state. Rural schools fill an integral role as centers of the
community and as a bridge for youth to connect with the broader society
in fulfilling their dreams and ambitions;
 2. Rural areas account for more than half of the school systems,
boards of cooperative education services and colleges in the state;
 3. Rural areas have unique conditions and circumstances which require
special consideration in the development and assessment of state policy,
including: (a) that rural areas contain many of the low-wealth,
low-spending school districts in the state; (b) that average incomes of
rural residents are lower than statewide norms; and (c) that per pupil
expenditures in rural schools are more than fifteen percent below the
statewide average;
 4. Weaknesses exist in rural education inasmuch as rural schools have
difficulty attracting and retaining highly trained teachers and
administrators, teachers are spread thinly over several subject areas;
 5. A limited knowledge base on small rural educational organizations
and lack of a systematic research agenda for rural schools limit the
potential for development of cohesive state policy for educational
services in rural New York;
 6. The establishment of a program on rural education would enhance the
capacity of policy makers within state government: (a) to better
understand the inefficiencies and needs of the state's rural education
systems; (b) to assess the impact of existing and proposed government
mandates on rural areas; (c) to promote innovation, flexibility and
investment to ensure that rural residents have equitable access to and
receive quality educational services and opportunities; and (d) to
promote the long-term goal of improving the economic and social
well-being of rural communities as a direct result of improving rural
school performance.
 § 1203. Definitions. For the purposes of this article:
 1. "Center" shall mean the New York state center for rural schools;
 2. "Committee" shall mean the rural education advisory committee,
established pursuant to the provisions of this article; and
 3. "Rural area" shall mean any county with less than two hundred
thousand population, or any town which has a population of less than one
hundred fifty persons per square mile.
 § 1204. New York state center for rural schools established. 1.
Subject to the availability of funds appropriated, allocated or
otherwise supplied from any other public or private source, the New York
state center for rural schools is hereby established in order to provide
a state-level focus and forum for conducting and disseminating specific
research and for developing policy recommendations targeted toward the
improvement of the effectiveness and efficiency of educational services
delivery and opportunities in rural New York. Such center shall be
established within the college of agriculture and life sciences at
Cornell University, and function cooperatively with the rural education
advisory committee established pursuant to the provisions of this
article.
 2. The center, in cooperation with the committee, shall:
 (a) Promote awareness of special educational needs and conditions in
rural areas;
 (b) Promote assessment and analysis of such factors and variables
impacting the quality of rural education as:
 (i) Existing statutory and regulatory measures;
 (ii) Current levels of federal, state and local support, in relation
to the financial capacity of school districts to maintain required
educational services;
 (iii) Academic and occupational-training opportunities and program
offerings, including those which may serve the physically challenged;
 (iv) Access to state of the art technology in instruction, including
telecommunications equipment and microcomputers;
 (v) Academic and occupational training performance testing and
standards;
 (vi) Staffing, including salary levels, recruitment and retention
incentives, and advanced training prospects;
 (vii) Career guidance, counseling and placement services;
 (viii) Capacity of school districts to engage in strategic and
long-range planning;
 (ix) Physical condition of existing facilities, inventories and
infrastructure;
 (x) Transportation, including services rendered pursuant to chapter
five hundred ninety-eight of the laws of nineteen hundred eighty-nine;
chapter eight hundred ninety-five of the laws of nineteen hundred
eighty-six as amended;
 (xi) Geographic sparsity and isolation, particularly in terms of
travel distances for pupils and access to community resources;
 (xii) Availability and integration of community support services; and
 (xiii) Alternatives to reorganization for necessarily small school
districts;
 (c) Maintain an informational repository/clearinghouse of data and
research results including innovative and cost-effective approaches in
rural education, and disseminate research findings, information,
materials and best practices;
 (d) Encourage cost-effective, integrated services that address special
needs and conditions in rural areas through joint efforts among private
and public institutions and agencies, including but not limited to
colleges, community action agencies, social services agencies, health
agencies, employment and training agencies;
 (e) Promote training and technical assistance for rural school
district officials and employees in the use of cost-effective
instructional and administrative practices;
 (f) Foster demonstration projects and development of alternative
models to enhance the delivery of academic and occupational-training
services and programs specific to rural areas;
 (g) Identify opportunities to advance equity in access and quality of
educational and job skills training for residents of rural areas,
including such special target or "at risk" populations as:
 (1) illiterate adults,
 (2) single mothers,
 (3) individuals in poverty,
 (4) substance abusers, and
 (5) youthful offenders;
 (h) Have the authority to accept and receive any grants, awards or
other funds or appropriations as may be made available to the center and
committee to effect the purposes of this article.
 § 1205. Rural education advisory committee established. 1. Subject to
the availability of funds appropriated, allocated or otherwise supplied
from any other public or private source for the purposes of implementing
the provisions of this article, a rural education advisory committee is
hereby established. Such committee shall be comprised of nine members,
to be appointed as follows: one by the temporary president of the
senate, one by the speaker of the assembly, one by the governor, and one
by the dean of the college of agriculture and life sciences at Cornell
University. The remaining five members, one of whom shall be a certified
teacher who has experience teaching in a rural school district, shall be
appointed by the commissioner. The commissioner, or his or her designee,
shall serve as chairperson of the committee. Membership on the committee
shall be:
 (a) reflective of the diversity of the state's rural population and
geographic areas, and;
 (b) reflective of the diversity of practical knowledge and interests
in the broad range of rural educational sectors, including but not
limited to, primary, secondary and post-secondary educators and
administrators who have experience in a rural school district, community
human service providers, the business community, and the general public.
 2. The chairperson may invite individuals to assist or to serve as
technical advisors to the committee in the exercise of its powers and
duties, as provided in this section.
 3. The terms of office of the appointed members of the committee shall
be for four years. Any vacancy occurring in the appointed membership of
the committee shall be filled within one year by the same authority
responsible for the initial appointment of such member.
 4. The committee shall meet at least twice yearly, and at such
additional times as may be determined by the chairperson.
 5. Members of the committee shall receive no compensation, but shall
be reimbursed for their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their official duties.
 6. In the exercise of its powers and duties, the committee shall:
 (a) Work with the center in developing priorities for targeted
research regarding rural education in New York;
 (b) Facilitate the development of policy recommendations which may
enhance access to, as well as the quality and productivity of,
educational programs and practices in rural areas;
 (c) Participate in the review and authorization of demonstration
projects and the development of alternative models for improved and
potentially more cost-effective educational activities and programs;
 (d) Promote community and school involvement and collaboration in the
development and implementation of policies and activities undertaken
pursuant to this article; and
 (e) Prepare an annual report, as well as special focus reports which
may result from specific research and other activities conducted in
accordance with this article.
 § 1206. Contract authority. The center, after consultation with the
committee, is hereby empowered to enter into any agreement or contract
with any private or public agencies, corporations, or individuals
necessary or convenient to carry out the provisions of this article.
 § 1207. Functions, powers and duties of other state agencies. Nothing
contained in this article shall be deemed to derogate or detract in any
way from the functions, powers or duties prescribed by law of any agency
or department of the state or to interrupt or preclude the direct
relationship of any such department or agency with local agencies,
individuals or corporations for the carrying out of such functions,
powers and duties.