Chapter 2: Department for the Aging
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1992/009.
§ 21-201 Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
   a.   "Commissioner" shall mean the commissioner of the department for the
aging.
   b.   "Department" shall mean the department for the aging.
   c.   "Regularly schedules activities" shall mean all activities which are
funded in whole or in part by the city of New York.
   d.   "Senior center" shall mean facilities operated by the city of New York
or operated by an entity that has contracted with the department to provide
services to senior citizens on a regular basis including, but not limited to
meals, recreation and counseling.
   e.   "Elder abuse" shall mean any knowing, intentional, or negligent act by
a caregiver or any other person holding a trusting relationship with a
vulnerable older adult, which causes harm or a serious risk of harm to that
older adult including physical, emotional, sexual, or financial harm, or harm
related to identity theft, or neglect, abandonment or confinement.
   f.   "Social adult day care" has the same meaning as set forth in section
two hundred fifteen of the elder law and any regulations promulgated by the
director of the office for the aging pursuant to such section.
(Am. L.L. 2015/009, 1/17/2015, eff. 7/14/2015; Am. 2021 N.Y. Laws Ch. 655, 12/
6/2021, eff. 12/6/2021)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1992/009 and
L.L. 2015/009.
§ 21-202 Bill of rights required.
   a.   The commissioner shall require that every senior center adopt a
statement of the rights of all senior citizens who participate in activities
and take advantage of services provided by such senior center and treat all
senior citizens in accordance with the provisions of such statement.
   b.   Contents of bill of rights. Such statement of rights shall include the
following:
      1.   Every senior citizen who otherwise qualifies for participation shall
have the right to participate as a member of a senior center.
      2.   Every senior citizen shall have the right to participate in all
regularly scheduled activities and take advantage of services provided by the
center to the extent that funding and space limitations permit.
      3.   Every senior center shall have a senior advisory council which will
be comprised of senior citizens from the senior center membership. Such
advisory council shall advise the senior center's management of the needs of
the senior citizens.
      4.   Every senior citizen attending a senior center's regularly scheduled
meal period shall be offered a balanced and nutritious meal to the extent that
funding and space limitations permit. Those senior citizens that do not receive
a balanced and nutritious meal shall be offered nourishment during a senior
center's regularly scheduled meal period to the extent that funding permits.
      5.   Every senior citizen attending a senior center shall have the
opportunity to make a financial contribution which shall be voluntary and
anonymous and shall be used by the senior center to enhance and increase
services to senior citizens.
      6.   Every senior citizen shall be treated courteously, fairly and
respectfully at a senior center.
      7.   Every senior citizen shall have the right not to be discriminated
against based upon his or her actual or perceived race, creed, color, national
origin, age, gender, disability, marital status, sexual orientation, alienage
or citizenship status, in violation of the human rights law of the city of New
York.
      8.   Every senior citizen shall have the right to be informed of those
senior centers that are handicapped accessible.
      9.   Every senior citizen shall have the right to present grievances on
behalf of himself or herself to the senior center's staff, board of directors
or executive committee, or elected or other government officials, without fear
of reprisal from officers or employees of the senior center.
   c.   Posting required. Every senior center shall post conspicuously:
      (i)   in or near the entrance to such center a sign that states the
rights of senior citizens as provided in this section;
      (ii)   all regularly scheduled activities as defined in this section; and
      (iii)   the department's phone number.
   d.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the department's
authority to promulgate rules regarding matters within its jurisdiction
pursuant to applicable law.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1992/009.
§ 21-203 Elder abuse training.
   a.   The commissioner shall develop a program to train senior service
providers in the detection and reporting of elder abuse. Such program shall
also include training on the counseling of elder abuse victims.
   b.   The commissioner shall require that employees of senior centers and
employees of entities that contract with the department to provide services to
senior citizens, be trained in elder abuse detection, reporting and counseling,
and receive supplemental refresher training regarding the same at least once
every 3 years, if such employee has or is expected to have significant and
direct person to person contact with senior citizens.
   c.   The commissioner shall require senior centers to hold at least two
educational sessions per year during which guests and members of the senior
center will receive counseling regarding elder abuse prevention and awareness
and be instructed on how to detect and report instances of elder abuse.
   d.   The commissioner shall require that every senior center post signage in
a prominent common area section within the center that directs those who need
information regarding elder abuse detection, reporting, counseling and services
to call either the 311 citizen service system or the department's Elderly Crime
Victims Resource Center.
§ 21-204 Social adult day care.
   a.   1.   All social adult day cares that do not receive funding pursuant to
section two hundred fifteen of the elder law shall meet the standards and
requirements of any rules or regulations promulgated by the director of the
office for the aging pursuant to such section related to program standards and
participant rights, notwithstanding the fact that such social adult day cares
do not receive such funding. For the purposes of this section, any reference to
an "area agency on aging" in such rules and regulations means the department
and any reference to a "participant" in such rules and regulations means an
adult individual who is functionally impaired as defined in such rules and
regulations and is eligible for and is receiving services from a social adult
day care. Any references to "functionally impaired" and "social adult day care
program" in such rules and regulations shall have the same meanings set forth
therein.
      2.   All social adult day cares shall carry out the provisions of this
section in accordance with all applicable provisions of the Americans with
disabilities act of nineteen ninety.
   b.   Registration.
      1.   An individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company,
joint venture, association, or other business entity shall not operate as a
social adult day care without having registered with the department.
Registration shall include registrant's name, address, corporate structure and
ownership, and other information as the department may require and shall be
filed on forms to be prescribed by the department. The department may require
social adult day cares to register electronically.
      2.   Changes to information required under this subdivision must be
submitted to the department no later than the effective date of such change in
writing or electronically in a form and manner designated by the department.
   c.   Civil penalties.
      1.   The department shall adopt rules establishing civil penalties of not
less than two hundred fifty dollars per day and not more than five hundred
dollars per day to be assessed against social adult day cares for violations of
subdivision a and any regulations promulgated thereunder. Such rules
establishing civil penalties shall specify the violations subject to penalty.
      2.   Any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company,
joint venture, association, or other business entity that operates as a social
adult day care without registering shall be subject to a civil penalty of not
less than two hundred fifty dollars per day and not more than one thousand
dollars per day such social adult day care operates without registering.
      3.   The department and officers and employees of city agencies
designated by the mayor shall have the authority to issue notices of violation,
returnable at the environmental control board, any administrative tribunal
within such designated agency, or any tribunal established within the office of
administrative trials and hearings as designated by the commissioner, for
violations of this section or any rules promulgated by the department pursuant
to such section.
   d.   Social adult day care ombudsperson.
      1.   The department shall designate an ombudsperson whose duties shall
include, but not be limited to:
         (i)   establishing a system to receive comments and complaints with
respect to any social adult day care;
         (ii)   requesting a list from the state department of health at least
once annually of providers operating social adult day cares within the city of
New York and the street address of each such social adult day care; and
         (iii)   investigating complaints received pursuant to subparagraph (i)
of this paragraph or based on any information known to the department related
to a social adult day care that may be in violation of the provisions of
subdivision a of this section and whether a social adult day care has violated
subdivision a of this section and upon finding there has been such a violation:
            (A)   promptly informing in writing such social adult day care and
any managed long term care organization known to be reimbursing such social
adult day care of such finding, and that such finding is appealable by writing
to the commissioner in accordance with the rules of the department, and
requesting any informed managed long term care organization to respond to the
ombudsperson in writing as to whether and how such violations will be
addressed,
            (B)   at the ombudsperson's discretion, forwarding the results of
such investigation and any such response from a managed long term care
organization to the department of investigation, the state department of health
or any office, agency, or entity responsible for the prevention, detection, and
investigation of fraud and abuse in the medical assistance program described in
title eleven of the social services law or for the recovery of any improperly
expended medical assistance funds, and
            (C)   taking other appropriate actions as determined by the
commissioner.
      2.   A social adult day care shall post in a conspicuous location on its
premises a sign indicating how to contact the ombudsperson and a statement
indicating that any person may contact such ombudsperson if such person has a
comment or complaint regarding such social adult day care.
      3.   The department shall make available on its website the contact
information of the ombudsperson as well as a statement indicating that any
person may contact such ombudsperson with a comment or complaint regarding any
social adult day care.
      4.   Not later than January 1, 2016 and annually thereafter, the
ombudsperson shall provide a written report to the council regarding social
adult day cares. Each such report shall include, but not be limited to:
         (i)   the total number of social adult day cares and the name and
street address of each such social adult day care;
         (ii)   the total number of complaints received by the ombudsperson;
         (iii)   a general description of the reason for each such complaint;
         (iv)   the total number of investigations conducted by the
ombudsperson, a general description of the reason for each such investigation,
any findings that a social adult day care has violated of subdivision a of this
section, and the outcome of each such investigation;
         (v)   the total number of notices of violation issued pursuant to
subdivisions a and c of this section, disaggregated by the specific violation
for which such notice was issued;
         (vi)   the total number of social adult day cares that failed to
register pursuant to subdivision b as of the date of such report; and
         (vii)   any recommendations regarding the operation of social adult
day cares.
      5.   Except as otherwise required by law, the department shall not share
information that identifies any individual who made a complaint to the
ombudsperson.
   e.   Online public searchable database of social adult day cares. 
      1.   The department shall create and maintain an online public searchable
database of social adult day cares registered with the department pursuant with
subdivision b of this section, which the public shall be able to search by the
name under which the social adult day care registered, by the name under which
the social adult day care is doing business, by borough, and by zip code. The
database shall include the following information reported to the department
pursuant to such subdivision: (i) the name, address, telephone number, and
website, if any, of the social adult day care; (ii) the corporate structure and
ownership of the social adult day care; (iii) the days and hours of operation
of the social adult day care; (iv) the year the social adult day care was
established; and (v) the name, address and telephone number of any managed long
term care company with which the social adult day care has a formal agreement.
The database shall further include any other relevant information reported to
the department pursuant to this section.
      2.   If applicable, the database shall indicate the number of notices of
violation issued and the outcome of any adjudication conducted pursuant to
subdivision c. The year and nature of the notice of violation and the
adjudication shall be posted, but may not contain personally identifying
information about a complainant.
      3.   The database shall allow an individual to submit complaints
electronically about a social adult day care to the ombudsperson.
(L.L. 2015/009, 1/17/2015, eff. 7/14/2015 and 1/17/2016; Am. L.L. 2018/009, 12/
31/2017, eff. 6/29/2018)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2015/009.
§ 21-204.1 Inspections for social adult day cares and senior centers;
reporting.
   a.   The department shall provide the department of health and mental
hygiene a list of all social adult day cares registered with the department and
a list of all senior centers in the city on an annual basis and update the
department of health and mental hygiene monthly of any changes to either list.
   b.   The department shall make available on its website information about
the inspections of senior centers and social adult day cares conducted by the
department of health and mental hygiene pursuant to subdivision b of section
17-1506.
(L.L. 2018/141, 8/6/2018, eff. 2/2/2019)
§ 21-205 Aging in place guide.
In consultation with the department of buildings, the department of housing
preservation and development, the mayor's office for people with disabilities,
and businesses and nonprofit organizations with expertise in design for
dwelling units occupied by older adults, the department shall develop,
distribute, and publish on its website, not later than July 1, 2016, a guide
for building owners regarding modifications and improvements that may be made
to dwelling units to allow tenants to safely remain in such units for as long
as possible as such tenants age. Such guide shall include, but not be limited
to, information relating to: improving access for individuals with limited
mobility; lighting, railings and grab bars; technological enhancements; and
widening of doorways and hallways. Such guide shall also include information on
available public and private sources of funding, including information on
eligibility criteria and how to apply for such funding, to assist building
owners in making modifications and improvements.
(L.L. 2015/051, 6/2/2015, eff. 6/2/2015)
§ 21-205.1 Plans to support aging in place.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Aging in place. The term “aging in place” means when older adults remain
in their existing homes or communities as they age, as an alternative to moving
into an assisted-living facility, nursing home, or other institutional care
facility.
      Coordinating agencies. The term “coordinating agencies” means the
department of buildings, the department of housing preservation and
development, the department of transportation, and any other agency designated
by the mayor.
      Naturally occurring retirement community. The term “naturally occurring
retirement community” has the same meaning as set forth in section 209 of the
elder law.
      Neighborhood naturally occurring retirement community. The term
“neighborhood naturally occurring retirement community” has the same meaning as
set forth in section 209 of the elder law.
      Older adult. The term “older adult” means a person 60 years of age or
older.
   b.   Ten-year plan. No later than 2 years after the effective date of the
local law that added this section, the commissioner, in consultation with
coordinating agencies, shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council
and post on the department’s website a 10-year plan regarding older adults
aging in place. Such plan shall focus on assisting older adults with aging in
place throughout the city, considering the department’s programs and services,
including in naturally occurring retirement communities and neighborhood
naturally occurring retirement communities, and shall include, but need not be
limited to:
      1.   An estimation of the need for improvements and investments to
enhance existing healthcare facilities, social services, access to
transportation, and other supportive services that help older adults with aging
in place throughout the city, as well as specific recommendations for any such
improvements and investments in each borough;
      2.   An estimation of the need in each community district for
accessibility improvements that facilitate the provision of services and allow
for aging in place, including the installation in publicly owned spaces of
lighting, railings, grab bars, ramps, elevators, escalators, curb cuts, and
enhancements such as the widening of doorways and hallways, and other
accessibility features, as well as recommendations for best practices to
improve accessibility in privately owned spaces;
      3.   Supportive services and accessibility improvement projects the
department and coordinating agencies plan to initiate and complete in the 10-
year period following submission of the plan, disaggregated by borough,
community district, and address;
      4.   Resources that the department and coordinating agencies determine
will be needed for the purpose of implementing and maintaining any such
supportive services and accessibility improvement projects; and
      5.   For each such supportive service and accessibility improvement
project, (i) an estimate of how many older adults would be served, and (ii) a
list of the boroughs, community districts, and neighborhoods that would be
served.
   c.   Study regarding naturally occurring retirement communities. Over a 3-
year period beginning on the effective date of the local law that added this
section, the commissioner shall conduct a study on naturally occurring
retirement communities and neighborhood naturally occurring retirement
communities in the city. Such study shall include, but need not be limited to:
      1.   Information on the existing state of naturally occurring retirement
communities, including their locations, supportive services provided at each
such location, and contact information for buildings and service providers;
      2.   Identifications of potential naturally occurring retirement
communities and neighborhood naturally occurring retirement communities as both
such communities are defined in section 209 of the elder law, not currently
designated or otherwise recognized by the New York state office for the aging
or the department, accompanied by explanations of how and why each such
potential community was identified;
      3.   In consultation with relevant council members and community
stakeholders, information on the existing capacity of community-based
organizations to support each such potential community;
      4.   An assessment of the identification, designation and funding
processes for naturally occurring retirement communities and neighborhood
naturally occurring retirement communities, including any recommendations for
improving such processes;
      5.   A summary of the needs assessments and challenges expressed by
current naturally occurring retirement community providers, including any
identified capital needs within such communities;
      6.   Data on the demographic trends, health outcomes, and social
isolation among older adults in such communities; and
      7.   In consultation with the department of city planning, the department
of health and mental hygiene, the department of transportation, and any other
agency deemed necessary, an evaluation of the necessary improvements and
investments required to enhance neighborhood infrastructure, healthcare
facilities, social services, transportation, and other critical services to
support older adults aging in place within such communities.
   d.   Plan regarding naturally occurring retirement communities. Based on the
findings of the study conducted pursuant to subdivision c of this section, the
commissioner shall, within 2 years of completing such study, develop and
implement a plan to support naturally occurring retirement communities and
neighborhood naturally occurring retirement communities. The plan shall
include, but need not be limited to:
      1.   Recommendations to the New York state office for the aging to
designate any housing developments, buildings, or areas identified in the study
conducted pursuant to subdivision c of this section as naturally occurring
retirement communities or neighborhood naturally occurring retirement
communities, as appropriate;
      2.   An estimate of the resources needed to establish and maintain
supportive service programs within such potential communities, disaggregated by
each such potential community;
      3.   Training and onboarding for community-based organizations to expand
their capacity to support older adults in such potential communities;
      4.   Recommendations for infrastructure improvements for such potential
communities to be shared with the cabinet for older New Yorkers as established
by section 2405 of the New York city charter;
      5.   Strategies to improve the identification of naturally occurring
retirement communities and neighborhood naturally occurring retirement
communities throughout the city, taking into consideration communities that
lack appropriate or relevant service providers; and
      6.   Subject to appropriation, a program to provide grant funding and
other resources, including start-up grants, capacity-building support, and
operational funding to support the operations of community-based organizations
to provide services within identified naturally occurring retirement
communities.
   e.   The commissioner shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the
council, and post on the department’s website, the findings of the study
conducted pursuant to subdivision c of this section and the plan developed
pursuant to subdivision d of this section.
   f.   Progress reports. Two years after publication of the plans developed
pursuant to subdivisions b and d of this section, and every 2 years thereafter
until the completion of each such plan, or until January 30, 2037, the
commissioner shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council and post
on the department’s website progress reports detailing the status of the
implementation of projects and recommendations included in each such plan.
(L.L. 2025/001, 1/4/2025, eff. 1/4/2025; L.L. 2025/002, 1/4/2025, eff. 1/4/
2025)
§ 21-206 Unpaid caregiver plan.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section:
      Adult. The term "adult" means an individual 18 years of age or older.
      Unpaid caregiver. The term "unpaid caregiver" means 1) an adult family
member or other adult providing unpaid care to a person 60 years of age or
older; 2) an adult family member or other adult providing unpaid care to a
person with Alzheimer's disease or other dementia; 3) a grandparent or other
non-parent relative 55 years of age or older providing unpaid care to a child
under the age of 18; and 4) an adult providing unpaid care to an individual
with a disability between the age of 18 and 59.
   b.   No later than February 15, 2017, the department shall develop and
conduct a survey of unpaid caregivers and providers offering services to unpaid
caregivers within the city to identify the needs of unpaid caregivers, as well
as to assess existing caregiver services. Such survey shall be developed in
consultation with academic experts in caregiving issues, service providers, and
other appropriate stakeholders, and shall contain questions designed to collect
information from a sample of unpaid caregivers and caregiver service providers
on the following issues:
      1.   Availability of information about programs, services, and other
resources designed to provide support to unpaid caregivers;
      2.   Accessibility of programs and services, including, but not limited
to, hours of operation, location, transportation options for accessing such
programs and services, cost, payment methods, eligibility restrictions,
cultural competency, and language capacity;
      3.   Utilization of programs and services, including, but not limited to,
the number of individuals requesting and receiving services, the types of
services requested, and the number of individuals placed on waitlists for
services where applicable; and
      4.   Recipient outcomes as a result of utilizing existing programs and
services, including, but not limited to, the unpaid caregiver's health and
employment circumstances, access to benefits, knowledge about the care
recipient's illness or condition, and awareness and use of appropriate services
for the care recipient's illness or condition.
   c.   No later than August 30, 2017, the department shall deliver to the
mayor and speaker of the council, and shall post on its website, a
comprehensive plan to address the needs of unpaid caregivers within the city,
in consultation with the department of social services, the mayor's office for
people with disabilities, the department of health and mental hygiene, and such
other appropriate agencies as the mayor shall determine. The department also
shall consult with unpaid caregivers, academic experts in caregiving issues,
service providers, advocates for senior citizens and individuals with
disabilities, and any other stakeholders that the department may deem
appropriate in developing such plan.
   d.   The plan required by subdivision c of this section shall include, but
not be limited to:
      1.   The results of the survey required by subdivision b of this section;
      2.   Data on:
         (a)   the estimated total number of unpaid caregivers providing care
in the city, disaggregated by age, gender, race, ethnicity, language, income
level, borough of residence, and employment status;
         (b)   the estimated average number of hours of care per week provided
by unpaid caregivers, disaggregated by age, gender, race, ethnicity, language,
income level, borough of residence, and employment status;
         (c)   care recipients, including but not limited to, age, gender,
borough of residence, number of individuals providing care to recipients, daily
activities necessitating assistance from a caregiver, health condition, and
living situation; and
      3.   Recommendations about:
         (a)   how to increase information and outreach to unpaid caregivers;
         (b)   how to expand education and training for unpaid caregivers;
         (c)   how to educate and involve businesses in addressing workplace
issues impacting unpaid caregivers;
         (d)   how to address issues and concerns with existing programs and
services identified through the survey conducted pursuant to subdivision b of
this section;
         (e)   additional programs and services that may be established to
provide support to unpaid caregivers;
         (f)   how to increase civic engagement and volunteer opportunities to
support unpaid caregivers; and
         (g)   Any other issues that the department deems appropriate.
   e.   Beginning two years following the submission of the plan required by
subdivision c of this section and every five years thereafter, the department
shall submit to the mayor and the speaker a report detailing progress made on
the recommendations, initiatives, and priorities that result from such plan, as
well as updated data for the information described in paragraph 2 of
subdivision d.
   f.   The unpaid caregiver plan shall be revisited and revised as appropriate
every four years after the submission of the initial plan.
(L.L. 2016/097, 8/31/2016, eff. 8/31/2016)
§ 21-207 Users of life-sustaining equipment and individuals for whom a
disruption in electrical service would create a medical emergency.
The department shall regularly provide written materials from the office of
emergency management to all senior centers in the city and all naturally
occurring retirement communities sponsored by the department on how to register
with any utility providing electrical service within the city as a user of
life-sustaining equipment or an individual for whom a disruption in electrical
service would create a medical emergency. These materials shall also be posted
electronically in a conspicuous location on the department's website and on the
website of the mayor's office for people with disabilities.
(L.L. 2018/066, 1/19/2018, eff. 2/18/2018)
§ 21-208 Senior centers.
   a.   For the purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Affiliated sites. The term "affiliated sites" means department-funded
congregate sites affiliated with a senior center, including any social club,
satellite, or extended/social services.
      Senior. The term "senior" means a person 60 years of age and older.
   b.   Not later than December 31, 2018, and by December 31 annually
thereafter, the department shall submit to the speaker of the council and post
to its website an annual report regarding the services of all department-funded
senior centers.
   c.   The annual report shall include, but need not be limited to, the
following information in non-proprietary machine readable format for each such
senior center for the prior fiscal year:
      1.   The program name, sponsor name, address, New York city housing
authority development in which such senior center is located if such senior
center is located on property owned by the housing authority, borough, council
district, community district, designation as a neighborhood senior center or
innovative senior center, and days and hours of operation as well as such
information for each affiliated site;
      2.   The contract term, including any renewals;
      3.   The budgeted total annual contract amount and the total annual
reimbursed expenditures paid;
      4.   The average number of daily participants;
      5.   The total annual reimbursed expenditures for congregate meals,
disaggregated by kosher and non-kosher meals;
      6.   The cost per meal for each senior center, disaggregated by kosher
and non-kosher meals;
      7.   The method by which the senior center provides congregate meals,
either by in-house preparation or catered meals, and whether the senior center
provides meals for any other senior center;
      8.   The combined total cost per person for providing services in the
following areas: information and assistance; education and recreation; and
health promotion. The report shall further include a brief description of the
types of services provided in each such area;
      9.   The percentage service utilization based on actual units of service
versus planned units of service comprising the combined total of services in
the following areas: information and assistance; education and recreation; and
health promotion;
      10.   The total number of employees, disaggregated by full-time and part-
time employees;
      11.   The total budgeted amount for personnel services;
      12.   For each senior center located on property owned by the New York
city housing authority, the name of the entity that operates such senior
center;
      13.   To the extent practicable, for each senior center located on
property owned by such authority, the number of complaints related to such
senior center's facilities; and
      14.   To the extent such information is available, any steps taken to
address the complaints described in paragraph 13 of this subdivision.
   d.   Not later than December 31, 2019, and by December 31 annually
thereafter, the department shall submit to the speaker of the council and post
to its website the following information in non-proprietary machine readable
format for each department-funded senior center for the prior fiscal year:
      1.   The total number of participants per day, including the
corresponding date;
      2.   The total number of congregate meals served per day, including the
corresponding date; disaggregated by breakfast, lunch, or dinner, where
applicable; and type of meal, including but not limited to kosher and non-
kosher; and
      3.   The total number of participants served in each of the following
areas per day, including the corresponding date, and the total number of
participants served in the combined total of such areas: information and
assistance; education and recreation; and health promotion.
   e.   No information that is otherwise required to be reported pursuant to
this section shall be reported in a manner that would violate any applicable
provision of federal, state, or local law relating to the privacy of
information or that would interfere with law enforcement investigations or
otherwise conflict with the interests of law enforcement.
(L.L. 2018/140, 8/6/2018, eff. 8/6/2018; Am. L.L. 2021/073, 6/27/2021, eff. 6/
27/2021)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2018/140 and
L.L. 2021/073.
§ 21-209 Mental health training for senior center case workers.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the term "caseworker"
means an individual employed by a senior center that receives funding from the
department to provide services on-site pursuant to a contract procured under
chapter 13 of the charter and through a source selection method established by
procurement policy board rule, who provides case assistance, information and
referrals for benefits and social services at such a senior center.
   b.   Each caseworker shall complete a training to recognize the signs and
symptoms of mental illness for older adults offered by the department of health
and mental hygiene or a successor agency, provided that such department offers
such training.
   c.   At least once every three years after completing the training described
in subdivision b of this section, each caseworker shall receive supplemental
refresher training, provided that the department of health and mental hygiene
or a successor agency offers such training.
(L.L. 2019/125, 6/29/2019, eff. 10/27/2019)
§ 21-210 Cultural programming relevant to prevalent spoken languages at older
adult centers.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Older adult. The term "older adult" means a person 60 years of age or
older.
      Older adult center. The term "older adult center" means a facility, other
than a social adult day care, operated by a person pursuant to a contract with
the department to provide services to older adults on a regular basis
including, but not limited to meals, recreation, and counseling.
      Prevalent spoken language. The term "prevalent spoken language" means a
language, other than English, spoken by 20 percent or more of older adults.
   b.   The department shall identify the communities served by each older
adult center and the prevalent spoken languages of such communities, and notify
each such center of such prevalent spoken languages at least once annually.
   c.   The department shall require each older adult center to develop and
conduct programming in each prevalent spoken language of such center as
identified pursuant to subdivision b of this section. Such programming shall
consider the cultural and ethnic background that relates to each prevalent
spoken language.
(L.L. 2023/019, 2/19/2023, eff. 6/19/2023)
§ 21-211 Know your rights pamphlet for older adults.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Designated citywide languages. The term "designated citywide languages"
means (i) the top 6 limited English proficiency languages spoken by the
population of New York city as determined by the department of city planning
and the office of the language services coordinator, based on the American
community survey data, as published by the United States census bureau; and
(ii) the top 4 limited English proficiency languages spoken by the population
served or likely to be served by agencies, as determined by the office of the
language services coordinator, based on language access data collected by the
department of education, excluding the languages designated based on the
American community survey data.
      Naturally occurring retirement community. The term "naturally occurring
retirement community" means an apartment building, a housing complex or a
housing development, as identified by the department, (i) that was not
constructed to house older adults, (ii) where dwelling units are not leased or
sold exclusively to older adults, and (iii) where at least 2,500 older adults
reside or at least 50 percent of the dwelling units are occupied by one or more
older adults.
      Older adult. The term "older adult" means a person 60 years of age or
older.
      Relevant agencies. The term "relevant agencies" means the city commission
on human rights, the department of consumer and worker protection, the
department of health and mental hygiene, the department of housing preservation
and development, the department of parks and recreation, the department of
social services, the department of youth and community development, the mayor's
office for people with disabilities, and the mayor's office of immigrant
affairs.
      State agency. The term "state agency" means any New York state
department, division, board, commission, or bureau of any state department, any
public benefit corporation, public authority, or commission at least one of
whose members is appointed by the governor of New York.
   b.   Pamphlet. The department, in consultation with relevant agencies, shall
develop and publish a pamphlet written in English, using clear and accessible
language, to educate older adults about their rights, and access to information
and resources, on topics including, but not limited to, age discrimination,
deed theft, discrimination in employment, elder abuse, emergency preparedness
and response, employment opportunities, paid volunteer opportunities, workforce
program opportunities, food security, health care and insurance, home care,
housing accommodations, living wills, and transportation. Such pamphlet shall
(i) describe each such topic and the rights of older adults regarding such
topic and (ii) list the name, address, contact information, and website of the
relevant agency or state agency and relevant community-based organizations that
an older adult may contact to obtain additional information. The department may
include a statement in such pamphlet notifying recipients that inclusion of an
organization on such list does not constitute an endorsement by the department
of the services provided by any such organization. The department shall post,
and update annually as necessary, such pamphlet on the department's website and
make it available in the designated citywide languages. Such pamphlet shall
also be posted on the 311 customer service center website.
   c.   Outreach. No later than 30 days after the department publishes the
pamphlet required by subdivision b of this section, the department, in
collaboration with relevant agencies, shall conduct outreach on such pamphlet
in the designated citywide languages and in a manner that takes into account
the cultural and ethnic backgrounds of the older adults who are the subjects of
such outreach. Such outreach shall include, but need not be limited to, the
following:
      1.   Conducting informational sessions about such pamphlet; and
      2.   Providing such pamphlet to organizations that have contracts with
the department to serve older adults.
   d.   The department may promulgate rules establishing a process for an
organization incorporated pursuant to the not-for-profit corporation law to be
included on the list required by subdivision b of this section. Such rules
shall consider factors including, but not limited to, whether such organization
provides services at no or low cost; the size, capacity, and services of such
organization; and the experience such organization has working with older
adults.
   e.   Report. No later than 1 year after the department posts the pamphlet as
required by subdivision b of this section, and annually thereafter, the
commissioner shall submit a report regarding the department's outreach efforts,
as required by subdivision c of this section, to the mayor and the speaker of
the council, and post such report on the department's website. Such report
shall include, but need not be limited to, the following information for the
previous year:
      1.   The number of informational sessions conducted on the pamphlet;
      2.   The number of pamphlets provided to organizations and institutions
serving older adults; and
      3.   Any recommendations to improve such outreach efforts.
(L.L. 2023/021, 2/19/2023, eff. 8/18/2023; Am. L.L. 2024/133, 12/21/2024, eff.
3/21/2025)
§ 21-212 Housing support.
   a.   The department shall establish a housing support program for the
purpose of helping persons 60 years of age or older who are at risk of eviction
or foreclosure to identify and access relevant aid and other support to remain
in their residence.
   b.   Such program shall provide case management services designed to provide
situation-specific advice and support to each participating person. Such
services shall be provided at no cost and, at minimum, include:
      1.   An intake session, which may be conducted at the participating
person's residence, for the purpose of identifying and assessing the factors
contributing to such person's risk of eviction or foreclosure, and how such
factors could be addressed under relevant assistance, services or programs;
      2.   Referrals for assistance, services or programs that could address
factors contributing to such person's risk of eviction or foreclosure;
      3.   Assistance completing applications for financial assistance or
enrollment in services or programs; and
      4.   Ongoing support to monitor such person's risk of eviction or
foreclosure, the effect of referred assistance, services or programs on
reducing or eliminating such risk and any factors contributing to such risk
that could be ameliorated with further advice and support.
   c.   In assessing a person's risk for eviction or foreclosure, the
department shall consider any relevant factor, including, but not limited to,
such person's health status and whether other persons, including family
members, also live in such person's residence.
   d.   In administering the program required by this section, the department
shall:
      1.   Maintain an online portal, accessible to program participants, for
the purpose of tracking events and progress of individual cases and storing
information relevant to each case; and
      2.   Maintain a phone number for the purpose of taking questions about
the department's housing support services and providing assistance to persons
seeking to enroll or enrolled in such program.
   e.   The department shall conduct ongoing outreach and education to promote
awareness of the program required by this section. Such outreach shall include,
but not be limited to, an annual mailing to persons who may benefit from
enrollment in such program or who may care for or serve such persons.
   f.   The department shall administer the program required by this section in
accordance with section
23-1102.
(L.L. 2023/020, 2/19/2023, eff. 8/18/2023)
§ 21-213 Digital literacy program for older adults.
   a.   No later than December 31, 2024, the commissioner for the aging in
collaboration with the commissioner of information technology and
telecommunications, and any relevant stakeholders deemed necessary by the
mayor, shall administer a digital literacy training program to serve older
adults. Such training program shall be offered to the public at no cost and
shall include the following topics:
      1.   The importance and need for older adults to be digitally literate;
      2.   Accessing and navigating city telehealth services;
      3.   Accessing and navigating online platforms and websites, including
social media platforms, which offer technology classes, lectures, workshops and
other programming and activities designed to help older adults learn and use
technology, develop skills, and connect and socialize with other older adults;
      4.   Accessing and navigating the website and mobile application in which
individuals obtain information on and apply for certain human resources
administration benefits, and human resources administration clients obtain
certain benefits case information;
      5.   Identifying and avoiding online fraud or scams; and
      6.   Accessing and navigating other programs or applications designed to
support older adults in accessing services, as deemed appropriate by the
commissioner for the aging or the commissioner of information technology and
telecommunications.
   b.   No less than once every three years, the commissioner for the aging, in
collaboration with the commissioner of information technology and
telecommunications, and any relevant stakeholders deemed necessary by the
mayor, shall evaluate the program established pursuant to subdivision a of this
section for updates to best practices, educational materials, curricula,
resources and any other program components, and make updates to any such
components as necessary. Such evaluation shall at minimum include an online or
electronic survey for older adults who participate in such program to provide
feedback regarding such program.
   c.   The commissioner for the aging shall report to the mayor and the
speaker of the council on any updates to the program made in response to the
evaluation required pursuant to subdivision b of this section if and when any
such updates are made.
   d.   The program shall be offered in appropriate prevalent spoken languages.
   e.   The program established pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall
be offered in person or through interactive live video instruction in at least
one library or senior center in each community district and in any other
facilities as deemed appropriate by the commissioner for the aging or the
commissioner of information technology and telecommunications.
   f.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate any existing
contract or other agreement between any department and any entity that provides
digital literacy programming on behalf of any such department.
(L.L. 2023/082, 6/25/2023, eff. 6/25/2023)
§ 21-214 Provision of information regarding initiatives to provide low or no-
cost primary health care to income-eligible New York city residents.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Client. The term “client” means an older adult to whom direct services
are provided by the department or by a person that contracts with the
department to provide such services.
      NYC care initiative. The term “NYC care initiative” means the health care
access program operated by the New York city health and hospitals corporation
to provide low or no-cost primary care to income-eligible New York city
residents, or any such successor program.
   b.   The department shall make available to all clients information
regarding the NYC care initiative. Such information shall describe the NYC care
initiative and provide eligibility guidelines for such initiative. The
department shall make such information available to clients in paper form at
all locations where the department, or a person contracting with the
department, provides services to clients. Such information shall, at minimum,
include:
      1.   A statement that eligibility to participate in the NYC care
initiative is not based on immigration status; and
      2.   Information regarding support services offered through the NYC care
initiative, including, as applicable, access to social workers and care
coordinators that connect eligible individuals with housing, legal services,
financial assistance, and food assistance.
   c.   The department shall post, and update as necessary, the information
required by subdivision b of this section on the department's website and shall
post a link to such information on the 311 citizen center website. The
department shall make such information available in the designated citywide
languages as defined in section
21-211.
(L.L. 2024/058, 4/18/2024, eff. 7/17/2024)
§ 21-215 Provision of information regarding older adult workforce programs.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Client. The term “client” means an older adult to whom direct services
are provided by the department or by an entity that contracts with the
department to provide such services.
      Older adult. The term “older adult” means a person 60 years of age or
older.
      Older adult workforce program. The term “older adult workforce program”
means a program administered by the department for the purpose of connecting
older adults to employment or paid volunteer opportunities.
   b.   Provision of information regarding older adult workforce programs. The
department shall make available to all clients information regarding older
adult workforce programs. Such information shall describe all such programs and
provide eligibility guidelines for such programs. The department shall make
such information available to clients in paper form at physical locations where
the department, or an entity contracted with the department, provides services
to clients.
   c.   Publication of information. The department shall post, and update as
necessary, the information required by subdivision b of this section on the
department's website and shall post a link to such information on the 311
customer service center website. The department shall make such information
available in the designated citywide languages as defined in section
21-211.
(L.L. 2024/133, 12/21/2024, eff. 3/21/2025)
§ 21-216 Elder fraud prevention.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Activity of daily living. The term “activity of daily living” means an
activity related to personal care, including, but not limited to, bathing,
showering, dressing, getting in or out of bed or a chair, walking, using the
toilet, or eating.
      Caregiver. The term “caregiver” means a nonprofessional person who
assists an older adult with the use of technology, including, but not limited
to, devices such as computers, smartphones or tablet computers, or services
such as e-mail, social media applications, or messaging applications.
      Designated citywide languages. The term “designated citywide languages”
has the same meaning as in section
23-1101.
      Homebound older adult. The term “homebound older adult” means an older
adult who resides at home and has physical or other health issues or functional
limitations that impact their ability to travel from their home safely to
obtain services in the community, as shown by the need for the assistance of
another person with at least one activity of daily living or instrumental
activity of daily living.
      Instrumental activity of daily living. The term “instrumental activity of
daily living” means an activity related to independent living, including, but
not limited to, preparing meals, managing finances, shopping for groceries or
personal items, performing housework, or using a telephone.
      Internet scam. The term “internet scam” means an individual or business’
use of an electronic device, digital tool, email program, or application
software to deceive individuals into revealing sensitive information, such as
passwords, bank account numbers, bank routing numbers, personal documents, and
identifying information, via the internet.
      Older adult. The term “older adult” has the same meaning as in section
21-210.
      Older adult center. The term “older adult center” has the same meaning as
in section
21-210.
      Phishing scam. The term “phishing scam” means an individual or business’
illegal use of an electronic device, digital tool, email program, or
application software to deceive individuals into revealing sensitive
information, such as passwords, bank account numbers, bank routing numbers,
personal documents, and identifying information.
      Phone scam. The term “phone scam” means an individual or business’
illegal use of a mobile telephone, cellular device, voice calling application,
internet telephone calling feature, or landline telephone to deceive
individuals into revealing sensitive information, such as passwords, bank
account numbers, bank routing numbers, personal documents, and identifying
information.
   b.   Printed materials. No later than 6 months following the effective date
of the local law that added this section, the department, in consultation with
the department of information technology and telecommunications and the
department of consumer and worker protection, shall develop and publish
materials to educate older adults and caregivers about how to prevent, detect,
and report common internet scams, phone scams, phishing scams, and other
financial scams. Such materials shall be printed in the designated citywide
languages, and incorporate accessibility features including the use of large
print, legible fonts, clear and accessible language, instructive graphics, and
braille. Such materials shall include:
      1.   A checklist of the core elements of common internet scams, phone
scams, and phishing scams;
      2.   Recommendations for older adults and caregivers to identify if an
older adult is being targeted by a scam;
      3.   The legal rights of older adults related to internet scams, phone
scams, and phishing scams;
      4.   Contact information for legal resources and legal services
organizations that can assist in advising individuals who have been deceived by
internet scams, phone scams, and phishing scams; and
      5.   Contact information for the department or other relevant agencies or
organizations that an individual may contact to obtain additional information
regarding internet scams, phone scams, and phishing scams.
   c.   Digital materials. The department shall create a digital version of the
materials created pursuant to subdivision b of this section, including an
audible version of such materials.
   d.   Distribution of materials. 
      1.   The commissioner shall require older adult centers to distribute the
materials created pursuant to subdivision b of this section to older adults
entering such centers. The commissioner shall also ensure that such materials
are distributed to homebound older adults. Such materials shall be updated and
distributed twice annually.
      2.   The department shall post on its website, and update as necessary,
the digital materials created pursuant to subdivision c of this section, and
make such materials available in the designated citywide languages.
   e.   Signage. The commissioner shall require every older adult center to
post signage in prominent common areas within every older adult center. Such
signage shall include contact information for the department or other relevant
agencies or organizations that an older adult may contact to obtain additional
information regarding internet scams, phone scams, and phishing scams.
   f.   Guidance. The department shall provide quarterly guidance to all older
adult centers regarding emerging internet scams, phone scams, and phishing
scams that older adults may encounter.
(L.L. 2025/034, 3/29/2025, eff. 3/29/2025)
§ 21-217 Financial literacy and end of life preparation education.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Designated citywide languages. The term “designated citywide languages”
has the same meaning as in section 23-2101*.
* Editor's note: as set forth in L.L. 2025/034; intended reference is likely
section
23-1101.
      End of life preparation. The term “end of life preparation” means
information regarding legal or financial considerations relevant to end of
life, including, but not limited to, the appointment of an agent to control the
disposition of remains; health care proxies; last will and testament
preparation; letters of competency; letters of intent; living will and living
trust preparation; orders for life-sustaining treatment; and power-of-attorney
designations.
      Financial literacy. The term “financial literacy” means financial
planning, budgeting, credit management, reducing debt, and saving.
      Homebound older adult. The term “homebound older adult” has the same
meaning as in section
21-216.
      Older adult center. The term “older adult center” has the same meaning as
in section
21-210.
   b.   Printed materials. No later than 6 months following the effective date
of the local law that added this section, the department, in consultation with
the department of consumer and worker protection, shall develop and publish
materials to educate older adults about financial literacy and end of life
preparation. Such materials shall be printed in the designated citywide
languages, and incorporate accessibility features including the use of large
print, legible fonts, clear and accessible language, instructive graphics, and
braille. Such materials shall include:
      1.   General information about financial literacy;
      2.   Contact information for financial empowerment and tax preparation
services provided pursuant to contracts with the department of consumer and
worker protection;
      3.   Contact information for legal resources and legal services
organizations that can assist in advising individuals in end of life
preparation and common legal issues that may impact older adults; and
      4.   Contact information for the department or other relevant agencies or
organizations that an older adult may contact to obtain additional information
regarding financial literacy and end of life preparation.
   c.   Distribution of materials. 
      1.   The commissioner shall require older adult centers to offer the
materials created pursuant to subdivision b of this section to older adults
entering such centers. The commissioner shall also ensure that such materials
are distributed to homebound older adults. Such materials shall be updated and
distributed as necessary, or least once every 2 years.
      2.   The department shall post on its website, and update as necessary,
such materials and make such materials available in the designated citywide
languages.
(L.L. 2025/034, 3/29/2025, eff. 3/29/2025)
