Section 626. Board of correction.
   a.   There shall be a city board of correction to consist of nine members.
Members shall be appointed for a term of six years. Vacancies shall be filled
for the remainder of the unexpired term. Three members shall be appointed by
the mayor, three by the council, and three by the mayor on the nomination
jointly by the presiding justices of the appellate division of the supreme
court for the first and second judicial departments. Appointments shall be made
by the three respective appointing authorities on a rotating basis to fill any
vacancy occurring on or after the effective date of this charter. Members of
the board may be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the performance of their
duties. The chairman of the board shall be designated from time to time by the
mayor from among its members. Members of the board may be removed by the mayor
for cause and after a hearing at which they shall be entitled to representation
by counsel.
   b.   The board shall adopt rules to govern its own proceedings. The board
may appoint an executive director to serve at its pleasure with such duties and
responsibilities as the board may assign, and other professional, clerical, and
support personnel within appropriations for such purpose. The commissioner
shall designate such of the department's stenographic, clerical and other
assistance to the board as may be necessary for the proper performance of its
functions. The commissioner may attend meetings of the board but shall not be a
member of it.
   c.   The board, or by written designation of the board, any member of it,
the executive director, or other employee, shall have the following powers and
duties:
      1.   The inspection and visitation at any time of all institutions and
facilities under the jurisdiction of the department;
      2.   The inspection of all books, records, documents, and papers of the
department;
      3.   The preparation for submission to the mayor, the council, and the
commissioner of proposals for capital planning and improvements; studies and
reports concerned with the development of the department's correctional program
planning; and studies and reports in regard to methods of promoting closer
cooperation of custodial, probation, and parole agencies of government and the
courts; and
      4.   The evaluation of departmental performance.
   d.   The board, annually and at such other times as it may determine, shall
submit to the mayor, the council, and the commissioner reports, findings and
recommendations in regard to the matters within its jurisdiction.
   e.   The board shall establish minimum standards for the care, custody,
correction, treatment, supervision, and discipline of all persons held or
confined under the jurisdiction of the department; and it shall promulgate such
minimum standards in rules and regulations after giving the mayor and
commissioner an opportunity to review and comment on the proposed standards, or
amendments or additions to such standards.
   f.   The board shall establish procedures for the hearing of grievances,
complaints or requests for assistance (1) by or on behalf of any person held or
confined under the jurisdiction of the department or (2) by any employee of the
department. Starting July 1, 2021, the board shall issue a report, at least
every three years, on issues related to the department's grievance process.
Such report shall incorporate direct feedback from incarcerated individuals and
proposed recommendations for relevant improvements, and shall include a section
of recommendations on how to improve the grievance process for vulnerable
populations, including incarcerated individuals who are lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, intersex, and gender nonconforming. Such report shall be submitted
to the council and posted on the board's website.
   g.   Within the scope of its authority pursuant to this section, the board
may compel the attendance of witnesses, require the production of books,
accounts, papers and other evidence, administer oaths, examine persons, and
conduct public or private hearings, studies and investigations. The board may
institute proceedings in a court of appropriate jurisdiction to enforce its
subpoena power and other authority pursuant to this section.
   h.   The board, or by written designation, a member of the board or the
executive director, may conduct hearings, or study or investigate any matter
within the jurisdiction of the department, and the board may make
recommendations and submit reports of its findings to the appropriate
authorities.
   i.   1.   For purposes of this subdivision, the term “correctional health
services” has the same meaning as set forth in section 9-108 of the
administrative code.
      2.   Except where the commissioner of investigation, the attorney
general, or the district attorney for the county in which a death of an
incarcerated individual held or confined under the jurisdiction of the
department occurred investigates such death or prosecutes any alleged criminal
offense related to such death and requests or directs the board not to
investigate such death, the board shall investigate such death and prepare a
report about such investigation. Such report shall include any recommendations
about measures the department or correctional health services may implement to
prevent the circumstances that contributed to the individual’s death. Nothing
in this subdivision shall be construed to limit the board’s discretion to
investigate a death of an incarcerated individual held or confined under the
jurisdiction of the department, including any death the board attributes to a
person’s time in the custody of the department.
         (a)   The board shall submit such report to the department and
correctional health services for review by the department and correctional
health services pursuant to subdivision h of section 9-171 of the
administrative code.
         (b)   No later than 30 days after the board submits the report to the
department and correctional health services, the board shall post such report
and any response to such report from the department and correctional health
services on the website of the board, provided that the board may post such
report and any such response on any date after the department and correctional
health services have provided such a response.
      3.   Notwithstanding subparagraph (b) of paragraph 2, where the board has
not concluded an investigation of a death of an incarcerated individual
pursuant to this subdivision within 180 days of such death, the board shall,
every 60 days until the board concludes such investigation and posts a report
about such investigation, post on its website a statement that the board has
not concluded such investigation, except where the commissioner of
investigation, the attorney general, or the district attorney for the county in
which such death occurred investigates such death or prosecutes any alleged
criminal offense related to such death and requests or directs the board not to
investigate such death.
      4.   Upon request from the next of kin of an incarcerated individual who
has died, the board shall provide to such next of kin records provided to the
board by the department and correctional health services for purposes of such
investigation in accordance with section 87 of the public officers law.
(Am. L.L. 2019/133, 7/14/2019, eff. 1/14/2020; Am. L.L. 2025/105, 8/13/2025,
eff. 11/11/2025)
