Chapter 24-B: Administration for Children's Services
Section 615. Administration; commissioner.
There shall be an administration for children's services, the head of which
shall be the commissioner of children's services.
Section 616. Deputies.
The commissioner shall appoint at least three deputy commissioners.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Administrative Code
Appendix A at L.L. 2010/061.
Section 617. Powers and duties.
   a.   The commissioner shall have the powers and perform the duties of a
commissioner of social services under the social services law for the purpose
of fulfilling his or her responsibilities under this section. The commissioner
shall have the power to perform functions related to the care and protection of
children including, but not limited to:
      1.   performing the functions of a child protective service, including
without limitation, the receipt and investigation of reports of child abuse and
maltreatment;
      2.   providing children and families with preventative services for the
purpose of averting the impairment or disruption of families which could result
in the placement of children in foster care; enabling children placed in foster
care to return to their families; and reducing the likelihood that a child who
has been discharged from foster care may return to such care;
      3.   providing suitable and appropriate care for children who are in the
care, custody, or guardianship of the commissioner;
      4.   providing appropriate daycare, Head Start and other child-care
services; and
      5.   providing services to ensure that legally responsible parents
provide child support.
   b.   Wherever the powers and duties of an agency other than the
administration for children's services as set forth in the charter or
administrative code confer any authority over the areas of child welfare, child
development or child support enforcement within the jurisdiction of the
commissioner of children's services pursuant to section
six hundred seventeen of this chapter, such powers and duties shall be deemed
to be within the jurisdiction of the administration for children's services and
shall be exercised by such administration; provided that such other agency may
exercise such powers and duties where required by state or federal law, or,
with respect to child support enforcement or determinations of eligibility for
subsidized child care, by the department of social services as directed by the
mayor.
   c.   No agency practice, including but not limited to any tracking system,
record keeping or reporting system or data collection system or device, may
prejudice the rights of, stigmatize or otherwise harm a person because of his
or her gender or relationship to a child or children involved in a child
protective matter. To the extent that requirements of this subdivision are
subject to state approval, the agency will request permission to make any
changes in policy necessary to comply with the provisions of this subdivision
within ninety days of the effective date of the local law that added this
subdivision. The agency shall promulgate such rules as are necessary for the
purposes of implementing and carrying out the provisions of this subdivision.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Administrative Code
Appendix A at L.L. 2003/052 and L.L. 2010/061.
Section 618. [Additional powers and duties.]
The commissioner shall, in addition:
   a.   establish, initiate, control, maintain and operate secure and non-
secure facilities for the temporary care and maintenance away from their own
homes only of children alleged to be or adjudicated as juvenile delinquents and
only of children alleged, adjudicated or convicted as juvenile offenders in
detention as defined in subdivision one of section five hundred ten-a of the
executive law;
   b.   contract with other public and private agencies for such services, in
order to ensure that adequate, suitable, and conveniently accessible
accommodations and proper care will be available when required for detention,
within the appropriations available therefore;
   c.   establish such regulations for the operation of secure and non-secure
detention facilities as may be necessary and not inconsistent with state or
local law or with applicable rules and regulations of any state or city agency
having jurisdiction. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the
commissioner shall provide or secure the availability of conveniently
accessible and adequate non-secure detention facilities, certified by the state
office of children and family services, as resources for the courts in the city
of New York pursuant to provisions of the family court act, the criminal
procedure law, and section five hundred ten-a of the executive law;
   d.   develop, implement and maintain systems to collect, store and
disseminate data concerning juvenile delinquency, juvenile crime and the
juvenile justice system;
   e.   participate with other city agencies in the development, implementation
and maintenance of a juvenile justice information system, to include (i) an
index of records of the family court and department of probation related to
proceedings conducted pursuant to article three of the family court act, and
(ii) other information, including but not limited to age, sex, race, date of
birth, charges, dispositions, warrants, calendar information and case
management data connected with such cases, such records to be made available to
the family court, the probation department, and an agency with which the child
is placed or committed upon request, and otherwise to be kept confidential
except as provided by law;
   f.   plan, develop, conduct and supervise programs, including diversion and
aftercare for previously detained juveniles, for the prevention of juvenile
delinquency and juvenile crime and for youths arrested, charged, adjudicated or
convicted of having committed delinquent or criminal acts, and conduct research
and demonstration projects related thereto.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Administrative Code
Appendix A at L.L. 2010/061.
Section 619. Juvenile justice advisory board. [Repealed]
(Am. L.L. 2022/102, 11/9/2022, eff. 11/9/2022; Repealed L.L. 2023/033, 3/14/
2023, eff. 3/14/2023)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Administrative Code
Appendix A at L.L. 2010/061.
Section 620. Child care advisory board.
   a.   Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Board. The term "board" means the child care advisory board established
by this section.
      Child care program. The term "child care program" means any program that
meets the definition provided in subdivision d of section 47.01 of the health
code.
      City. The term "city" means the city of New York.
   b.   Board established. There is hereby established a child care advisory
board.
      1.   The board shall be comprised of the following members:
         (a)   The commissioner of health and mental hygiene, or such
commissioner's designee;
         (b)   The commissioner of the administration for children's services,
or such commissioner's designee;
         (c)   The chancellor of the city school district, or such chancellor's
designee;
         (d)   One member to be appointed by the mayor;
         (e)   One member to be appointed by the speaker of the council;
         (f)   One member to be appointed by the comptroller;
         (g)   One member to be appointed by the public advocate; and
         (h)   Such other members as deemed necessary by the mayor, who shall
also be appointed by such mayor.
      2.   The mayor shall designate one of the members appointed by such mayor
to serve as chair.
      3.   All appointed members shall serve for a term of two years and shall
serve without compensation.
   c.   Duties. The board shall have the power and duty to conduct studies on
and issue reports related to child care in the city, including, but not limited
to, providing an annual assessment of the needs of the city's child care
programs and the city's progress towards providing universal child care. The
board shall also have the power and duty to make recommendations to the mayor
and the speaker of the council on legislation, regulation, policies, procedures
and initiatives to help to make child care more affordable based on the board's
assessments.
   d.   Meetings. The board shall keep a record of its deliberations and
determine its own rules of procedure, which shall include a procedure or
mechanism by which members of the public may make submissions to the board. The
first meeting of the advisory board shall be convened within 120 days after the
effective date of the local law that added this section. The board shall meet
quarterly, and such meetings shall be open to the public.
   e.   Report. No later than one year after the first meeting of the board,
and annually thereafter, the board shall submit a report to the mayor and the
speaker of the council setting forth its assessment of child care programs in
the city and recommendations for making child care more affordable, which shall
include, but need not be limited to, the following for the preceding year:
      1.   Any challenges child care programs faced in providing quality child
care;
      2.   The city's advancement towards universal child care, including any
actions taken by city agencies or legislation or policies introduced;
      3.   The projected annual costs for the next five years associated with
implementing universal child care;
      4.   The recommended costs associated with expanding child care subsidies
to families in the city whose income equals up to 300% and 400% of the federal
poverty guidelines; and
      5.   A summary of information the board considered in formulating its
recommendations to make child care more affordable.
(L.L. 2022/102, 11/9/2022, eff. 11/9/2022)
