Chapter 9: Children's Services
§ 21-901 Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, the terms set forth below are defined as
follows:
   "Abused child" means a child or youth who has been subjected to "physical
abuse," "sexual abuse" and/or "psychological abuse" as defined in section four
hundred eighty-eight of the New York state social services law while in the
custody of ACS.
   "ACS" means the administration for children's services, or any successor
agency charged with operating the city's child welfare system.
   "Bias-based incidents" means incidents, including fights or altercations
between a child and another child or staff, that arose in whole or in part due
to a child's perceived or actual sexual orientation, gender expression or
gender identity, as reported by such child.
   "Case worker" means a diagnostic child protective specialist assigned to a
zone.
   "Child" means "youth" as defined in this section.
   "Commissioner" means the commissioner of ACS.
   "Detention" means the temporary care and maintenance of youth held:
      1.   away from their homes pursuant to article three or seven of the
family court act; or
      2.   pending a hearing for an alleged violation of the conditions of
release from the New York state office of children and family services or ACS
facility or authorized agency; or
      3.   pending a hearing for an alleged violation of a condition of parole
as a juvenile offender; or
      4.   pending a return to a jurisdiction other than the one in which the
youth is held; or
      5.   pursuant to a securing order of a criminal court if the youth named
therein as principal is charged as a juvenile offender; or
      6.   pending a hearing on an extension of placement; or
      7.   pending transfer to a facility upon commitment or placement by a
court.
   "Detention facility" means a facility, certified by the New York state
office of children and family services, for the care of youth detained in
accordance with the provisions of the family court act, regulations of the New
York state office of children and family services, and the criminal procedure
law.
   Emergency removal. "Emergency removal" means the removal of a child from
such child's place of residence or from the custody of such child's parent, or
person legally responsible for the child, pursuant to section 1024 of the
family court act.
   "Entry order" means an order entered pursuant to subdivision two of section
ten hundred thirty-four of the family court act to enter specific premises
where there is probable cause to believe an abused or neglected child may be
found.
   "Fiscal year" means the fiscal year for the city of New York.
   "IRT investigation" means an instant response team investigation conducted
pursuant to the Administration for Children's Services and Law Enforcement
Instant Response Teams Protocol dated February 1998 or any protocol hereafter
promulgated that sets forth guidelines for the use of interdisciplinary instant
response teams.
   "Limited secure placement facility" means a placement facility characterized
by physically restricting construction, hardware and procedures which are less
restrictive than the construction, hardware and procedures of a secure
placement facility.
   "Mechanical restraint" means the use of a mechanical device to restrict the
movement or normal function of a portion of a child's body, including but not
limited to, handcuffs, leg cuffs, daisy chains or waist restraint.
   "Neglected child" means a child or youth who has been subjected to neglect
as defined in section four hundred eighty-eight of the New York state social
services law while in the custody of ACS. "Non-secure detention or placement
facility" means a detention or placement facility characterized by the absence
of physically restricting construction, hardware and procedures.
   "Physical injury or impairment" means any confirmed harm, hurt or damage
resulting in a significant worsening or diminution of a child's physical
condition.
   "Physical restraint" means the use of bodily force to limit a child's
freedom of movement during a physical confrontation or to prevent a
confrontation.
   "Placement" means the temporary care and maintenance of adjudicated youth
held away from their homes pursuant to article three of the family court act.
   "Placement facility" means a facility, certified by the New York state
office of children and family services, for the care of youth placed in
accordance with the provisions of the family court act and the regulations of
the New York state office of children and family services.
   "Room confinement" means the confinement of a child in a room, including but
not limited to the child's own room, when locked or when the child is
authoritatively told not to leave.
   "Secure detention or placement facility" means a detention or placement
facility characterized by physically restricting construction, hardware and
procedures.
   "Youth" means a person who resides in a juvenile detention or placement
facility in the custody of ACS.
   "Zone" means one of no fewer than 13 divisions of ACS child protective
services headed by a deputy director who exercises oversight over the work of
child protective managers, supervisors and child protective specialists in a
specific geographic area, or the Office of Confidential Investigations.
(Am. L.L. 2021/131, 11/21/2021, eff. 4/1/2022)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2013/044.
§ 21-902 Quarterly reports regarding child welfare system.
Beginning no later than July 31, 2006 and no later than the last day of the
month following each calendar quarter thereafter, ACS will furnish to the
speaker of the city council a report regarding New York City's child welfare
system that includes, at a minimum, the following information:
   1.   Child protective services. The following information regarding child
protective services shall be included in the quarterly report, disaggregated by
zone:
      a.   number of case workers employed and number of vacancies in case work
staff at the end of the reporting period;
      b.   experience of case workers, broken down by years of experience in
New York City's child welfare system as follows: 1-3 years of experience; 3-
5 years of experience; 5-7 years of experience; 7-9 years of experience; 9 or
more years of experience;
      c.   average caseload of case workers;
      d.   number of case workers with a caseload of more than 15 cases;
      e.   number of level one supervisors;
      f.   experience of level one supervisors, broken down by years of
experience in New York City's child welfare system as follows: number with 1-
5 years of experience; 5-10 years of experience; 10-15 years of experience; 15-
20 years of experience; 20 or more years of experience;
      g.   number of level two supervisors;
      h.   experience of level two supervisors, broken down by years of
experience in New York City's child welfare system as follows: number with 1-
5 years of experience; 5-10 years of experience; 10-15 years of experience; 15-
20 years of experience; 20 or more years of experience;
      i.   number of child protective managers;
      j.   experience of child protective managers, broken down by years of
experience in New York City's child welfare system as follows: number with 1-
5 years of experience; 5-10 years of experience; 10-15 years of experience; 15-
20 years of experience; 20 or more years of experience;
      k.   number of reports of suspected child abuse or neglect referred to
the zone for investigation, disaggregated by the type of case;
      l.   number of reports of suspected child abuse or neglect referred to
the zone for investigation that were indicated during the reporting period,
disaggregated by the type of case and whether the case was referred to
preventive services, court mandated services, foster care placement or closed;
      m.   number of unfounded cases, disaggregated by whether or not the case
was referred to preventive services;
      n.   number of investigations that resulted in closure without referral
to preventive services, disaggregated by the type of case and whether the case
was indicated or unfounded and the reason for closure;
      o.   number of reports of suspected child abuse or neglect referred to
the zone that involved a family with respect to which ACS had received at least
one prior report of suspected abuse or neglect within the past 24 months,
disaggregated by the type of case;
      p.   number of reports of suspected child abuse or neglect referred to
the zone that involved a family that had at least one child previously in the
foster care system, disaggregated by the type of case;
      q.   number of reports of suspected child abuse or neglect referred to
protective services for which protective services conducted a 72-hour case
conference, disaggregated by the type of case;
      r.   number of reports of suspected child abuse or neglect referred to
protective services for which an elevated risk conference was held,
disaggregated by the type of case;
      s.   number of IRT investigations commenced; and
      t.   number of entry orders sought and number of entry orders obtained.
   2.   Family reunification. The following information regarding family
reunification shall be provided in the quarterly report:
      a.   number of families reunited from foster care during the reporting
period, disaggregated by zone and by length of stay in foster care in six month
intervals;
      b.   of all families reunited during the reporting period, the number of
families receiving aftercare services, disaggregated by zone and by the type of
services being received; and
      c.   number of children who entered foster care during the reporting
period who had been in the custody of the child welfare system within the
thirty-six months immediately preceding the reporting period, disaggregated by
zone.
   3.   Emergency removal information.* The following information regarding
emergency removals shall be included in the quarterly report required pursuant
to this section:
* Editor's note: there are two subsections designated as 3. This subsection 3
was added by L.L. 2021/131, 11/21/2021, eff. 4/1/2022.
      a.   The total number of children removed from their parent or a person
legally responsible for the children on an emergency basis;
      b.   The race and ethnicity, including two or more races or ethnicities
where applicable, of each child and person legally responsible for such child
of a family involved in an emergency removal;
      c.   The community district of the residence of any family from which a
child has been removed on an emergency basis;
      d.   The primary language(s) spoken by the parent or person legally
responsible for the child from whom a child has been removed on an emergency
basis;
   3.   Emergency removal information.* Definitions. For purposes of this
subdivision, the term "emergency removal" means the removal of a child from the
child's residence or from the custody of such child's parent or primary
caretaker pursuant to section 1024 of the family court act. The following
information regarding emergency removals shall be included in the quarterly
report:
* Editor's note: there are two subsections designated as 3. This subsection 3
was added by L.L. 2021/134, 11/21/2021, eff. 4/1/2022.
      a.   The total number of emergency removal cases in which a judge at the
initial appearance following the filing of a child protective proceeding
pursuant to article 10 of the family court act did each of the following:
         (i)   ordered that the child be remanded to the custody of the
commissioner, pursuant to section 1027(b)(i)(A) of the family court act;
         (ii)   ordered that the child be placed with a relative or suitable
person other than the child's parent or primary caretaker, pursuant to section
1027(b)(i)(C) of the family court act;
         (iii)   ordered that a child be released to the care of the respondent
parent with court ordered supervision pursuant to section 1027(d) of the family
court act;
         (iv)   ordered that a child be released to a respondent parent without
court ordered supervision pursuant to section 1027 of the family court act;
         (v)   ordered that the child be released to the care of such child's
non-respondent parent with court ordered supervision, pursuant to section 1027
(d) of the family court act; or
         (vi)   ordered that the child be released to the care of such child's
non-respondent parent without court ordered supervision, pursuant to section
1027(d) of the family court act; or
         (vii)   issued no order respecting the child's custody or release
status pending further proceedings;
      b.   In cases in which a hearing pursuant to section 1027 of the family
court act or section 1028 of the family court act was completed within 7 days
of the initial filing, the total number of cases in which, following completion
or settlement of the hearing, the court:
         (i)   remanded the child to the custody of the commissioner, pursuant
to section 1027(b)(i)(A) of the family court act;
         (ii)   placed the child with a relative or suitable person other than
the child's parent or other person responsible for such child's care, pursuant
to section 1027(b)(i)(C) of the family court act;
         (iii)   released the child to the care of the respondent parent with
court ordered supervision pursuant to section 1027(d) or 1028 of the family
court act;
         (iv)   released the child to a respondent parent without court ordered
supervision pursuant to section 1027 or 1028 of the family court act;
         (v)   released the child to the care of such child's non-respondent
parent with court ordered supervision pursuant to section 1027(d) of the family
court act or section 1028 of the family court act; or
         (vi)   released the child to the care of such child's non-respondent
parent without court ordered supervision, pursuant to section 1027(d) or
section 1028 of the family court act.
   4.   Contact with foster care youth. Beginning with the report due July 31,
2022, the report shall include the following information regarding contact
between a foster care youth, as defined by section
21-902.1, and such youth's parent or caretaker:
      a.   The percent of foster care youth who had their first in-person visit
within 2 days; 7 days; and 14 days from when the foster care youth were
initially placed in ACS custody; and
      b.   The percentage of foster care youth entering foster care in the
quarter who received an ACS placement in a borough other than that which they
are from, disaggregated by borough.
   5.   ACS may use preliminary data to prepare the report required by this
chapter to be delivered no later than July 31, 2006 and may include an
acknowledgement that any preliminary data used in the report is non-final and
subject to change.
(Am. L.L. 2021/131, 11/21/2021, eff. 4/1/2022; Am. L.L. 2021/133, 11/21/2021,
eff. 11/21/2021; Am. L.L. 2021/134, 11/21/2021, eff. 4/1/2022)
§ 21-902.1 Youth and foster care.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:
      Absent without leave. The term "absent without leave" means a child who
has been placed by an authorized agency in foster care in a certified foster
boarding home, an approved relative foster home, or a licensed foster care
facility, and who is absent without the consent of the person(s) or facility in
whose care the child has been placed or the consent of the case planner/
caseworker at the facility in whose care the child has been placed for a
minimum of three days.
      ACS housing subsidy. The term "ACS housing subsidy" means the rent
subsidies or assistance provided pursuant to section 409-a of the social
services law.
      Adult permanency resource. The term "adult permanency resource" means an
adult who has been determined by a social services district to be an
appropriate and acceptable resource for a youth and is committed to providing
support, advice and guidance to the youth and to assist the youth as the youth
makes the transition from foster care to responsible adulthood.
      Adult residential care. The term "adult residential care" means an adult-
care facility contracted by the office for persons with developmental
disabilities or the office of mental health established and operated for the
purposes of providing long-term residential care, room, board, housekeeping,
case management, activities and supervision of five or more adults, unrelated
to the operator, who are unable or substantially unable to live independently.
      Age out. The term "age out" means the discharge of a person aged 18 years
or older who has been discharged from care to self or adulthood attained.
      Another planned permanent living arrangement (APPLA). The term "another
planned permanent living arrangement (APPLA)" means a permanency planning goal
to assist foster care youth in their transition to self-sufficiency by
connecting the youth to an adult permanency resource, equipping the youth with
life skills and, upon discharge, connecting the youth with any needed community
and/or specialized services.
      Concurrent plan. The term concurrent plan "concurrent plan" means a plan
to help a child in foster care find a permanent, stable home that is being
pursued as an alternative to, and simultaneously with, his or her primary plan
to find a permanent, stable home.
      Discharge checklist. The term "discharge checklist" is a form completed
by the ACS contracted foster care agency in consultation with a young person
leaving foster care that is intended to guide discussions about the youth's
plans after leaving care. The document is intended to develop and document a
discharge plan that is youth-driven, is as detailed as the youth elects and
enables the young person to address any outstanding topics prior to discharge.
      Education and training voucher. The term "education and training voucher"
means a current or successor federal program that provides resources
specifically to meet the needs of youth aging out of foster care, through which
eligible youth may receive funds to attend a post-secondary education or
vocational training program.
      Exception to policy. The term "exception to policy" means an approval
from ACS for a foster care youth to remain living in their foster care
placement.
      Foster care youth. The term "foster care youth" means a person who was
placed in an out-of-home placement with the ACS after the filing of a petition
in family court pursuant to articles 3, 7, 10, 10a, 10b or 10c of the family
court act or social services law sections 358a or 384b.
      Housing assistance. The term "housing assistance" means any form of help
designed to assist youth with finding and maintaining a place of residence
including but not limited to ACS housing subsidy, rental assistance received
from any other city agency, supportive housing, or any other assistance
sufficient to obtain adequate housing, including exception to policy.
      Independent living stipend. The term "independent living stipend" means
the payment a youth receives to attend independent living skills formalized
instruction including but not limited to supervised performance in job search,
career counseling, finding an apartment or other place of residence, budgeting,
shopping, cooking, and house cleaning skills.
      Kinship guardians assistance program (KinGAP). The term "kinship
guardianship assistance program (KinGAP)" means the permanency outcome for
children in foster care who have been cared for by a relative for six
consecutive months and for whom it has been determined that returning home or
adoption are not viable options.
      Permanent connection to a caring adult. The term "permanent connection to
a caring adult" means finding an adult who is committed to providing support,
advice and guidance to the youth and to assist the youth as the youth makes the
transition from foster care to responsible adulthood.
      Permanency planning goal. The term "permanency planning goal" means the
goal for child permanency as designated in the child's family assessment and
service plan and approved by the family court.
      Special immigrant juvenile status (SIJS). The term "special immigrant
juvenile status (SIJS)" means legal immigration status that can be awarded by
United States citizenship and immigration services to undocumented immigrant
children, for whom family reunification with one or both parents is not a
viable option and who have been found dependent upon the juvenile court, and
that allows a child to apply for lawful permanent residency.
      Supportive housing. The term "supportive housing" means housing that is
for people with mental health needs or other special needs.
      Test assessing secondary completion (TASC). The term "test assessing
secondary completion (TASC)" means the New York state high school equivalency
test which replaced the general education development examination as the
primary pathway to a New York state high school equivalency diploma.
      Trial discharge. The term "trial discharge" means that a child in foster
care is no longer in the physical care of the social services district but
remains in the legal custody of the social services district.
      Vocational training. The term "vocational training" means instructional
programs, including but not limited to marketable skills or trade or formal on-
the-job training.
   b.   Annual reports regarding youth and foster care. Beginning no later than
April 30, 2026 for the calendar year 2025 and annually thereafter, ACS shall
furnish to the speaker of the council and the public advocate, and post on
ACS's website a report regarding youth in foster care. Such report shall
include the following information disaggregated where available and indicated
with an explanation where not available by age range, gender, race and
ethnicity:
      1.   Discharge outcomes of foster care youth. The following information
regarding the discharge outcomes of youth in foster care shall be included in
the annual report:
         i.   number and percentage of youth who have been adopted,
disaggregated by age from 0 to 21 and over 21;
         ii.   number and percentage of youth who have been reunified with
family, disaggregated by age from 0 to 21 and over 21;
         iii.   number and percentage of youth who are placed with family
through KinGAP, disaggregated by age from 0 to 21 and over 21;
         iv.   number and percentage of youth who have aged out of care,
disaggregated by age from 18 to 21, and over 21;
         v.   number and percentage of youth who left foster care with any
other discharge outcome, including discharges to psychiatric institutions,
correctional facilities, or unspecified destinations, disaggregated by age from
0 to 21 and over 21;
         vi.   number and percentage of youth who did not consent to remain in
foster care past age 18 and for whom the court approved a discharge from foster
care, disaggregated by age from 18 to 20; provided, however, that this
information shall be included in such report only upon required New York state
approval of the necessary changes to the discharge checklist, beginning with
the report for the second calendar year following such approval;
         vii.   number and percentage of youth for whom an exception to policy
to remain in foster care after age 21 was requested;
         viii.   number and percentage of youth who remained in foster care
after age 21 under an exception to policy;
         ix.   number and percentage of youth who requested to return to foster
care after not consenting to remain in care after age 18;
         x.   number and percentage of youth who returned to foster care after
not consenting to remain in care after age 18.
         xi.   the number and percentage of youth who were absent without leave
from foster care at discharge, disaggregated by age from 0 to 21, and over 21.
      2.   Youth currently in foster care. The following information regarding
youth currently in foster care shall be included in the annual report:
         i.   the total number of youth in care disaggregated by age from 0 to
21 and over 21, and the number and percentage of youth who have a permanency
planning goal of APPLA, including those who have concurrent plans,
disaggregated by age as follows: 14-15; 16-17; 18-19; 20-21; over 21;
         ii.   number and percentage of youth for whom ACS paid an independent
living stipend;
         iii.   number and percentage of youth who receive vocational training,
disaggregated by age as follows: 14-15; 16-17; 18-19; 20-21; over 21;
         iv.   number and percentage of youth who may be eligible to petition
for SIJS or other immigration relief, disaggregated by age as follows: 14-15;
16-17; 18-19; 20-21; over 21;
         v.   number and percentage of youth who have SIJS applications or
other immigration applications pending, disaggregated by age as follows: 0-3;
4-6; 7-9; 10-12; 13-15; 16-18; 19-21;
         vi.   number and percentage of youth who have a permanent connection
to a caring adult;
         vii.   number and percentage of youth who applied for housing
assistance, disaggregated by the type of assistance as follows:
            (a)   NYCHA public housing;
            (b)   section 8 voucher;
            (c)   supportive housing;
            (d)   adult residential care;
            (e)   ACS housing subsidy;
            (f)   any other type of housing assistance, whether private,
federal, state or city-subsidized or operated, including information specifying
the specific subsidies or resources utilized;
         viii.   number and percentage of youth who have been found eligible
for housing assistance, disaggregated by the type of assistance as follows:
            (a)   NYCHA public housing;
            (b)   section 8 voucher;
            (c)   supportive housing;
            (d)   adult residential care;
            (e)   ACS housing subsidy;
            (f)   any other type of housing assistance, whether private,
federal, state or city-subsidized or operated, including information specifying
the specific subsidies or resources utilized;
         ix.   number and percentage of youth who have been found ineligible
for housing assistance, disaggregated by the type of assistances as follows:
            (a)   NYCHA public housing;
            (b)   section 8 voucher;
            (c)   supportive housing;
            (d)   adult residential care;
            (e)   ACS housing subsidy;
            (f)   any other type of housing assistance, whether private,
federal, state or city-subsidized or operated, including information specifying
the specific subsidies or resources utilized;
         x.   number and percentage of youth who are currently enrolled in high
school, disaggregated by social education status and by age as follows: 14-15;
16-17; 18-19; 20-21; over 21;
         xi.   number and percentage of youth who are currently enrolled in a
New York city department of education approved high school equivalency program,
disaggregated by age as follows: 14-15; 16-17; 18-19; 20-21; over 21;
         xii.   number and percentage of youth who are currently enrolled in
colleges, disaggregated by age as follows: under 18; 18-19; 20-21; over 21;
         xiii.   number and percentage of youth who are not enrolled in high
school, a New York city department of education approved high school
equivalency program, college or a vocational training program, disaggregated by
age as follows: 14-15; 16-17; 18-19; 20-21; over 21;
         xiv.   number and percentage of youth who were absent without leave
from foster care, disaggregated by age from 0 to 21, and over 21.
      3.   Youth who left foster care who were discharged to APPLA. The
following information regarding youth who aged out of foster care shall be
included in the annual report:
         i.   number and percentage of youth who were on trial discharge
status;
         ii.   number and percentage of youth who received housing assistance,
broken down by the type of assistance as follows:
            (a)   NYCHA public housing;
            (b)   section 8 voucher;
            (c)   supportive housing, disaggregated by council district;
            (d)   adult residential care;
            (e)   ACS housing subsidy;
            (f)   any other type of housing assistance, whether private,
federal, state or city-subsidized or operated, including information specifying
the specific subsidies or resources utilized; provided, however, that the
information required by this subparagraph shall be included in such report only
upon required New York state approval of the necessary changes to the discharge
checklist, beginning with the report for the second calendar year following
such approval;
         iii.   number and percentage of young people who left foster care to
alternative safe and stable housing, including but not limited to an apartment
or other place of residence shared with friends or family members, or remained
in the home of their foster families; provided, however, that this information
shall be included in such report only upon required New York state approval of
the necessary changes to the discharge checklist, beginning with the report for
the second calendar year following such approval;
         iv.   number and percentage of youth who completed high school,
disaggregated by the type of diploma or credential certification received;
         v.   number and percentage of youth who passed the TASC high school
equivalency test;
         vi.   number and percentage of youth who obtained an education and
training voucher;
         vii.   number and percentage of youth who are enrolled in college;
         viii.   number and percentage of youth who were enrolled in a
vocational/trade program at the time of discharge;
         ix.   number and percentage of youth who obtained a college diploma,
disaggregated by the type of diploma received; provided, however, that this
information shall be included in such report only upon required New York state
approval of the necessary changes to the discharge checklist, beginning with
the report for the second calendar year following such approval;
         x.   number and percentage of youth who have a verifiable source of
income;
         xi.   number and percentage of youth who obtained SIJS;
         xii.   number and percentage of youth who obtained lawful permanent
resident status;
         xiii.   number and percentage of young people who were parents at the
time of their discharge from foster care;
         xiv.   number and percentage of youth who had a permanent connection
to a caring adult at the time of their discharge from foster care; and
         xv.   number and percentage of youth who were discharged as absent
without leave at the time of their discharge from foster care.
   c.   No information that is otherwise required to be reported pursuant to
this section shall be reported in a manner that would violate any applicable
provision of federal, state or local law relating to the privacy of information
respecting youth in foster care or that would interfere with law enforcement
investigations or otherwise conflict with the interests of law enforcement. If
any category requested contains between 1 and 5 youth in foster care, or allows
another category to be narrowed to between 1 and 5 youth in foster care, the
number shall be replaced with a symbol. The reports required pursuant to this
section shall remain permanently accessible on ACS' website.
   d.   The commissioner, in consultation with the commissioner of social
services and the commissioner of homeless services, shall establish a procedure
to determine how many youth who were discharged from foster care entered a
shelter operated by or under contract or similar agreement with the department
of homeless services or the department of social services. The following
information regarding youth who were discharged from foster care during the
calendar year prior to the year covered by the report required pursuant to this
section who entered such shelters shall be included such report, disaggregated
as follows: number and percentage who entered within 30 days of their discharge
from foster care; number and percentage who entered within 90 days of their
discharge from foster care; number and percentage who entered within 180 days
of their discharge from foster care; number and percentage who entered within 1
year of their discharge from foster care. Such data shall be disaggregated by
youth who entered shelters for single adults and shelters for families with
children. For the purposes of this subdivision, "entering the homeless shelter
system" shall include seeking and being found eligible for shelter at any
intake facility operated by or under contract or similar agreement with the
department of homeless services or the department of social services.
   e.   The commissioner, in consultation with the commissioner of social
services, shall establish a procedure to determine how many youth who were
discharged from foster care received cash assistance, supplemental nutrition
assistance benefits, and/or medicaid. The following information regarding youth
who were discharged from foster care during the calendar year prior to the year
covered by the report required pursuant to this section who received such
benefits shall be included in such report, disaggregated as follows: number and
percentage who received cash assistance within 30 days of their discharge from
foster care; number and percentage who received supplemental nutrition
assistance benefits within 30 days of their discharge from foster care; number
and percentage who received cash assistance within 60 days of their discharge
from foster care; number and percentage who received supplemental nutrition
assistance benefits within 60 days of their discharge from foster care; number
and percentage who received cash assistance within 180 days of their discharge
from foster care; number and percentage who received supplemental nutrition
assistance benefits within 180 days of their discharge from foster care; and
the number and percentage of youth who were discharged from foster care with a
goal of APPLA were successfully transitioned to medicaid without any gap in
coverage.
(Am. L.L. 2016/145, 11/16/2016, eff. 11/16/2016; Am. L.L. 2025/116, 8/13/2025,
eff. 8/13/2025)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2014/046.
§ 21-902.2 Child protective caseload and workload study.
   a.   By March 31, 2019, ACS shall complete a study regarding child
protective caseloads and workloads. Such study shall include, but need not be
limited to:
      1.   Examination of the key milestones and tasks required in a child
protective investigation and time spent on each milestone or task;
      2.   Analysis of how case factors impact case complexity, including but
not limited to type of allegation, number of children, and prior ACS
involvement;
      3.   Examination of the relationship between the data described in
paragraphs 1 and 2 of subdivision a of this section and child safety outcomes;
      4.   Assessment of best practices in caseload and workload standards that
improve child safety and wellbeing outcomes; and
      5.   Recommendations for how ACS will implement best practices to
structure business processes to assign and balance caseloads and workloads.
   b.   By September 30, 2019, ACS shall report its findings and
recommendations to the speaker of the council.
(L.L. 2018/018, 12/31/2017, eff. 12/31/2017)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2018/018.
§ 21-903 Annual reports.
   Within 45 days after the end of each calendar year, ACS will publish and
make available on its website an annual report compiling information provided
in all quarterly reports required by this chapter for the prior calendar year.
§ 21-904 Special immigrant juvenile status plan within the administration for
children's services. [Repealed]
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2010/006.
§ 21-905 Demographic data of the juvenile justice system.
By January 15, 2025, and no later than 90 days after the end of each quarter
thereafter, ACS shall submit a report about the demographics of juveniles in
the juvenile justice system to the speaker of the council and post such report
on ACS’s website. All data contained in such report must be in a machine-
readable format and include a comparison of the data in the current reporting
period to the data in the 4 preceding reporting periods, to the extent such
information is available. The report required by this section must be
accessible through the city’s open data web portal. Such report must include
the following information:
   a.   Admissions to detention facilities. 
      1.   The number of admissions during the previous quarter to the
following facilities:
         (a)   secure and specialized secure detention facilities,
disaggregated by facility; and
         (b)   non-secure detention facilities.
      2.   The data provided pursuant to paragraph 1 of this subdivision shall
be disaggregated by the following factors:
         (a)   age;
         (b)   gender;
         (c)   race;
         (d)   zip code of residence;
         (e)   for youth remanded to a detention facility by a court, the most
serious charged offense on the court petition, complaint, or indictment at the
time ACS assumed custody, further disaggregated by the youth’s age, gender, and
race;
         (f)   for youth brought to detention by police, the top arrest charge
at the time ACS assumed custody, further disaggregated by the youth’s age,
gender, and race; and
         (g)   whether such youth is in foster care.
   b.   Demographic data for detention facilities. 
      1.   The average daily population during the previous quarter in the
following facilities:
         (a)   secure and specialized secure detention facilities, in total and
disaggregated by facility; and
         (b)   non-secure detention facilities in total.
      2.   The number of youth admitted to a detention facility during the
previous quarter who spent time either in non-secure detention only, secure and
specialized secure detention only, or both non-secure and secure detention, and
disaggregated by the following factors:
         (a)   age;
         (b)   gender;
         (c)   race;
         (d)   zip code of residence;
         (e)   for youth remanded to a detention facility by a court, the most
serious charged offense on the court petition, complaint, or indictment at the
time ACS assumed custody;
         (f)   for youth brought to detention by police, the top arrest charge
at the time ACS assumed custody; and
         (g)   whether such youth is in foster care.
      3.   During the prior quarter, the average and median bail amounts
imposed by the criminal court on youth in ACS custody and the percentage of
youth in ACS custody who were remanded by the criminal court to detention
without the imposition of bail, disaggregated by juvenile and adolescent
offenders; and
      4.   The number of adolescent offenders in the facility on the last day
of the reporting period who are serving a sentence in specialized secure
detention, further disaggregated by top charge at sentencing, age, gender, and
race.
   c.   Admissions to placement facilities. 
      1.   The number of placement admissions during the previous quarter in
the following facilities:
         (a)   non-secure placement facilities, in total; and
         (b)   limited-secure placement facilities, in total.
      2.   The data provided pursuant to paragraph 1 of this subdivision shall
be disaggregated by the following factors:
         (a)   age;
         (b)   gender;
         (c)   race;
         (d)   zip code of residence;
         (e)   youth who were detained at a detention facility immediately
prior to being ordered to a placement facility by a court pursuant to the
family court act;
         (f)   youth who were not detained at a detention facility immediately
prior to being ordered to a placement facility by a court pursuant to the
family court act;
         (g)   youth who were transferred to an ACS placement facility from the
custody of the New York state office of children and family services in
accordance with subdivision 6 of section 404 of the social services law;
         (h)   for youth ordered to a placement facility by a court, the most
serious offense adjudicated against such youth by the court; and
         (i)   whether such youth is in foster care.
   d.   Demographic data for placement facilities. 
      1.   The average daily population during the previous quarter in the
following facilities:
         (a)   non-secure placement facilities, in total; and
         (b)   limited-secure placement facilities, in total.
      2.   The number of youth admitted to a placement facility during the
previous quarter who spent time either in non-secure placement only, limited
secure placement only, or both non-secure and limited secure placement,
disaggregated by the following factors:
         (a)   age;
         (b)   gender;
         (c)   race;
         (d)   zip code of residence;
         (e)   for youth remanded to a detention facility by a court, the most
serious offense adjudicated against such youth by the court; and
         (f)   whether such youth is in foster care.
   e.   Data on transfers. 
      1.   The number of youth who have been transferred during the previous
quarter from:
         (a)   a non-secure detention facility to a secure detention facility;
         (b)   a secure and specialized secure detention facility to a non-
secure detention facility;
         (c)   a non-secure placement facility to a limited secure placement
facility;
         (d)   a non-secure placement facility to a secure placement facility;
         (e)   a limited secure placement facility to a non-secure placement
facility;
         (f)   a limited secure placement facility to a secure placement
facility;
         (g)   a secure placement facility to a limited secure placement
facility; and
         (h)   a secure placement facility to a non-secure placement facility.
      2.   The data provided pursuant to paragraph 1 of this subdivision shall
be disaggregated by the following factors:
         (a)   age;
         (b)   gender; and
         (c)   race.
   f.   Pre-sentence data. 
      1.   The number of youth housed in non-secure, secure, and specialized
secure juvenile detention facilities pre-sentencing, in total and disaggregated
by the following factors, as defined in the New York state family court act and
criminal procedure law:
         (a)   juvenile delinquents, in total and disaggregated by secure
detention facility or non-secure facility;
         (b)   juvenile offenders, in total and disaggregated by facility; and
         (c)   adolescent offenders, in total and disaggregated by facility.
      2.   The data provided pursuant to paragraph 1 of this subdivision shall
be disaggregated by the following factors:
         (a)   age;
         (b)   gender;
         (c)   race;
         (d)   zip code of residence;
         (e)   the most serious charged offense on the court petition,
complaint, or indictment, or top arrest charge at the time ACS assumed custody;
and
         (f)   the average, median, minimum, and maximum length of detention,
as well as the standard deviation for pre-sentencing or pre-disposition youth.
   g.   No information that is otherwise required to be reported pursuant to
this section shall be reported in a manner that would violate any applicable
provision of federal, state or local law related to the privacy of information.
If any category requested contains between 1 and 5 youth, the number shall be
replaced with a symbol.
(Am. L.L. 2024/112, 11/22/2024, eff. 1/1/2025)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2013/044.
§ 21-906 Incident reports in juvenile justice facilities.
   a.   Quarterly incident reports. 
      1.   By January 15, 2025, and no later than 60 days after the end of each
quarter thereafter, ACS shall submit a report related to incidents occurring in
juvenile justice facilities to the speaker of the council and make such report
available on ACS’s website. All data contained in such report must be in a
machine-readable format and include a comparison of the data in the current
reporting period to the data in the 4 preceding reporting periods, to the
extent such information is available. The information required pursuant to this
section for each reporting period must be accessible through the city’s open
data web portal. Such report must include the number of the following
incidents:
         (a)   use of physical restraint by staff on children;
         (b)   physical injuries or impairment to children as a result of the
use of physical restraint;
         (c)   use of mechanical restraint by staff on children;
         (d)   physical injuries or impairment to children as a result of the
use of mechanical restraint;
         (e)   fights and altercations between children;
         (f)   physical injuries or impairment to children as a result of
fights with other children;
         (g)   physical injuries or impairment to children resulting from any
other means not previously mentioned, disaggregated by cause;
         (h)   physical injury to staff, to the extent known;
         (i)   biased-based incidents as reported by a child; and
         (j)   the number of room confinements and the average length of stay
for such confinements in secure and specialized secure detention facilities.
      2.   The data provided pursuant to paragraph 1 of this subdivision shall
be disaggregated by the following factors:
         (a)   secure and specialized secure detention facilities, in total and
disaggregated by facility;
         (b)   non-secure detention facilities, in total;
         (c)   non-secure placement facilities, in total; and
         (d)   limited secure placement facilities, in total.
      3.   For each room confinement in a secure or specialized secure facility
reported pursuant to subparagraph (j) of paragraph 1 of this subdivision, such
report must include the facility, duration, and reason for each such room
confinement.
   b.   Annual incident reports. 
      1.   Within 60 days after the end of each fiscal year, ACS shall post a
report on its website containing the following data:
         (a)   the number of allegations made during the fiscal year that a
child in a detention or placement facility was a neglected or abused child; and
         (b)   the number of findings made during the fiscal year by the New
York state office of children and family services substantiating allegations
that a child in a detention or placement facility was a neglected or abused
child, including findings that substantiated allegations made prior to the
fiscal year.
      2.   The data provided pursuant to paragraph 1 of this subdivision shall
be disaggregated by the following factors:
         (a)   secure and specialized secure detention facilities, in total and
further disaggregated by facility;
         (b)   non-secure detention facilities, in total;
         (c)   non-secure placement facilities, in total; and
         (d)   limited secure placement facilities, in total.
   c.   Oleoresin capsicum spray. If, at any time, the city obtains a waiver
pursuant to section 180-3.19 of title 9 of the New York codes, rules and
regulations, or a successor regulation, permitting ACS or the department of
correction to use oleoresin capsicum spray in a specialized secure detention
facility, ACS shall post notice of such waiver on their website no later than 5
days following the receipt of such waiver. Beginning January 15, 2025, and 15
days after the end of each month ACS shall report on all incidents in which
oleoresin capsicum spray was used in a juvenile facility, including the
following information:
      1.   the date and time of such use;
      2.   the number of youths exposed to oleoresin capsicum spray;
      3.   the ages of all such youths who were exposed;
      4.   the number of each ACS or department of correction personnel
involved in the incident;
      5.   the number of youth requiring medical attention after such incident;
and
      6.   the facility where such incident occurred.
   d.   No information that is otherwise required to be reported pursuant to
this section shall be reported in a manner that would violate any applicable
provision of federal, state or local law related to the privacy of information.
If any category requested contains between 1 and 5 youth, the number shall be
replaced with a symbol.
(Am. L.L. 2024/112, 11/22/2024, eff. 1/1/2025)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2013/044.
§ 21-907 Graduation rates of foster care youth.
   a.   Beginning no later than January 31, 2015, and no later than every
January 31 thereafter, the commissioner shall submit to the speaker of the
council and post on ACS' website an annual report regarding the number of youth
in foster care who were enrolled in and/or graduated from high school in the
previous academic year as described by the department of education. Each such
report shall disaggregate the data by gender and ethnicity, and include but not
be limited to: (i) the total number of youth in foster care disaggregated by
age, utilizing the following ranges: 13-15 years old; 16-18 years old; and 19-
21 years old; (ii) the number of youth in foster care enrolled in high school
disaggregated by age, utilizing the following ranges: 13-15 years old; 16-18
years old; and 19-21 years old; (iii) the number of youth in foster care who,
based on cohort and the number of high school credits they have obtained by
August 31 of the year of such report, are on pace to graduate high school and
the number of such youth that are on pace to graduate high school in five
years, utilizing the following age ranges: 14-15 years old; 16-18 years old;
and 19-21 years old; and (iv) the number of youth in foster care who graduated
from high school disaggregated by: (1) the age at which such students
graduated; (2) the type of diploma or certification received; and (3) based on
cohort, the number of years it took to complete high school. The reports
required pursuant to this section shall remain permanently accessible on ACS'
website. 
   b.   No information that is otherwise required to be reported pursuant to
this section shall be reported in a manner that would violate any applicable
provision of federal, state or local law relating to the privacy of information
respecting youth in foster care or that would interfere with law enforcement
investigations or otherwise conflict with the interests of law enforcement. If
any category requested contains between 1 and 5 youth in foster care, or allows
another category to be narrowed to between 1 and 5 youth in foster care, the
number shall be replaced with a symbol.
(Am. L.L. 2016/147, 11/16/2016, eff. 11/16/2016)
§ 21-907.1 Educational continuity of children in foster care.
   a.   For the purposes of this section, the term "school of origin" means the
school that a child or youth attended at the time of their entry into foster
care or prior to transferring foster care placements.
   b.   Not later than February 1, 2017, and on or before December 1 annually
thereafter, ACS shall submit to the speaker of the council and post on its
website annual reports regarding the educational continuity of children in
foster care. Such reports shall include the following information:
      1.   Of the children who entered foster care during the school year, the
number and percentage who remained in their school of origin 90 days after the
child's initial entry into foster care;
      2.   Of the children who entered foster care during the school year, the
number and percentage who remained in their school of origin 90 days after
transferring to a new foster care placement;
      3.   Of the children who entered foster care during the school year, the
number and percentage who did not return to their school of origin upon initial
entry into foster care;
      4.   Of the children who transferred foster care placements during the
school year, the number and percentage who did not return to their school of
origin after transferring to a new foster care placement; and
      5.   The average school attendance rates of children in foster care
disaggregated by the following percentages: less than 50 percent, 50-59
percent, 60-69 percent, 70-79 percent, 80-89 percent and 90 percent or more,
disaggregated by age as follows: 5-10; 11-15; 16-21.
   c.   No information that is otherwise required to be reported pursuant to
this section shall be reported in a manner that would violate any applicable
provision of federal, state or local law relating to the privacy of information
respecting youth in foster care or that would interfere with law enforcement
investigations or otherwise conflict with the interests of law enforcement. If
any category requested contains between 1 and 5 youth in foster care, or allows
another category to be narrowed to between 1 and 5 youth in foster care, the
number shall be replaced with a symbol. The reports required pursuant to this
section shall remain permanently accessible on ACS' website.
(L.L. 2016/142, 11/16/2016, eff. 11/16/2016)
§ 21-908 Government-issued personal identification.
   a.   For the purposes of this section the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
      1.   "Another Planned Permanent Living Arrangement (APPLA)" means a
permanency planning goal for young people in foster care who are over the age
of fourteen that seeks to assist foster care youth in their transition to self-
sufficiency by connecting the youth to an adult permanency resource, equipping
the youth with life skills and, upon discharge, connecting the youth with any
needed community and/or specialized services.
      2.   "Discharge Checklist" is a form completed by the ACS contracted
foster care agency in consultation with a young person leaving foster care that
is intended to guide discussions about the youth's plans after leaving care.
The document is intended to develop and document a discharge plan that is
youth-driven, is as detailed as the youth elects and enables the young person
to address any outstanding topics prior to discharge.
      3.   "Government-issued personal identification" shall mean a birth
certificate, social security card, state-issued driver's license or non-driver
identification card, United States permanent resident card, individual taxpayer
identification number, municipal identification card, consular identification
card, or passport.
      4.   "Preparing Youth for Adulthood (PYA) Checklist" is a form completed
by the ACS contracted foster care agency in consultation with a young person
transitioning from foster care that is intended to guide discussions about the
youth's plans after leaving care. The document is intended to assess and
document a transition plan that is youth-driven and enables the young person to
address any outstanding barriers to the successful transition to independence.
   b.   Beginning no later than January 31, 2015, and no later than every
January 31 thereafter, the commissioner shall submit to the speaker of the
council and post on ACS' website an annual report for the prior calendar year
that includes the following information:
      1.   the number of youth in foster care who are aged seventeen or older;
and the total number of youth in foster care who are aged seventeen or older
and have a form of government-issued personal identification, disaggregated by
birth certificate, social security card, state-issued identification, municipal
identification, passport or other form of government-issued personal
identification, the number of such youth who only possess one form of
government-issued personal identification, disaggregated by the type of
identification and the number of youth in foster care who obtained such
identification with assistance from ACS; provided, however, that the
information relating to municipal identification, passports or other forms of
government-issued personal identification required by this paragraph shall be
included in such report only upon required New York state approval of changes
to the Discharge Checklist and PYA Checklist in a manner that reasonably allows
for the collection of such information beginning with the report for the second
calendar year following such approval;
      2.   the number of youth in foster care who were discharged with an APPLA
goal; and the total number of youth with an APPLA goal who were in possession
of a birth certificate, social security card, state-issued identification,
municipal identification or passport at the time of discharge from foster care,
disaggregated by the type of identification and the number of such youth who
only possess one form of government-issued personal identification at the point
of discharge, disaggregated by the type of identification; provided, however,
that the information relating to municipal identification and passports
required by this paragraph shall be included in such report only upon required
New York state approval of changes to the Discharge Checklist and PYA Checklist
in a manner that reasonably allows for the collection of such information
beginning with the report for the second calendar year following such approval;
and
      3.   a description of the actions ACS has taken in the prior calendar
year to assist youth in foster care in obtaining the kinds of government-issued
personal identification described in the report required by this subdivision.
The reports required pursuant to this section shall remain permanently
accessible on ACS' website.
(Am. L.L. 2016/141, 11/16/2016, eff. 11/16/2016)
§ 21-909 Five-year plan to address barriers to permanency.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:
      Another planned permanent living arrangement (APPLA). The term "another
planned permanent living arrangement (APPLA)" means a permanency planning goal
to assist foster care youth in their transition to self-sufficiency by
connecting the youth to an adult permanency resource, equipping the youth with
life skills and, upon discharge, connecting the youth with any needed community
and/or specialized services.
      Kinship guardianship assistance program (KinGAP). The term "kinship
guardianship assistance program (KinGAP)" means the permanency and discharge
outcome for children for whom a relative has become the legal guardian via
court order and whereby the relative and ACS has entered into a final KinGAP
agreement for a subsidy pursuant to the Kingship Guardianship Assistance
Program.
   b.   By December 31, 2017, ACS shall submit to the speaker of the council
and post on its website a five-year plan to address barriers to permanency for
youth in foster care. Such plan shall include, but not be limited to, the
following information:
      1.   A case study of a statistically significant sample of children who
have spent at least two years in foster care, but no less than 5% of the total
foster care population, including but not limited to the following aggregated
information:
         (a)   Age, gender, race/ethnicity, and, if available, sexual
orientation;
         (b)   Permanency plan, including reunification, adoption, KinGAP,
APPLA, or other;
         (c)   The number of months in care; and
         (d)   Barriers to permanency, including but not limited to parental
homelessness, parental relapse, parental childcare needs, education issues,
family court delays, lack of permanency resources, juvenile incarceration,
college enrollment, and any other barrier as determined by ACS.
      2.   An analysis of how ACS plans to address the systemic barriers to
permanency identified during the case study required pursuant to paragraph 1.
   c.   The five-year plan shall be reviewed and updated by ACS annually and
the updated version shall be submitted to the speaker of the council and posted
online one year following the submission of the initial five-year report and
annually on such date thereafter.
   d.   In the fifth year covered by each such five-year plan, ACS shall submit
to the speaker of the council and post on its website a new five-year plan to
address barriers to permanency for the next succeeding five-year period not
later than six months prior to the last day of such fifth year. The previous
five-year report shall remain on ACS' website when the new report is added.
   e.   No information that is otherwise required to be reported pursuant to
this section shall be reported in a manner that would violate any applicable
provision of federal, state or local law relating to the privacy of information
respecting youth in foster care or that would interfere with law enforcement
investigations or otherwise conflict with the interests of law enforcement. If
any category requested contains between 1 and 5 youth in foster care, or allows
another category to be narrowed to between 1 and 5 youth in foster care, the
number shall be replaced with a symbol.
(L.L. 2016/143, 11/16/2016, eff. 11/16/2016)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2016/143.
§ 21-910 Foster care experience surveys.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the term “LGBTQIA+” means
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer/questioning, intersex, asexual,
gender non-conforming, or non-binary.
   b.   ACS shall provide to all youth in foster care ages 13 and older an
annual survey regarding such youth’s experiences with each foster care
placement where the youth resided and with any ACS or foster care agency
provider employees the youth came into contact with that year. For youth placed
with foster parents, such surveys shall be administered in a location other
than the foster parent’s home, or administered online or through a mobile
application that enables youth to complete the survey outside of their foster
home. ACS shall explain the purpose of such survey to youth and shall not
attribute survey responses to youth without their consent. In addition to
questions, such survey shall provide space for such youth to provide ACS with
any additional information or feedback they wish to share.
   c.   Such survey shall include, but not be limited to, questions addressing
the following topic areas: access to food and clothing; religious practices;
relationships with foster families, biological families, and friends; personal
allowances; education and extracurricular activities; internet and phone
access; experiences related to gender expression, gender identity, sex
characteristics, and sexual orientation; identification as a member of the
LGBTQIA+ community; racial identity; and placement type, including, but not
limited to, kinship, nonkinship, and residential care.
   d.   By August 1, 2026, and biennially thereafter, ACS shall submit to the
speaker of the council and post on its website a report of aggregated data from
the surveys required pursuant to this section and any steps ACS had taken in
response to the information provided in such surveys. Such report shall
include, but not be limited to, the following information regarding the youth
in foster care who complete the survey:
      1.   The number of survey respondents, disaggregated by placement type;
      2.   The number of survey respondents who identify as LGBTQIA+,
disaggregated by LGBTQIA+ identity;
      3.   The racial identity of survey respondents, disaggregated by
placement type;
      4.   Disaggregation of the racial identity and LGBTQIA+ identity of the
youth; and
      5.   Disaggregation of the racial identity, LGBTQIA+ identity, and
placement type of the youth.
   e.   No information that is otherwise required to be reported pursuant to
this section shall be reported in a manner that would violate any applicable
provision of federal, state, or local law relating to the privacy of
information respecting youth in foster care or that would interfere with law
enforcement investigations or otherwise conflict with the interests of law
enforcement. If any category requested contains between 1 and 5 youth in foster
care, or allows another category to be narrowed to between 1 and 5 youth in
foster care, the number shall be replaced with a symbol.
(L.L. 2016/146, 11/16/2016, eff. 11/16/2016; Am. L.L. 2025/037, 4/11/2025, eff.
7/10/2025; Am. L.L. 2025/046, 4/11/2025, eff. 7/10/2025)
§ 21-911 Secure detention facility visitors.
ACS shall permit youth in secure detention facilities to receive visitors
including, but not limited to, a coach, teacher, clergy person or other
appropriate adult, except when the facility director determines that such
visits are detrimental to the youth, or that the visitors refused to comply
with rules governing visitation, or the visit would not be consistent with
public safety.
(L.L. 2017/172, 9/8/2017, eff. 12/10/2017)
§ 21-912 Video conferencing in secure detention facilities.
ACS shall establish and operate a program that permits youth in secure
detention facilities to communicate through video conference or substantially
similar technology with family, as defined by ACS, or legal guardians, except
when the facility director determines that such communication is detrimental to
the youth or not consistent with public safety. Video conferences shall be held
primarily for the purpose of discharge planning, treatment, and rehabilitative
conversations.
(L.L. 2017/173, 9/8/2017, eff. 3/11/2019)
§ 21-913 Electronic health records in juvenile detention facilities.
ACS shall conduct an internal review of the effectiveness of the current system
for maintaining health records created for individuals in juvenile detention
facilities including whether maintaining such records electronically would
improve the current system and submit to the council, by December 31, 2017, a
report including recommendations for improvements to the health records
maintenance system and a timeframe for implementation of such improvements.
(L.L. 2017/169, 9/8/2017, eff. 9/8/2017)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2017/169.
§ 21-914 Preventive services surveys.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the term "preventive
services" means supportive and rehabilitative services provided, in accordance
with title four of the social services law, to children and their families for
the purposes of: averting an impairment or disruption of a family which will or
could result in the placement of a child in foster care; enabling a child who
has been placed in foster care to return to his family at an earlier time than
would otherwise be possible; or reducing the likelihood that a child who has
been discharged from foster care would return to such care.
   b.   Commencing 18 months after the effective date of the local law that
added this section, ACS shall provide to all families receiving preventive
services an annual survey regarding the family's experiences with each
preventive services provider that provided the family services during the
preceding calendar year. Such surveys may be administered online or through a
mobile application. ACS shall not attribute survey responses to families
without their consent. In addition to questions, such surveys shall provide
space for such families to provide ACS with any additional information they
wish to share.
   c.   Such survey shall include but not be limited to questions regarding the
following: interactions with caseworkers, the type and quality of services, and
suggestions for how services may be improved.
   d.   No later than six months following the first administration of the
survey required pursuant to this section, and annually thereafter, ACS shall
submit to the speaker of the council and post on its website aggregated data
from such surveys and any steps ACS had taken in response to the information
provided in such surveys.
   e.   Not later than six months after the effective date of the local law
that added this section, ACS shall submit to the speaker of the council a
report on its plan for the implementation of the survey required pursuant to
this section.
   f.   No information that is otherwise required to be reported pursuant to
this section shall be reported in a manner that would violate any applicable
provision of federal, state or local law relating to the privacy of information
respecting families or children receiving preventive services or that would
interfere with law enforcement investigations or otherwise conflict with the
interests of law enforcement. If any category requested contains between 1 and
5 families or children receiving preventive services, or allows another
category to be narrowed to between 1 and 5 families or children receiving
preventive services, the number shall be replaced with a symbol.
(L.L. 2018/017, 12/31/2017, eff. 12/31/2017)
§ 21-915 Annual report regarding child fatality review aggregate findings and
recommendations.
No later than June 1, 2018, and no later than 18 months after the end of each
calendar year thereafter, ACS shall publish and make available on its website a
report on the findings and recommendations of its child fatality reviews during
the previous calendar year. Such report shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
   (i)   the number of fatalities of children known to ACS for the previous
year;
   (ii)   the cause of death in such fatalities;
   (iii)   the age, gender, race and ethnicity of children with fatalities for
the previous year;
   (iv)   any relevant trends identified and systemic recommendations,
including opportunities for inter-agency collaboration; and
   (v)   a summary of any case practice findings and agency policy changes made
in response to child fatalities in the previous 12 months.
(L.L. 2018/019, 12/31/2017, eff. 12/31/2017)
§ 21-916 Preventive services training.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the term "preventive
services" means supportive and rehabilitative services provided, in accordance
with title four of the social services law, to children and their families for
the purposes of: averting an impairment or disruption of a family which will or
could result in the placement of a child in foster care; enabling a child who
has been placed in foster care to return to his family at an earlier time than
would otherwise be possible; or reducing the likelihood that a child who has
been discharged from foster care would return to such care.
   b.   ACS shall require all individuals providing preventive services to
attend trainings, the content of which shall be determined by ACS, on an
ongoing basis and no less than once per year. This requirement is in addition
to any other training required by law or regulation for individuals providing
preventive services.
(L.L. 2018/016, 12/31/2017, eff. 3/1/2018)
§ 21-917 Preventive services quarterly reports.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the term "preventive
services" means supportive and rehabilitative services provided, in accordance
with title four of the social services law, to children and their families for
the purposes of: averting an impairment or disruption of a family which will or
could result in the placement of a child in foster care; enabling a child who
has been placed in foster care to return to his family at an earlier time than
would otherwise be possible; or reducing the likelihood that a child who has
been discharged from foster care would return to such care.
   b.   Beginning with the calendar quarter ending March 31, 2018, and for
every calendar quarter thereafter, ACS shall furnish to the speaker of the
council and post on ACS' website, no later than 30 days after the end of each
such calendar quarter, a report regarding preventive services rendered during
such calendar quarter that includes, at a minimum, the following information:
      1.   The number of families and the number of children who received
preventive services and the average length of enrollment, disaggregated by each
program type, for all program types offered within the ACS continuum of
preventive services;
      2.   The number of open slots available for preventive services,
disaggregated by each program type, for all program types offered within the
ACS continuum of preventive services;
      3.   The number of children who entered foster care and had been
receiving preventive services at the time of removal, six months prior to
removal, and 12 months prior to removal;
      4.   The number of families and the number of children who received
preventive services after a previous final discharge from foster care to
reunification;
      5.   The number of families who received ACS family services unit
monitoring and preventive services; and
      6.   To the extent such data is available to ACS, the number of families
who lived in homeless shelters operated by or under contract or similar
agreement with the department of homeless services or department of social
services/human resources administration while receiving preventive services.
   c.   No information that is otherwise required to be reported pursuant to
this section shall be reported in a manner that would violate any applicable
provision of federal, state or local law relating to the privacy of information
respecting families or children receiving preventive services or that would
interfere with law enforcement investigations or otherwise conflict with the
interests of law enforcement. If any category requested contains between 1 and
5 families or children receiving preventive services, or allows another
category to be narrowed to between 1 and 5 families or children receiving
preventive services, the number shall be replaced with a symbol.
(L.L. 2018/011, 12/31/2017, eff. 12/31/2017)
§ 21-918 Language study.
   a.   For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
      Limited English proficient individual. The term "limited English
proficient individual" means an individual who identifies as being, or is
evidently, unable to communicate meaningfully in English.
      Primary language. The term "primary language" means the language in which
a limited English proficient individual chooses to communicate with others.
   b.   By January 1, 2019, ACS shall complete a study regarding its ability to
provide access to language classes for any child between the ages of 3 years
and 12 years who, pursuant to article 10 of the family court act, was removed
from the custody of parents or guardians who are limited English proficient
individuals and who has been in the custody of ACS for at least 6 months. Such
study shall include, but need not be limited to:
      1.   The number of such children in the foster care system;
      2.   The languages spoken by such children;
      3.   The languages spoken by the individuals from whom such children were
removed;
      4.   Strategies to assess the language needs of such children; and
      5.   Barriers to addressing such language needs.
   c.   The department shall report its findings from its language study to the
speaker of the council and post a copy of the report on the ACS website by July
1, 2019.
   d.   As part of the study required pursuant to subdivision c of this
section, ACS shall initiate a process to identify and track whether parents or
guardians of children removed pursuant to article 10 of the family court act
are limited English proficient individuals. If such process is not in place at
the time the report required pursuant to subdivision c of this section is
complete, such report will include an explanation of the barriers to initiating
such process.
(L.L. 2018/037, 1/11/2018, eff. 7/10/2018)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2018/037.
§ 21-919 Demographic reporting and plan to address disparities.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Demographic information. The term "demographic information" means race or
ethnicity, gender, community district, primary language, and any other category
ACS deems relevant.
      Step in the child welfare system. The term "step in child welfare system"
includes, but is not limited to, when a report is accepted by the state central
register and triggers an investigation, when an ACS investigation results in a
case being determined indicated, when an ACS investigation results in a case
being unfounded, when a case is handled by ACS in a non-investigatory manner;
when a child is removed from their residence or the custody of their parent or
primary caretaker on an emergency basis pursuant to section 1024 of the family
court act, when a child is removed from their residence or the custody of their
parent or primary caretaker pursuant to section 1027 of the family court act,
when ACS files a child protective proceeding in family court pursuant to
article 10 of the family court act, when ACS opens a preventive services case,
and any other instance that ACS deems relevant.
   b.   Beginning September 1, 2022, and annually on September 1 thereafter,
ACS shall submit to the mayor and speaker of the council and post on its
website demographic information of parents and children at each step in the
child welfare system. Such report shall include, but need not be limited to:
      1.   The total number of parents at each step in the child welfare
system, disaggregated by demographic information; and
      2.   The total number of children at each step in the child welfare
system, disaggregated by demographic information.
   c.   ACS shall address any disparate outcomes identified based on
demographic information reported pursuant to subdivision b of this section in
equity assessments required pursuant to subchapter 6 of
chapter 1 of title 3 of the administrative code of the city of New York.
   d.   No information that is otherwise required to be collected and reported
pursuant to this section shall be collected and reported in a manner that would
violate any applicable provision of federal, state or local law relating to the
privacy of information or that would interfere with law enforcement
investigations or otherwise conflict with the interests of law enforcement.
(L.L. 2021/132, 11/21/2021, eff. 11/21/2021)
§ 21-920 Psychiatric medication for youth in foster care.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Age group. The term "age group" means the following categories: 0 - 6
years old; 7 - 12 years old; and 13 - 17 years old. If authorized by law and
the relevant state agencies to obtain the data in a manner that can be accessed
and aggregated, without obtaining appropriate individual consents, the term age
group shall additionally include the category of youth age 18 and over.
      Class of medication. The term "class of medication" includes the
following categories of medication: ADHD medication; anti-depressant; anti-
psychotic medication; anxiolytic or hypnotic medication; long-acting anti-
psychotic medication; medication to treat opioid use disorder; and mood
stabilizer.
      Foster care provider agency. The term "foster care provider agency" means
foster care programs and agencies contracted with ACS to provide services to
youth and families, including family foster care, treatment family foster care,
specialized foster care and residential services.
      Override of parental consent. The term "override of parental consent"
means a request by ACS to administer a psychiatric medication for a youth in
foster care when (i) the youth's parent or guardian has either affirmatively
objected or refused to provide their informed, written consent; (ii) ACS has
conducted a clinical review of the youth's case; and (iii) ACS has determined
that the medication is clinically appropriate for treatment of the youth's
psychiatric condition.
      Placement type. The term "placement type" means the setting in which
youth in foster care are housed, including but not limited to foster care
boarding homes, approved relative foster homes, residential care facilities and
pre-placement settings.
      Prescriber type. The term "prescriber type" means the individual
prescribing the psychiatric medication to the youth. This term includes, but is
not limited to, the following types of individuals: a psychiatrist, nurse
practitioner or pediatrician.
      Psychiatric medication. The term "psychiatric medication" means
medication used to exercise an effect on the central nervous system prescribed
for the treatment of symptoms of a mental, emotional or behavioral disorder,
including but not limited to, antipsychotics, antidepressants, antianxiety
drugs or anxiolytics, stimulants and mood stabilizers.
      Youth in foster care. The term "youth in foster care" shall mean youth in
foster care on the last day of the quarter, for whom ACS has the authority to
access and aggregate data from the state PSYCKES Medicaid database.
   b.   Beginning no later than July 31, 2022, and no later than the last day
of the month following each calendar quarter thereafter, the commissioner shall
submit to the speaker of the council and post to ACS's website a quarterly
report regarding youth in foster care prescribed psychiatric medication. Such
report shall include the following information disaggregated by gender and age
group:
      1.   Number and percentage of youth currently prescribed a psychiatric
medication;
      2.   Number of unique youth with prescriptions, disaggregated by class of
medication;
      3.   Number and percentage of youth currently prescribed three or more
psychiatric medications;
      4.   Number and percentage of youth currently prescribed more than one
psychiatric medication from the same class of medication;
      5.   Number and percentage of youth for whom an override of parental
consent was requested;
      6.   Number and percentage of youth for whom an override of parental
consent was approved; and
      7.   Number and percentage of youth currently prescribed psychiatric
medication. The information required pursuant to paragraph 7 of this
subdivision shall be disaggregated by prescriber type, if the relevant state
agencies make such information available to ACS in a manner than can be
accessed and aggregated.
   c.   Beginning no later than July 31, 2022, and no later than July 31
annually thereafter, the commissioner shall submit to the speaker of the
council and post to ACS's website a report regarding youth in foster care
prescribed psychiatric medication. The report shall include the number and
percentage of youth currently prescribed psychiatric medication, disaggregated
by placement type, and further disaggregated by gender and age group.
   d.   ACS shall review the quarterly and annual reports required pursuant to
subdivisions b and c of this section. Accompanying the report due on July 31,
2023, and each report due July 31 thereafter, ACS shall further include a
description of actions that ACS has taken in the prior fiscal year to promote
best practices regarding the use of psychiatric medication for youth in foster
care and obtaining informed consents, including but not limited to the
following: a description of any training for foster care provider agency staff
regarding relevant ACS and state policies and best practice guidance; a
description of quality assurance procedures; any trends that ACS has identified
as a result of its medical audits or other compliance activities, as related to
foster care provider agencies; and a description of any actions taken in
response to such trends.
   e.   No information that is otherwise required to be reported pursuant to
this section shall be reported in a manner that would violate any applicable
provision of federal, state or local law related to the privacy of information.
If any category requested contains between one and six youth, the number shall
be replaced with a symbol.
   f.   The reports required pursuant to this section shall remain permanently
accessible on ACS's website.
(L.L. 2022/034, 1/15/2022, eff. 1/15/2022)
§ 21-921 Information regarding the right to request a fair hearing.
   a.   Where, following an ACS child protective investigation, a report
against a parent or person legally responsible for the child is indicated, ACS
shall provide to the parent or person legally responsible for the child written
information regarding the process for requesting a fair hearing to challenge
such indication, which begins at the state level with an administrative review,
pursuant to section 422 of the social services law.
   b.   Such information will be provided in the designated citywide languages,
as defined in section
23-1101.
(L.L. 2021/135, 11/21/2021, eff. 4/20/2021)
§ 21-922 Juvenile justice advisory board.*
* Editor's note: there are two sections designated as § 21-922.
   a.   There is hereby established a juvenile justice advisory board to advise
and provide recommendations to the mayor, the council, and ACS on issues
related to juvenile justice, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Risk factors associated with criminal behavior among youth and
interventions to prevent such behavior;
      2.   The availability of community-based services directed at youth,
including justice-involved youth, and their families that effectively prevent
youth involvement in criminal behavior and aid in the re-entry and transition
from juvenile detention or another court-ordered placement facility to the
community. Such services include educational and mental health services,
including services that address trauma, family support, and vocation;
      3.   The availability and efficacy of academic and vocational programming
for youth in detention or another court-ordered placement in connection with a
juvenile delinquency proceeding;
      4.   Challenges faced by youth upon discharge from detention or another
court-ordered placement in connection with a juvenile delinquency proceeding;
and
      5.   The particular challenges faced by justice-involved youth in foster
care.
   b.   The board shall consist of 20 members, as follows:
      1.   The speaker of the council or their designee;
      2.   The commissioner of ACS or their designee;
      3.   The commissioner of probation or their designee;
      4.   The commissioner of youth and community development or their
designee;
      5.   The chancellor of the department of education or their designee;
      6.   The director of the mayor's office of criminal justice or their
designee;
      7.   The commissioner of health and mental hygiene or their designee; and
      8.   13 public members, including:
         (a)   The following mayoral appointees:
            (1)   1 attorney who specializes in defending youth in family
court;
            (2)   1 attorney who specializes in defending youth in New York
state supreme court;
            (3)   1 individual representing an organization that advocates for
improvements in education;
            (4)   1 mental health professional who specializes in the provision
of pediatric mental health services;
            (5)   1 individual who specializes in issues of housing
adolescents; and
            (6)   2 individuals who provide community-based youth development
services, 1 of whom focuses on justice-involved youth; and
         (b)   6 individuals, or family members of individuals, who were
incarcerated, detained, or placed in a juvenile justice facility before their
nineteenth birthday, 1 of each to be appointed by the borough presidents and
the public advocate.
   c.   1.   Board members shall serve without compensation.
      2.   All appointments required by this section shall be made no later
than 120 days after the effective date of the local law that added this
section.
      3.   Board members shall serve terms of 6 years and no such member shall
be removed from office except by the appointing officer.
      4.   Any vacancy on the board shall be filled in the manner of the
original appointment.
   d.   The board shall meet at least quarterly and choose a chairperson at its
first meeting. The board shall keep a record of its proceedings and determine
the rules of its own proceedings, provided that special meetings may be called
by the chairperson upon their own initiative or upon receipt of a written
request signed by at least 4 board members. Written notice of the time and
place of such special meetings shall be given to each member at least 2 weeks
before the date fixed by the notice for such special meeting.
   e.   The board shall, at least annually, hold a public meeting to solicit
feedback from stakeholders and the public.
   f.   No later than 1 year after all appointments required by this section
are made, and annually thereafter, the board shall submit to the mayor and the
speaker of the council a report describing the activities of the board over the
preceding 12 months, the results of the board's review and recommendations
pursuant to this section, and any challenges faced by the board in providing
oversight and feedback pursuant to this section. Each such report shall be
posted to ACS's website upon submission to the mayor.
(L.L. 2023/033, 3/14/2023, eff. 9/10/2023)
§ 21-922 Juvenile justice facility staffing.*
* Editor's note: there are two sections designated as § 21-922.
   a.   Within 15 days of January 1, 2025, and no later than 90 days after the
end of each quarter thereafter, ACS shall submit to the speaker of the council
and post on ACS’s website a report regarding the average number of staff
members during the previous quarter deployed to secure and specialized secure
detention facilities, in total and disaggregated by facility.
   b.   The data provided pursuant to subdivision a for specialized juvenile
detention shall be further disaggregated by the average number of ACS staff, in
total and disaggregated by job title.
   c.   No information that is otherwise required to be reported pursuant to
this section shall be reported in a manner that would violate any applicable
provision of federal, state or local law related to the privacy of information.
If any category requested contains between 1 and 5 youth, the number shall be
replaced with a symbol.
(L.L. 2024/112, 11/22/2024, eff. 11/22/2024)
§ 21-923 Reporting on length of stay of children and youth in ACS facilities.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Age range. The term "age range" refers to a breakdown by the following
categories: 6 years or less; 7 - 12 years; 13 - 17 years; and 18 - 20 years.
      Children's center. The term "children's center" means the Nicholas
Scoppetta children's center or a successor center operated by ACS for the
purpose of providing short-term care and maintenance therein for children or
youth under ACS's care.
      Length of stay. The term "length of stay" refers to a breakdown by the
following categories: 3 days or less; 4 - 7 days; 8 - 10 days; 11 - 20 days; 21
- 30 days; 31 - 60 days; 61 - 120 days; 121 - 180 days; and 181 or more days.
      Rapid intervention center. The term "rapid intervention center" means a
facility that provides intensive, structured, clinically-focused, therapeutic
programming designed to provide stabilization and short-term, intensive
treatment interventions to youth in a residential setting so that they may be
returned to their parents, foster parents, or least-restrictive level of care
as promptly as possible.
      Temporary placement facility. The term "temporary placement facility"
means a facility for children or youth under the care of ACS who await a
longer-term placement.
      Youth reception center. The term "youth reception center" means a short-
term, pre-placement facility for children or youth under the care of ACS who
await placement with an appropriate foster care provider.
   b.   No later than March 31, 2024, and quarterly thereafter, ACS shall
submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and shall post
conspicuously on the ACS website, a report containing the following
information, disaggregated by age range and length of stay, for the children's
center, youth reception centers, rapid intervention centers, and any other
temporary placement facilities for the immediately preceding quarter:
      1.   The number of children or youth residing in such facility; and
      2.   The number of such children or youth who were placed in such
facility for the first time.
   c.   The report required pursuant to subdivision b shall be presented as a
table where each row represents 1 of the following: (i) the children's center;
(ii) youth reception centers; (iii) rapid intervention centers; and (iv) other
temporary placement facilities. The columns in such table shall include the
number of children or youth residing in the applicable facility, the number of
such children or youth in each age range, the number of such children or youth
in each category of length of stay, and the number of such children or youth
placed in such facility for the first time.
   d.   No report required by this section shall contain personally
identifiable information. If a category contains between 1 and 5 children or
youth, or contains a number that would allow the identity of a child or youth
in another category that contains between 1 and 5 children or youth to be
deduced, the number shall be replaced with a symbol. A category that contains
zero shall be reported as zero, unless such reporting would violate any
applicable provision of federal, state, or local law relating to the privacy of
children's information. Reports submitted pursuant to this section shall be
made in accordance with all applicable provisions of federal, state, and local
laws relating to the privacy of information and confidentiality of records.
(L.L. 2023/050, 4/16/2023, eff. 4/16/2023)
§ 21-924 Education reports for juvenile delinquents, juvenile offenders, and
adolescent offenders.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have
the following meanings:
      ACS division. The term “ACS division” means the division of youth and
family justice of the ACS.
      Adolescent offender. The term “adolescent offender” means any individual
who is charged pursuant to the criminal procedure law as an adolescent
offender, as such term is defined in subdivision 44 of section 1.20 of the
criminal procedure law, and who is in custody of ACS.
      Children and youth in ACS division facilities. The term “children and
youth in ACS division facilities” shall include all children between the ages
of 13 and 20 who are in custody in facilities operated by the ACS division,
pursuant to a court order.
      Commissioner. The term “commissioner” means the commissioner of education
of the state of New York.
      Custody. The term “custody” means the confinement, in secure and non-
secure detention, of an individual by the ACS division pursuant to a court
order.
      Department of education site. The term “department of education site”
means any site that is (i) operated by the department of education and offers
educational programming to individuals who are required to receive a public
education pursuant to education law 3205 and chancellor’s regulation A-210 or
any successor regulation or provision and who are in custody pursuant to a
court order and (ii) located on property that is either under the control of
the department of education or ACS or that is contracted by the department of
education or ACS for the purpose of providing services for the department of
education or for ACS.
      Department of education staff. The term “department of education staff”
means any employee of the department of education assigned to work at a
department of education site.
      Educational programming. The term “educational programming” means
educational programming provided by the department of education pursuant to
section 112 or part 1 of article 65 of title 4 of the education law, and any
regulation promulgated by the commissioner of education thereto.
      High school equivalency diploma. The term “high school equivalency
diploma” means the diploma established pursuant to part 100.7 of the
regulations of the commissioner or any successor regulation.
      High school equivalency diploma test. The term “high school equivalency
diploma test” means any test that the New York state education department
offers for the purpose of establishing the equivalent of a high school diploma,
including, but not limited to, a general education development test or the test
assessing secondary completion.
      Individualized education program. The term “individualized education
program” has the same meaning as is set forth in paragraph (1) of subsection
(d) of section 1414 of title 20 of the United States code and any regulations
promulgated thereto.
      Juvenile delinquent. The term “juvenile delinquent” means any individual
in the custody of the ACS division who is charged pursuant to the family court
act as a juvenile delinquent, as such term is defined in subdivision 1 of
section 301.2 of the family court act.
      Juvenile offender. The term “juvenile offender” means any individual in
the custody of the ACS division who is charged pursuant to the criminal
procedure law as a juvenile offender, as such term is defined in subdivision 42
of section 1.20 of the criminal procedure law.
      Local or regents diploma. The term “local or regents diploma” means the
diploma established pursuant to part 100.5 of the regulations of the
commissioner or any successor regulation or provision.
      School re-entry. The term “school re-entry” means the process by which a
student, following release from an ACS division facility, is re-enrolled in the
school of the department of education in which such student was enrolled prior
to being placed in custody of ACS.
      Skills and achievement commencement credential. The term “skills and
achievement commencement credential” means the credential established pursuant
to part 100.6 of the regulations of the commissioner or any successor
regulation or provision.
      Special education plan. The term “special education plan” means the plan
created by the department of education to describe the services a student in
custody who has an individualized education program will receive in a
department of education site.
   b.   The department of education and ACS shall each produce an annual report
on educational programming for children and youth in ACS division facilities.
On October 1, 2024, and every October 1 thereafter, the department of education
and ACS shall post such report on their respective websites and provide a link
in each such report to the other report.
   c.   The department of education report shall provide data about children
and youth in ACS division facilities and shall include, but need not be limited
to, the following information:
      1.   The number and percentage of children and youth in ACS division
facilities enrolled in educational programming at department of education
sites, both in total and disaggregated by age. Such number and percentage shall
be reported for the school year and for each month. Such percentage shall be
calculated on the final day of each month by dividing the number of children
and youth in ACS division facilities enrolled in educational programming by the
respective number of children and youth in custody on such date.
      2.   The number of hours of educational programming offered to children
and youth in ACS division facilities on each school day and the curriculum
subject areas included in educational programming.
      3.   The number of children and youth in ACS division facilities whose
educational programming includes the required courses of study for the first 8
years of full-time public day school, pursuant to section 3204 of the education
law, disaggregated by grade level.
      4.   The number of children and youth in ACS division facilities whose
educational programming is designed for the (i) skills and achievement
commencement credential, (ii) local or regents diploma, or (iii) high school
equivalency diploma test.
      5.   The number of children and youth in ACS division facilities who,
while in custody, completed the required courses of study for the first 8 years
of full-time public day school, pursuant to section 3204 of the education law,
disaggregated by grade level.
      6.   The number of children and youth in ACS division facilities who
graduated, dropped out, or otherwise exited from high school while in custody,
in total and disaggregated by the number of children and youth who completed
requirements for a (i) local or regents diploma, or (ii) skills and achievement
commencement credential.
      7.   The number of children and youth in ACS division facilities to whom
a high school equivalency diploma test was administered while in custody.
      8.   The number of children and youth in ACS division facilities who met
high school equivalency diploma requirements while in custody.
      9.   The number of children and youth in ACS division facilities who are
enrolled in college level coursework.
      10.   The average functional level of children and youth in ACS division
facilities on tests such as the STAR assessment, the test of basic adult
education, or similar testing.
      11.   The number and percentage of children and youth in ACS division
facilities enrolled in educational programming and have an individualized
education program as of the date of enrollment in educational programming,
disaggregated by disability classification. Such number and percentage shall be
reported for the school year as well as for each month. Such percentage shall
be calculated by dividing the number of children and youth in ACS division
facilities so enrolled on the final day of each month by the respective number
of children and youth in ACS division facilities in custody on such date.
      12.   The number of children and youth in ACS division facilities who, as
of the date of enrollment in educational programming, had an individualized
education program recommendation of:
         (a)   related services only;
         (b)   special education teacher support services;
         (c)   integrated co-teaching services;
         (d)   special class in a school located in districts 1 through 32,
including high schools;
         (e)   special class in a school in district 75; or
         (f)   non-public school placement.
      13.   The number and percentage of children and youth in ACS division
facilities for whom the department of education has completed special education
plans within 30 school days of enrolling in educational programming.
      14.   The average and median number of days the department of education
requires to complete special education plans, from the date children and youth
in ACS division facilities with individualized education programs are enrolled
in educational programming.
      15.   The number and percentage of children and youth in ACS division
facilities who have special education plans and are receiving the full range of
special education services indicated in their special education plan. This
information shall be further disaggregated by whether such children and youth
have been detained in secure or non-secure facilities.
      16.   The number and percentage of children and youth in ACS division
facilities who have special education plans and are receiving the related
services indicated in their special education plans. This information shall be
further disaggregated by each related service, and whether such children and
youth have been detained in secure or non-secure facilities.
      17.   The number and percentage of children and youth in ACS division
facilities who have individualized education programs and have received special
education evaluations while in custody. This information shall be further
disaggregated by (i) the type of evaluation, including initial evaluation,
mandated triennial reevaluation, or related service evaluation and (ii) whether
such children and youth have been detained in secure or non-secure facilities.
      18.   The number and percentage of children and youth in ACS division
facilities enrolled in educational programming whom the department of education
identifies as having an English language learner status. Such number and
percentage shall be reported for the school year as well as for each month.
Such percentage shall be calculated by dividing the number of children and
youth so enrolled on the final day of each month by the total number of
children and youth in custody on such date.
      19.   The number and percentage of children and youth in ACS division
facilities enrolled in educational programing who are identified as having an
English language learner status who are receiving language instruction, in
total and disaggregated by language and the type of instruction, including
instruction by a certified English as a new language teacher, bilingual
instruction, bilingual special education instruction, or language specific high
school equivalency test preparation instruction.
      20.   The number of full-time equivalent teachers working at department
of education sites assigned to teach children and youth in ACS division
facilities, in total and disaggregated by (i) general education teachers, (ii)
English-as-a-new-language teachers, and (iii) special education teachers.
      21.   The number of department of education staff other than teachers
assigned to work at department of education sites, in total and disaggregated
by staff role and by those working with children and youth in ACS division
facilities.
      22.   The average class size for educational programming that the
department of education provides to children and youth in ACS division
facilities, disaggregated by facility location.
      23.   The number of children and youth in ACS division facilities
participating in department of education career and technical education and the
number of children and youth who complete such training.
      24.   The mean and median number of credits per quarter, semester, or
other period of time that children and youth in ACS division facilities who are
enrolled in high school educational programming attempted to earn and earn
while in custody. This paragraph only applies to those children and youth who
are in custody for a sufficient period to permit earning of credits.
      25.   The number of children and youth in ACS division facilities
enrolled in physical education.
      26.   The mean and median rate of attendance in a department of education
school for children and youth in ACS division facilities upon six months after
their release from custody and upon one year post-release, disaggregated by
age, race, disability classification, and English language learner status.
      27.   The mean and median number of days between release from ACS
division custody and re-enrollment into schools of the department of education
for children and youth in ACS division facilities, for students who are not
returned to the schools of the department of education that such students
attended preceding confinement in ACS division custody through the school re-
entry process and the number of students re-enrolled in such schools through
the school re-entry process.
      28.   The plans, if any, of the department of education to ensure the
educational progress of children and youth in ACS division facilities, after
their release from custody.
      29.   All high school courses offered to children and youth in ACS
division facilities at department of education sites.
      30.   All socio-emotional, behavioral, and mental health supports and
services provided by the department of education to children and youth in ACS
division facilities, disaggregated by whether such services were mandated
pursuant to the special education plan of such children and youth.
      31.   The number and percentage of children and youth in ACS division
facilities who did not attend educational programming, and if known,
disaggregated by the reason such children and youth did not attend educational
programming, including, but not limited to, unexplained absence, illness,
special needs or circumstances, unavailable mandated transportation, required
court appearance, or school closure due to medical or health issue; and the
average and median number of days such children and youth missed school, and if
known, disaggregated by reason such children and youth did not attend
educational programming. Such number shall be reported for each month.
   d.   The ACS report shall provide data about children and youth in custody
in ACS division facilities and shall include, but need not be limited to, the
following information:
      1.   The number of incidents of use of physical restraints at a
department of education site, in total and disaggregated by (i) whether such
physical restraints were used on a juvenile delinquent, juvenile offender, or
adolescent offender and (ii) the reason for using such physical restraints.
      2.   The number of incidents of use of mechanical restraints at a
department of education site, in total and disaggregated by (i) whether such
mechanical restraints were used on a juvenile delinquent, juvenile offender, or
adolescent offender and (ii) the reason for using such mechanical restraints.
      3.   The number of incidents of restraints resulting in injuries and the
type of injuries to children and youth in ACS division facilities when
attending educational programming.
   e.   No data required to be reported by subdivisions c and d of this section
shall be reported in a manner that would violate any applicable provision of
federal, state, or local law relating to the privacy of information respecting
children and youth placed in custody in ACS division facilities or that would
interfere with law enforcement investigations or otherwise conflict with the
interests of law enforcement. If a category contains between 1 and 5 such
children and youth, or allows another category to be narrowed to between 1 and
5 such children and youth, the number shall be replaced with a symbol. A
category that contains zero shall be reported as zero, unless such reporting
would violate any applicable provision of federal, state, or local law relating
to the privacy of student information.
(L.L. 2024/021, 1/20/2024, eff. 1/20/2024)
§ 21-925 Provision of information about legal services.*
* Editor's note: there are two sections designated as § 21-925.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Child protective report. The term “child protective report” means a
report made to the state central register of child abuse and maltreatment that
results in either: an ACS child protective investigation conducted pursuant to
section 424 of the social services law, or an ACS child protective response
provided pursuant to section 427-a of the social services law, which may
include alternative interventions and supportive services in lieu of a formal
investigation.
      Covered individual. The term “covered individual” means a parent or other
person legally responsible for the care of a child, other than a foster parent,
or employee, volunteer, owner or operator of a day care facility who is the
subject of a child protective report.
      Covered proceeding. The term “covered proceeding” means an ACS child
protective investigation conducted pursuant to section 424 of the social
services law, or an ACS child protective response provided pursuant to section
427-a of the social services law.
      Legal services. The term “legal services” means no-cost or low-cost
individualized legal assistance provided in a single consultation or provided
for a longer period of time by an organization that has the capacity to provide
legal services to a covered individual in connection with a covered proceeding.
   b.   When an ACS child protective caseworker initiates direct engagement
with a covered individual at the onset of a covered proceeding, such ACS child
protective caseworker shall provide information to such covered individual on
where they may obtain legal services.
(L.L. 2025/029, 3/29/2025, eff. 3/29/2025)
§ 21-925 Foster care placement notices; audit and report.*
* Editor's note: there are two sections designated as § 21-925.
   a.   ACS shall conduct an annual random audit of 100 notices of an
anticipated change in a foster care placement of a child as required by
paragraph (g) of subdivision (3) of section 358-a of the social services law,
subdivision (5) of section 1017 of the family court act, subdivision (j) of
section 1055 of the family court act and item (H) of paragraph (vii) of
subdivision (d) of section 1089 of the family court act. Such audit shall
include a review of the following:
      1.   The number of such notices provided to the court and the attorneys
for the parties, including the attorney for the child, as required by law and
the number of such notices that were not provided as required by law;
      2.   The amount of time that elapsed between a change in a foster care
placement and the provision of each such notice to the court and to the
attorney for the parties, including the attorney for the child;
      3.   Whether each such notice included the information required by law;
and
      4.   To the extent required information was not included in such notice,
a summary of such information.
   b.   No later than June 30, 2026, and annually thereafter, ACS shall submit
to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and shall post conspicuously on
the ACS website, a report for the immediately preceding year with the results
of the audit required by subdivision a. Such report shall be based on the audit
findings and include the following:
      1.   The number of instances in which a placement change notice was
required but such notice was not provided;
      2.   The number of placement change notices provided, disaggregated by
the number of days before or after the change in placement;
      3.   The number of emergency placement changes made, disaggregated by the
number of notices conducted within 24 hours of such change and the number of
notices provided 24 hours or more after such change;
      4.   The number of notices provided that included all required
information; and
      5.   The number of notices provided that did not include all required
information, disaggregated by the category of information that was missing;
such categories shall include, but not be limited to, the information relating
to the date of the placement change; the foster care agency; the foster care
agency contact information; and the ACS attorney contact information.
   c.   No report required by subdivision a of this section shall contain
personally identifiable information. If a category contains between 1 and 5
children, or contains a number that would allow another category that contains
between 1 and 5 children to be deduced, the number shall be replaced with a
symbol. A category that contains zero shall be reported as zero, unless such
reporting would violate any applicable provision of federal, state or local law
relating to the privacy of child information.
(L.L. 2025/038, 4/11/2025, eff. 4/11/2025)
§ 21-926 Fair futures program for youth in foster care and youth who have
exited foster care.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Housing assistance. The term "housing assistance" means any form of help
designed to assist youth with finding and maintaining a place of residence,
including, but not limited to, ACS housing subsidy, rental assistance received
from any other city agency, supportive housing, or any other assistance
sufficient to obtain adequate housing, including exception to policy.
      Youth in foster care. The term "youth in foster care" means a person who
was placed in an out-of-home placement with ACS after the filing of a petition
in family court pursuant to article 3, 7, 10, 10-a, 10-b, or 10-c of the family
court act or section 358-a or 384-b of the social services law.
   b.   ACS shall partner with foster care agencies to operate a program to
improve outcomes for youth in foster care, including individuals who were
formerly in foster care and have exited foster care. Such program shall
include, but not be limited to, the following types of services for such
individuals: long term coaching, academic support, career development guidance,
and referrals to mental health services and housing assistance. Such program
shall offer age-dependent services to every such individual beginning at age 11
and extending up to 26, as applicable based on the type of service, provided
that an individual may opt out of such program at any time.
   c.   At least quarterly, ACS shall consult with youth in foster care,
including individuals who were formerly in foster care and have exited foster
care regarding the services offered through the program established pursuant to
subdivision b of this section.
(L.L. 2025/117, 8/13/2025, eff. 8/13/2025)
§ 21-927 Behavioral support training for direct service staff.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Behavioral support strategies. The term “behavioral support strategies”
means evidence-based methods or techniques aimed at understanding, reinforcing,
or redirecting behavior in a positive and non-punitive manner.
      Direct service staff. The term “direct service staff” means any
individual employed at a juvenile justice facility who has regular, direct
contact with youth, but who does not hold a professional license or
certification in mental health, behavior analysis, medicine, or a similar
field.
      Juvenile justice facility. The term “juvenile justice facility” means a
detention facility or placement facility as defined in section
21-901.
   b.   Mandatory training. 
      1.   No later than 1 year after the effective date of the local law that
added this section, the commissioner shall require direct service staff to
complete a foundational training in behavioral support strategies. Such
training shall include, but need not be limited to:
         (a)   Basic principles of behavior and learning;
         (b)   Techniques for encouraging positive behaviors, including the use
of positive reinforcement;
         (c)   Methods for de-escalation and crisis prevention that rely on
non-punitive approaches; and
         (d)   Guidance on incorporating trauma-informed and culturally
competent practices when addressing challenging behaviors.
      2.   The commissioner shall determine the minimum hours required and the
acceptable format of such training, which may include in-person sessions,
online modules, or a combination thereof. The commissioner may also require
periodic refresher trainings to ensure continued competency.
      3.   Each direct service staff member employed as of the date on which
the commissioner establishes the training required by paragraph 1 of this
subdivision shall complete such training within 1 year of the establishment of
such training. Any individual who is hired as direct service staff after the
date on which the commissioner establishes such training shall complete such
training no later than 1 year after the individual’s date of employment as
direct service staff.
   c.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize direct service
staff to engage in any activities that require a license or certification under
title VIII of the education law. Such staff shall be limited to performing only
those behavioral support functions permissible for non-licensed persons
pursuant to section 8807 of the education law and any other applicable
provisions of law.
   d.   The commissioner shall ensure that training and informational materials
and guidance regarding behavioral support strategies are available
electronically to providers working with youth involved in a juvenile justice
facility upon request.
(L.L. 2025/119, 8/13/2025, eff. 8/13/2025)
§ 21-928 Luggage for youth in foster care.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Luggage. The term “luggage” means a suitcase, duffel bag, backpack, or
similar reusable container that is designed to hold an individual’s personal
belongings and is not a disposable bag or trash bag.
      Youth in foster care. The term “youth in foster care” means a person who
was placed in an out-of-home placement with ACS after the filing of a petition
in family court pursuant to article 3, 7, 10, 10-a, 10-b, or 10-c of the family
court act or section 358-a or 384-b of the social services law.
   b.   ACS shall provide luggage to youth in foster care who are: (1) entering
foster care; (2) moving from one foster care placement to another; or (3)
exiting foster care, provided that such youth may decline to accept such
luggage. Provision of disposable containers, while permissible if requested,
does not constitute the provision of luggage.
   c.   No later than January 31 of each year, ACS shall submit a report to the
mayor and the speaker of the council regarding its provision of luggage to
youth in foster care during the preceding calendar year. Such report shall
include, but need not be limited to, the following information: ACS’s efforts
to provide luggage to youth in foster care; any barriers encountered in
providing luggage to such youth; and any additional efforts to be taken in the
upcoming year to overcome such barriers.
(L.L. 2025/115, 8/13/2025, eff. 12/11/2025)
