Title 6: Department of Consumer and Worker Protection
(Caption amended City Record 2/22/2021, eff. 3/24/2021)
Chapter 1: License Enforcement
§ 1-01 Fingerprinting.
   (a)   The Department may require applicants to appear in person at the
Department or a location designated by the Department to be fingerprinted. This
requirement applies to: an individual, if the applicant is an individual; the
general partners, if the applicant is a partnership; the officers, directors
and stockholders owning more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation
("principal stockholders"), if the applicant is a corporation; and the members,
if the applicant is a limited liability company.
   (b)   The Commissioner may, in his or her discretion, waive the fingerprint
requirement if a person required to be fingerprinted is unavailable, or for
other good cause shown.
(Amended City Record 2/24/2020, eff. 3/25/2020)
§ 1-01.1 Applications.
   (a)   All applicants for a license or a license renewal must provide
complete and truthful responses to all the information requested on an
application for such license or license renewal and any related documents.
   (b)   No applicant for a license or a license renewal shall conceal any
information, make a false statement or falsify or allow to be falsified any
certificate, form, signed statement, application or report required to be filed
with an application for a license or license renewal to be issued by the
department.
   (c)   Unless otherwise provided by law or rule, no applicant for a license
or renewal thereof, or licensee, including the general partners, officers,
directors, members, and principal stockholders of such applicant or licensee,
whose application or renewal thereof is denied or whose license is revoked by
the Department may submit a new application for the same license for a period
of 12 months from the date the initial application or renewal was denied or the
license was revoked. This subsection shall only apply if the initial
application or renewal was denied, or the license was revoked, because the
applicant or licensee concealed information, made a false statement, or
falsified or allowed to be falsified any certificate, form, signed statement,
application or report required to be filed with an application for a license
that is to be issued by the Department or for a renewal thereof.
   (d)   The commissioner may deny any license application or refuse to renew
any license, and may, after due notice and opportunity to be heard, suspend or
revoke such license, if the applicant or person holding such license, or where
applicable, any of its officers, principals, directors, members, managers,
employees, or stockholders owning ten percent or more of the outstanding stock
of the corporation, has been found to have violated subdivisions a or b of this
section in connection with the application or licensed business.
(Amended City Record 1/30/2019, eff. 3/1/2019; amended City Record 2/24/2020,
eff. 3/25/2020)
§ 1-02 Term and Expiration Date of Licenses.
   (a)   The licenses and permits listed below expire on the dates indicated:
License Date (years refer to calendar years)
License                                        Date (years refer to calendar
                                               years)
Booting of Motor Vehicles                      December 31 of Odd Years
Debt Collection Agency                         January 31 of Odd Years
Electronic or Home Appliance Service Dealers   June 30 of Even Years
Electronic Stores                              December 31 of Even Years
Employment Agency                              May 1 of Even Years
Garage, Parking Lot                            March 31 of Odd Years
Home Improvement Contractor                    February 28 of Odd Years
Horse Drawn Cab                                March 31 of Even Years
Horse Drawn Cab Driver                         May 31 of Even Years
Hotel                                          September 30 of Even Years
Laundry – Retail, Industrial, and Industrial December 31 of Odd Years
Delivery
Locksmith; Locksmith Apprentice                May 31 of Odd Years
Process Server                                 February 28 of Even Years
Products-for-the-Disabled Dealer               March 15 of Odd Years
Secondhand Dealer                              July 31 of Odd Years
Sightseeing Bus                                March 31 of Even Years
Sightseeing Guide                              March 31 of Even Years
Stoop Line Stand                               March 31 of Even Years
Storage Warehouse                              April 1 of Odd Years
Towing Vehicles Company                        April 30 of Even Years
Towing Vehicles Driver                         October 31 of Even Years
 
   (b)   General vendor licenses are valid for two years. Such licenses shall
expire September 30 of each year.
   (c)   Newsstand licenses are valid for a two year term and shall expire on
either March 31 or September 30 and in either odd or even numbered years,
depending on the date designated in the license document.
   (d)   Reserved.
   (e)   Reserved.
   (f)   Pedicab business licenses and pedicab driver licenses are valid for
one year. Pedicab business licenses shall expire November 1 of each year and
pedicab driver licenses shall expire April 30 of each year.
   (g)   Car wash licenses are valid for a two year term and shall expire
October 31 of odd-numbered years.
   (h)   In all instances where the license expiration dates differ from those
in existence prior to the effective date of this section, or amendments
thereto, the License Issuance Division of the Department shall make appropriate
adjustments.
(Amended City Record 9/26/2016, eff. 10/26/2016; amended City Record 2/24/2020,
eff. 3/25/2020; amended City Record 12/1/2020, eff. 12/31/2020; amended City
Record 2/22/2021, eff. 3/24/2021; amended City Record 3/11/2022, eff. 4/10/
2022; amended City Record 10/9/2024, eff. 11/8/2024; amended City Record 5/2/
2025, eff. 5/2/2025)
§ 1-03 Display of License Sign.
   (a)   Every licensee must post conspicuously at the licensee's place of
business the license sign provided by the Department that includes the license
information, instructions on contacting the Department to file a complaint, and
other important information for consumers as the Department deems appropriate.
A licensee may post a copy of such sign at the licensee's place of business
only if the original is available at such place of business for inspection by
any person. A licensee having no fixed place of business must exhibit his or
her license upon the request of any person.
   (b)   Reserved.
(Amended City Record 2/24/2020, eff. 3/25/2020; amended City Record 10/9/2024,
eff. 11/8/2024)
§ 1-04 Making False Representations and Altering or Falsifying Department
Documents.
   (a)   No licensee or employee or agent of such licensee shall make a false
representation to the Department or falsify or allow to be falsified any
certificate, form, signed statement, application or report required to be filed
with the Department.
   (b)   No licensee or employee or agent of such licensee shall forge,
counterfeit, alter, fabricate, or falsely make any document issued by the
Department or purported to be issued by the Department, including, but not
limited to, Department licenses, permits, and letterhead.
   (c)   No licensee or employee or agent of such licensee shall use, attempt
to use, possess, obtain, accept, receive, or provide to another any document
prohibited by subdivision b of this section.
   (d)   The commissioner may deny any license application or refuse to renew
any license, and may, after due notice and opportunity to be heard, suspend or
revoke such license, if the applicant or person holding such license, or where
applicable, any of its officers, principals, directors, members, managers,
employees, or stockholders owning ten percent or more of the outstanding stock
of the corporation, has been found to have violated subdivisions a, b, or c of
this section in connection with the application or licensed business.
(Added City Record 2/24/2020, eff. 3/25/2020)
§ 1-05 License Number in Advertisements and Other Printed and Electronic
Matter.
Any advertisement, letterhead, receipt, online media, website, electronic
advertisement, or other printed or electronic matter of a licensee must contain
the license number assigned to the licensee by the Department. If a licensee
uses email to communicate with consumers, the licensee's email must contain the
license number assigned to the licensee by the Department. The license number
must be clearly identified as a New York City Department of Consumer Affairs
license number and must be disclosed and disseminated in a lawful manner. Any
telephone listing consisting solely of the name, address, and telephone number
of the licensee need not specify the licensee's license number. Licensees
holding licenses for more than one location must also include their respective
license number(s) clearly identified as New York City Department of Consumer
Affairs license number(s) on all correspondence and other matter which contains
or makes reference to one or more of such licensees' licensed location(s).
(Amended City Record 2/24/2020, eff. 3/25/2020)
§ 1-06 Proof of Surety Bond.
No license or renewal shall be issued unless the licensee or applicant submits
proof that every bond required by the Department for the license is in effect
and does not expire prior to the end of the licensing period. Except where
otherwise provided, all such bonds must allow any person aggrieved by the
bondholder's breach of the conditions of the bond to proceed against the bond.
(Amended City Record 7/26/2018, eff. 8/25/2018)
§ 1-07 Liability Insurance.
Every licensee required to have liability insurance must obtain a liability
insurance policy that obligates the insurer to notify the License Issuance
Division of the Department if the policy is canceled or if the insured fails to
renew 30 days prior to the expiration of the policy.
§ 1-08 Change of Address.
A licensee shall notify the Department in writing of any change of address
within 10 days of the change. This requirement applies to the address of the
licensed business, and to the residence addresses of: individual licensees; all
partners of partnership licensees; and the officers and principal stockholders
of corporate licensees.
§ 1-09 Late Renewal.
   (a)   Except as provided in subdivision (b), any application for a license
renewal that is filed sixty days or more after the expiration date of such
license will be treated as a new license application.
   (b)   Any application for a renewal of a license subject to Emergency
Executive Order number 107 of 2020, received by the Department within 60 days
of the effective date of this subdivision, will be treated as a renewal
application.
(Amended City Record 8/22/2022, eff. 8/22/2022)
§ 1-10 Lost or Mutilated Licenses and License Plates and Lost or Stolen
Records.
   (a) Lost license or license plate. A licensee shall immediately report, in
an affidavit, the loss of a license or license plate issued to him or her by
the Department, requesting the issuance of a new license or plate. Replacement
licenses and plates are issued at the discretion of the Department.
   (b)   Mutilated license or license plate. Should a license or license plate
issued by the Department to any licensee become mutilated or otherwise
illegible, the holder of the license or plate shall promptly surrender it to
the Department and request the issuance of a new license or plate. The request
shall be made upon a form provided by the Department.
   (c)   Fee. A fee of fifteen dollars ($15) shall be charged for the issuance
of a replacement license, and a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25) shall be
charged for the issuance of a replacement license plate. This fee must be paid
when the affidavit for a lost license or plate is filed or when a mutilated or
otherwise illegible license or plate is surrendered and a request for the
issuance of a new license or plate is filed. This fee will be refunded should
the Department decide not to issue the replacement license or plate. This fee
shall not be charged if the license or license plate is not received by the
licensee and the Department receives a certification from the licensee that
such license or license plate was not received within 30 days of the license or
license plate being issued.
   (d)   Lost or stolen records. A licensee shall report to the Department, in
an affidavit, the loss or theft of any records required to be maintained by it
under Chapters 1 and 2 of Title 20 of the New York City Administrative Code,
within ten calendar days of such loss or theft.
(Amended City Record 2/24/2020, eff. 3/25/2020)
§ 1-11 Dishonored Check Fee.
Any licensee or license applicant who, in payment of a license fee, renewal
fee, fine or other fee or charge assessed by the Department, tenders or causes
to be tendered to the Department a check or other item that is subsequently
dishonored, shall pay to the Department, in addition to any other fees or
penalties provided by law, the amount of any fee for a dishonored check or
other item that is charged to the Department for such check or item.
§ 1-12 Compliance with the Consumer Protection Law. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 2/24/2020, eff. 3/25/2020)
§ 1-13 Response to Complaints.
A licensee or license applicant must respond in writing to the Department about
any complaint sent to the licensee or applicant by the Department. The response
must be made within 20 days of the date the complaint is sent to the licensee
or applicant and must set forth the licensee's or applicant's position
regarding the transaction which is the subject of the complaint, including the
facts which the licensee or applicant believes justify its position. The
licensee or applicant must also provide with its response any documents in its
possession related to the transaction which is the subject of the complaint.
The licensee or applicant must respond to subsequent communications from the
Department concerning the complaint within 10 days after receiving a
communication. The Department may rely on any complaint, regardless of whether
it has been resolved, or any response to such complaint, in any subsequent
Department action, including, but not limited to, decisions to deny, suspend,
or revoke an application or license.
(Amended City Record 2/24/2020, eff. 3/25/2020)
§ 1-14 Requests for Documents, Subpoenas, Interrogatories, and Notices of
Deposition.
   (a)   This section applies to requests for documents, subpoenas,
interrogatories, or notices of depositions issued to licensees or applicants
pursuant to Section 2203 of the Charter, Title 20 of the New York City
Administrative Code, or any other provisions of law or rule within the
jurisdiction of the Department.
   (b)   A licensee must reply to a subpoena, a request for documents or
interrogatories within twenty days of the date the request was mailed or
otherwise served upon the licensee.
      (1)   If the licensee fails to respond to a subpoena, a request for
documents or interrogatories, the licensee is liable for a separate violation
for each day the licensee fails to respond to the requests.
      (2)   If the licensee provides an incomplete response to a subpoena, a
request for documents or interrogatories, the Department may send a deficiency
letter to the licensee. If the licensee does not provide a complete response
within 14 days of the deficiency letter being sent, the licensee is liable for
a separate violation for each day the licensee fails to provide a complete
response. If the licensee provides an incomplete response to a subpoena, a
request for documents or interrogatories, or to a subsequent deficiency letter,
there will be a presumption that the licensee has neglected to respond to each
such subpoena, request for documents, interrogatory, or deficiency letter
unless the licensee states that the licensee has no responsive documents to
that particular request or no information responsive to that particular
interrogatory.
      (3)   Licensees must include a notarized certification that each
subpoena, request for documents or interrogatory was answered fully and
truthfully, accompanying their response. Responses to a subpoena, request for
documents or interrogatories will not be deemed complete until they are
accompanied by such certification.
   (c)   A licensee must appear at a time and place designated by the
Department for a deposition. Failure to appear for a noticed deposition will be
grounds for revocation of the licensee's license upon notice and opportunity to
be heard. If the licensee is an individual, he or she must appear; if a
partnership, one of its general partners with relevant knowledge of the
partnership must appear; and if a corporation or limited liability company, one
of its members or officers with relevant knowledge of the corporation must
appear.
   (d)   The Department may serve subpoenas, interrogatories, requests for
documents, and notices of deposition upon an applicant regarding materials
related to a license or renewal application. Failure by the applicant to fully
respond to a subpoena, interrogatories or a request for documents, or to appear
for a deposition, within twenty days of the mailing date of the request or of
the date indicated on the notice of deposition will be grounds for denial of
the license application.
   (e)   Subpoenas, interrogatories, requests for documents and notices of
deposition pursuant to this section may be served by ordinary mail addressed to
the licensee's or applicant's place of business. They may also be served by
ordinary mail addressed to the residence of an individual licensee; the
residence of a general partner of a partnership licensee; the residence of an
officer or principal stockholder of a corporate licensee, or the residence of a
member of a limited liability company licensee. They may also be served by
email if an email address has been provided by the licensee or applicant.
   (f)   Upon good cause shown, the Department may extend the time to respond
as required under this section.
(Amended City Record 2/24/2020, eff. 3/25/2020)
§ 1-14.1 Notices of Hearing.
A licensee must appear at the Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings to
answer a notice of hearing served upon that licensee. If the licensee is an
individual, he or she must appear; if a partnership, one of its general
partners must appear; if a corporation, one of its officers must appear; and if
a limited liability company, one of its members must appear. A notice of
hearing pursuant to this section may be served by ordinary mail addressed to
the licensee's place of business. It may also be served by ordinary mail
addressed to the residence of an individual licensee; the residence of a
general partner of a partnership licensee; the residence of an officer or
principal stockholder of a corporate licensee, or the residence of a member of
a limited liability company licensee. It may also be served by email if an
email address has been provided by the licensee or applicant. Notices of
hearing includes summonses, petitions, and other notices of violation filed by
the Department.
(Added City Record 2/24/2020, eff. 3/25/2020)
§ 1-15 Judgments.
A licensee or license applicant must satisfy any outstanding judgment against
him or her that has been obtained by a consumer and that relates to activities
for which a license is required:
   (a)   within thirty (30) days from the date of entry of the judgment; or
   (b)   if the judgment has been stayed or appealed, within thirty (30) days
from the date the stay is lifted or the appeal decided; or
   (c)   according to a payment schedule the parties agree upon.
§ 1-16 Inspection of Records and Business Premises.
   (a)   Every licensee shall maintain the records which it is required to
maintain under Chapters 1 and 2 of Title 20 of the New York City Administrative
Code and the regulations promulgated thereunder, and, except as otherwise set
forth in said chapters or regulations, shall retain such records for three
years. Licensees shall make such records available for inspection at the
offices of the Department of Consumer Affairs, or at licensee's place of
business, during business hours.
   (b)   The Commissioner or authorized representatives of the Commissioner may
enter the business premises of a licensee during business hours for the
purposes of:
      (1)   Inspecting or examining licensee's place of business in order to
verify compliance with the provisions of Chapters 1 and 2 of Title 20 of the
New York City Administrative Code and the regulations promulgated thereunder;
and
      (2)   Inspecting or examining any records or documents licensee is
required to maintain pursuant to said chapters and regulations; and
      (3)   Inspecting or examining non-public areas of licensee's place of
business for the purposes stated in paragraph (b)(1) above.
   (c)   Inspections of the type described above will be conducted at least
once in every two-year period, and additional inspections will be conducted if
an inspection reveals alleged violations of Chapters 1 and 2 of Title 20 of the
New York City Administrative Code or the regulations promulgated thereunder.
Additional inspections shall also be conducted whenever the Department receives
information alleging violation of said chapters or regulations.
§ 1-17 Wearing of Badge Prohibited.
No licensee or employee or agent of such licensee shall purchase, procure, or
have made, or shall wear, display, carry, possess or exhibit any badge,
insignia, shield, medal, decoration or facsimile thereof that in any way
denotes, suggests, implies or could lead anyone to believe it confers or
represents its wearer has an official or governmental status, except when
required to do so by law or rule, nor shall a licensee in any way permit,
authorize, encourage, acquiesce or consent to, any employee or agent doing so.
§ 1-18 Destruction of Identification Documents Issued by the Department.
Whenever any licensee has not renewed a license upon its expiration, such
former licensee must, not later than 10 business days after the expiration of
such license, destroy all license and identification documents that have been
issued to such licensee and to any of its employees or agents.
(Amended City Record 2/24/2020, eff. 3/25/2020)
§ 1-19 Presumption of Continued Unlicensed Activity.
   (a)   Unless otherwise specified in the notice, if the Department, on
notice, charges a business or individual with engaging in activity without a
license required under Chapter 2 of Title 20 of the New York City
Administrative Code or under provisions of state law enforced by the
Department, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the unlicensed
activity continued every day, without interruption, from the date specified by
the Department in the notice as the first date of unlicensed activity through
the hearing date.
   (b)   The first date of unlicensed activity specified by the Department in
the notice may be the date of an inspection at which unlicensed activity is
identified, the date on which a previously-held license expired, was suspended
or revoked, or became void by operation of law, or any other date on which
unlicensed activity first occurred, such as the date the business or individual
entered into a contract to conduct business for which a license was required or
the first date a business or individual advertised or offered services for
which a license was required.
   (c)   Regardless of the date specified by the Department in the notice, if
the Department presents at the hearing a copy of a decision or order from a
prior proceeding finding that the business or individual engaged in the same
unlicensed activity, or a copy of a settlement from a prior proceeding
resolving a charge of the same unlicensed activity, there shall be a rebuttable
presumption that the unlicensed activity continued every day, without
interruption, from the date of the decision, order or settlement through the
date of the hearing, unless the decision, order or settlement specifically
provides otherwise.
   (d)   Regardless of the date specified by the Department in the notice, if
the Department presents at the hearing a copy of a decision or order from a
prior proceeding revoking or suspending the license to engage in the same
activity forming the basis of the charge of unlicensed activity, or a copy of a
settlement from a prior proceeding that includes such license revocation or
suspension, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the unlicensed
activity continued every day, without interruption, from the date following the
decision, order or settlement through the date of the hearing.
   (e)   A party may present credible evidence at the hearing to rebut the
presumption of continued unlicensed activity, such as written proof that the
party obtained a license; receipts or other documentation indicating that
merchandise was returned to distributors; written termination of leases or
agreements; or photographs demonstrating the discontinuance of the unlicensed
activity.
(Added City Record 9/18/2015, eff. 10/18/2015; amended City Record 2/24/2020,
eff. 3/25/2020)
§ 1-20 Non-Payment of Civil Penalties.
   (a)   The Commissioner may deny a new or renewal application for any
license, permit or registration, and may revoke, suspend, cancel, or terminate
any license, permit or registration, if (i) the applicant, licensee, permittee
or registrant has failed to timely pay civil penalties imposed by a tribunal of
the New York City Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings (OATH), and (ii)
an agency has provided the Commissioner with the following information: the
name, address, Department license number and license category, where
applicable, and information sufficient to determine the delinquency and
monetary amount of the outstanding civil penalties owed by the applicant,
licensee, permittee or registrant.
   (b)   In determining whether to exercise the power granted by paragraph (a)
of this section, the Commissioner shall consider the amount of time that has
passed since the applicant, licensee, permittee or registrant failed to satisfy
a final judgment, order or decision imposing civil penalties from OATH, the
amount of the outstanding civil penalties, whether the applicant, licensee,
permittee or registrant has committed a series of violations, and any such
other matters as justice may require, as follows:
      1.   New applications for licenses, permits or registrations may be
denied where there is an outstanding final judgment, order, or decision of any
amount older than thirty (30) days.
      2.   Licenses, permits or registrations may be suspended, and renewal
applications denied, where outstanding final judgments, orders, or decisions
are:
         A.   Older than sixty (60) days; and
         B.   Five hundred dollars ($500) or more.
      3.   Licenses, permits or registrations may be revoked or cancelled where
outstanding final judgments, orders, or decisions are:
         A.   Older than ninety (90) days; and
         B.   One thousand dollars ($1,000) or more; and
         C.   The applicant, licensee, permittee or registrant violated any
provision the enforcement of which is within the jurisdiction of the Department
in the previous five (5) years.
   (c)   If the applicant, licensee, permittee or registrant breaches the terms
of a settlement agreement or payment plan reached with the City for
satisfaction of a final judgment, order or decision imposing civil penalties,
time will be calculated from the date of the breach or first missed payment,
unless otherwise set forth in the agreement.
   (d)   For purposes of this subsection, a judgment, order or decision
imposing civil penalties from OATH is considered "final" when:
      1.   An appeal or motion to vacate challenging the judgment, order, or
decision has been resolved;
      2.   The entity or legal representative against whom the judgment, order
or decision was imposed fails to appeal within the time allotted by OATH; or
      3.   The entity or legal representative against whom the judgment, order
or decision was entered on default fails to move to vacate the judgment, order
or decision within sixty (60) of the date entered.
   (e)   The Department reserves the right to take any action on an application
or license for any monies owed to the Department regardless of the criteria
provided in this section.
(Added City Record 1/30/2019, eff. 3/1/2019; amended City Record 2/24/2020,
eff. 3/25/2020)
§ 1-21 Injurious Conduct by Licensees.
   (a)   No person shall assault, menace, unlawfully imprison, or harass, or
attempt to assault, menace, unlawfully imprison, or harass, any employee of the
Department engaged in carrying out any duty for the Department. No person shall
intentionally damage any property of the Department. A licensee found in
violation of this subdivision, or a licensee whose employees or agents are
found in violation of this subdivision, is subject to suspension and/or
revocation of its licenses as provided for in this section.
   (b)   In addition to any of the powers that may be exercised by the
commissioner pursuant to any other provision of law or rule, upon the issuance
of a summons alleging a violation of subdivision (a) by a licensee, or employee
or agent of a licensee, the commissioner may immediately suspend any license
held by the licensee, subject to a prompt post-suspension hearing to be held no
more than 7 business days after the commencement of the suspension. In a
summons alleging a violation of subdivision (a), the Department may request
suspension or revocation of any license issued by the Department and held by
the licensee, in addition to alleging any other violations.
   (c)   Post-suspension hearing and trial. 
      (1)   At the post-suspension hearing prescribed by subdivision (b),
continued suspension of a license must be ordered if the Department is found to
have alleged facts which, if true, are sufficient to establish a violation of
subdivision (a) of this section and the Department establishes by a
preponderance of the evidence that continued licensure poses a risk to public
safety or the Department's ability to perform enforcement. Suspension ordered
pursuant to this subdivision must be continued until a final determination is
issued pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subdivision.
      (2)   Following the post-suspension hearing prescribed by subdivision (b)
of this section, a trial will be held to adjudicate all violations alleged in
the summons as well as any continued suspension or revocation requested by the
Department. At such trial, the Department must prove by a preponderance of the
evidence that the licensee's continued licensure poses a risk to safety or the
Department's ability to perform enforcement. Such trial must commence within 45
days of the decision rendered in the post-suspension hearing.
   (d)   As used in this section, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
      (1)   "Assault" shall mean to intentionally or recklessly cause physical
injury to another person.
      (2)   "Menace" shall mean to intentionally place another person in
reasonable fear of physical injury.
      (3)   "Unlawfully imprison" shall mean to restrict a person's movements
intentionally and unlawfully in such manner as to interfere substantially with
his or her liberty by moving him or her from one place to another, or by
confining him or her either in the place where the restriction commences or in
a place to which he or she has been moved, without consent and with knowledge
that the restriction is unlawful. A person is so moved or confined "without
consent" when such is accomplished by physical force, intimidation or
deception.
      (4)   "Harass" shall mean to intentionally and repeatedly harass another
person by following such person in or about a public place or places or by
engaging in a course of conduct or by repeatedly committing acts which places
such person in reasonable fear of physical injury.
      (5)   "Person" shall have the same meaning as found in § 20-102 of Title
20 of the New York City Administrative Code.
(Added City Record 2/15/2019, eff. 3/17/2019; amended City Record 4/7/2023,
eff. 5/7/2023)
§ 1-22 Reservation of Rights.
Nothing in this chapter shall impair, diminish, or otherwise affect any other
authority granted to the Department by any general, special or local law or any
rule promulgated pursuant thereto to deny an application for a license, permit
or registration, or suspend, terminate or revoke a license, permit or
registration.
(Added City Record 2/24/2020, eff. 3/25/2020)
§ 1-23 References to the Department of Consumer Affairs.
Any reference to the Department of Consumer Affairs in this title shall be
deemed to be a reference to the Department of Consumer and Worker Protection.
(Added City Record 2/22/2021, eff. 3/24/2021)
Chapter 2: Licenses
Subchapter A: Motion Picture Exhibitions
§ 2-01 Attendants. [Repealed]
Subchapter B: Tobacco Retail Dealers
(Title Amended City Record 1/11/2019, eff. 2/10/2019)
§ 2-11 Definitions.
Whenever used in this subchapter:
   (a)   "Community District Cap" means "Community district retail dealer cap"
as that term is defined in § 20-201 of the Administrative Code.
   (b)   "Tobacco Retail Dealer" means a "Retail Dealer" as that term is
defined in § 20-201 of the Administrative Code.
(Added City Record 1/11/2019, eff. 2/10/2019)
§ 2-12 Required Periodic Retraining Programs and Proof of Satisfactory
Completion of Such Program.
A periodic retraining program, as provided in § 17-710(f)(3) of the
Administrative Code, will only be recognized if it is certified by the New York
State Department of Health in accordance with subdivision 6 of Section 1399-ee
of the Public Health Law. Such a training program must issue a certificate of
completion to each person who successfully completes the training. The Tobacco
Retail Dealer also must demonstrate that the person who committed the violation
held a valid certificate of completion from the state certified sales training
program at the time of the violation.
(Amended City Record 1/11/2019, eff. 2/10/2019)
§ 2-13 Application Process for Available Licenses within Community Districts.
   (a)   On the first business day in April and the first business day in
October of each year, the Department will publish the following information for
each community district in the City: (i) the community district cap; (ii) the
number of current Tobacco Retail Dealer licenses; and (iii) the number of
available Tobacco Retail Dealer licenses.
   (b)   (1)   For each community district where Tobacco Retail Dealer licenses
are available as of the first business day of April in a given year, the
Department will accept requests to apply for a Tobacco Retail Dealer license
from the first business day in May until 5:00 p.m. on the last business day in
May of such year.
      (2)   For each community district where Tobacco Retail Dealer licenses
are available as of the first business day of October in a given year, the
Department will accept requests to apply for a Tobacco Retail Dealer license
from the first business day in November until 5:00 p.m. on the last business
day in November of such year.
      (3)   The Department will reject any duplicate requests to apply.
   (c)   At the close of each request period, in each community district where
Tobacco Retail Dealer licenses are available, the Department will randomly
select from among the requesters businesses that may apply for a Tobacco Retail
Dealer license and invite such businesses to apply for such license. The number
of businesses selected shall be equal to the number of licenses available in
that community district. An invitation to apply is only valid for the business
randomly selected by the Department and may not be transferred to another
business.
   (d)   Once notified by the Department, selected businesses will have 65 days
from the date of notification to submit a complete application for a Tobacco
Retail Dealer license. If a complete application is not received by the
Department within 65 days, or the application is otherwise denied, the
opportunity to apply will be forfeited, and the Department will offer the
opportunity to apply to another business in the same community district that is
randomly selected from the pool of requesters, and that business will have 65
days to submit a complete application.
   (e)   When the Department has issued all available licenses within each
community district, the application process will be closed, and the remaining
request pool will be voided. A request from any given request period will not
be valid in a subsequent request period.
   (f)   Any license issued that causes the number of licenses in a community
district to exceed the community district's retail dealer cap will be
considered to be issued in error and voided.
   (g)   Any license issued as a result of deceptive or misleading application
materials will be considered to be issued in error and voided.
(Added City Record 1/11/2019, eff. 2/10/2019; amended City Record 1/20/2023,
eff. 2/19/2023)
§ 2-14 Licensing of Tobacco Retail Dealers at Residential Locations.
   (a)   A Tobacco Retail Dealer license will not be issued for use at any
residential location, including any location considered a dwelling unit as that
term is defined in the Housing Maintenance Code, Title 27, § 27-2004 of the New
York City Administrative Code.
(Added City Record 5/19/2022, eff. 6/18/2022)
Subchapter C: Amusement Devices, Arcades and Operators [Repealed]
§ 2-21 Definitions. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 3/11/2022, eff. 4/10/2022)
§ 2-22 Filing of Documentation with Application for Amusement Device License.
[Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 3/11/2022, eff. 4/10/2022)
§ 2-23 Notification of Accidents Relating to Amusement Devices. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 3/11/2022, eff. 4/10/2022)
§ 2-24 Sign Requirements for Amusement Arcades and Gaming Cafes. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 3/11/2022, eff. 4/10/2022)
Subchapter D: [Reserved]
Subchapter E: [Reserved]
Subchapter F: Sidewalk Cafes [Repealed]
Part 1: Revocable Consents For Sidewalk Cafe [Repealed]
§ 2-41 Definitions. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 9/3/2019, eff. 10/3/2019; repealed City Record 2/2/2024,
eff. 3/3/2024)
§ 2-42 Processing Fee for Revocable Consent Petitions. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 2/2/2024, eff. 3/3/2024)
§ 2-43 Petition Requirements. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 9/3/2019, eff. 10/3/2019; repealed City Record 2/2/2024,
eff. 3/3/2024)
§ 2-44 Action by the Department on Petition. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 9/3/2019, eff. 10/3/2019; repealed City Record 2/2/2024,
eff. 3/3/2024)
§ 2-45 Rates for Sidewalk Cafe Consents. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 9/3/2019, eff. 10/3/2019; repealed City Record 2/2/2024,
eff. 3/3/2024)
§ 2-46 Sidewalk Clearance Standards. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 2/2/2024, eff. 3/3/2024)
§ 2-47 Level of Service. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 2/2/2024, eff. 3/3/2024)
§ 2-48 Waivers Related to Standards. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 9/3/2019, eff. 10/3/2019; repealed City Record 2/2/2024,
eff. 3/3/2024)
Part 2: Sidewalk Cafe Licenses [Repealed]
§ 2-51 License Applications. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 9/3/2019, eff. 10/3/2019; repealed City Record 2/2/2024,
eff. 3/3/2024)
§ 2-52 Sidewalk Cafe Location Criteria. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 2/2/2024, eff. 3/3/2024)
§ 2-53 Physical Criteria for Sidewalk Cafes. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 9/3/2019, eff. 10/3/2019; repealed City Record 2/2/2024,
eff. 3/3/2024)
§ 2-54 Physical Criteria for Enclosed Sidewalk Cafes. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 9/3/2019, eff. 10/3/2019; repealed City Record 2/2/2024,
eff. 3/3/2024)
§ 2-55 Physical Criteria for Unenclosed Sidewalk Cafes. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 9/3/2019, eff. 10/3/2019; repealed City Record 2/2/2024,
eff. 3/3/2024)
§ 2-56 Requirements for Applicants. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 9/3/2019, eff. 10/3/2019; repealed City Record 2/2/2024,
eff. 3/3/2024)
§ 2-57 Operations. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 9/2/2015, eff. 10/2/2015; amended City Record 9/3/2019,
eff. 10/3/2019; repealed City Record 2/2/2024, eff. 3/3/2024)
§ 2-58 Variances and Amendments. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 9/3/2019, eff. 10/3/2019; repealed City Record 2/2/2024,
eff. 3/3/2024)
§ 2-59 Rebuttable Presumption of Unenclosed Sidewalk Cafe Operation. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 9/3/2019, eff. 10/3/2019; repealed City Record 2/2/2024,
eff. 3/3/2024)
Subchapter G: Sidewalk Stands
Part 1: Newsstands
§ 2-61 Definitions.
As used in this Part, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
   (a)   Area occupied. "Area occupied" means the sidewalk space under DOT's
jurisdiction occupied by the newsstand operation and its operators when a
newsstand is in operation, including any space occupied by the stand itself and
its racks, tables, doors and everything else that prevents ordinary use of the
sidewalk.
   (b)   Capital Project. "Capital Project" has the same meaning as set forth
in subdivision (1) of Section 210 of the New York City Charter.
   (c)   Catchment area. "Catchment area" means the area within a radius of 500
feet of the location at which a newsstand is licensed to operate.
   (d)   Change in location or expansion of the area occupied. "Change in
location or expansion of the area occupied", as used particularly in paragraph
2 of subdivision k of § 20-231 of the Code and subdivision (c) of 6 RCNY §
2-68, means a change in location or expansion of the area occupied by a
newsstand such that the footprint of the new newsstand overlaps with the
footprint of the old newsstand.
   (e)   Code. "Code" means the Administrative Code of the City of New York.
   (f)   Disabled person. "Disabled person" means a person who has a physical
impairment that substantially limits one or more of such person's major life
activities and who has documentation of such an impairment.
   (g)   Disabled veteran. The term "veteran" has the same meaning as set forth
in Section 3101 of the New York City Charter. "Disabled veteran" means any
veteran who has sustained one or more of the following impairments while
performing service for the United States of America:
      (1)   impairment requiring use of a wheelchair; or
      (2)   impairment requiring the use of braces, crutches or other
artificial support; or
      (3)   impairment caused by amputation; or
      (4)   total or partial impairment of hearing or sight causing insecurity
or likelihood of exposure to danger in public places.
   (h)   DCWP. "DCWP" means the Department of Consumer and Worker Protection of
the City of New York.
   (i)   DOT. "DOT" means the Department of Transportation of the City of New
York.
   (j)   Franchise. "Franchise" means a franchise granted pursuant to Chapter
14 of the New York City Charter to construct, install, and maintain newsstands
in the city of New York. For purposes of this Part of Subchapter G of
Title 6, the date upon which a franchise is granted is the date on which such
franchise is registered with the Comptroller of the City of New York in
accordance with Chapter 14 of the New York City Charter.
   (k)   Franchisee. "Franchisee" means a person granted a Franchise.
   (l)   LPC. "LPC" means the Landmarks Preservation Commission of the City of
New York.
   (m)   Major life activities. "Major life activities" means functions such as
walking, seeing, hearing, and speaking.
   (n)   Newsstand. "Newsstand" means a not readily removable stand or booth
operated primarily for the sale of newspapers and periodicals.
   (o)   NYPD. "NYPD" means the New York City Police Department.
   (p)   Open programmatic areas. "Open programmatic areas" mean those areas
within a pedestrian plaza designated for moveable seating and tables, events,
performances, markets or other activities.
   (q)   PDC. "PDC" means the New York City Public Design Commission, formerly
the Art Commission.
   (r)   Pedestrian plaza. "Pedestrian plaza" means an area designated by DOT
as such for pedestrian circulation, use and enjoyment on property under the
jurisdiction of DOT, including but not limited, to property mapped as public
space or property within the bed of a roadway, and which may contain amenities
such as tables, seating, trees, plants, lighting, bike racks, or public art.
   (s)   Physical impairment. "Physical impairment" means a physiological
disorder or condition, or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the
following body systems: neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs;
respiratory, including speech organs; cardiovascular; genitourinary; hemic and
lymphatic; or skin and endocrine. It includes, but is not limited to, such
diseases and conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech, and hearing impairments,
cerebral palsy, muscular dystrophy, and multiple sclerosis.
   (t)   Plaza amenity. "Plaza amenity" means any feature installed in or on a
pedestrian plaza designated as such by DOT, including but not limited to
chairs, tables, planters, benches, kiosks, utilities or canopies.
   (u)   Replacement newsstand. "Replacement newsstand" means either:
      (1)   a newsstand that replaces a newsstand at the same location,
provided that the license issued pursuant to § 20-229 of the Code for the
newsstand that is being replaced is in full force and effect on the date a
franchise is granted; or
      (2)   a newsstand constructed and installed at any location approved by
DOT to replace a newsstand that the City requires, for any reason, to be
permanently removed from the location for which it is licensed, provided such
license is in full force and effect at the time removal is required.
   (v)   Vault. Vault means any space below the surface of the street, that is
enclosed except those openings that are used exclusively to descend into the
cellar or basement of any building via steps.
(Amended City Record 7/26/2018, eff. 8/25/2018; amended City Record 8/15/2024,
eff. 9/14/2024)
§ 2-62 Introduction.
   (a)   Purpose. The rules of this Part 1 of Subchapter G of
Title 6 are promulgated pursuant to the Code to ensure that while serving the
public, newsstands do not unduly interfere with pedestrian circulation or
unduly conflict with street obstructions or the design of their surroundings.
   (b)   Scope. These rules govern applications for licenses and the renewal of
licenses for newsstands, the replacement of licensed newsstands with newsstands
to be constructed and installed by a franchisee, the temporary relocation of
newsstands, and the general operation of newsstands.
§ 2-63 License Application Requirements.
   (a)   Documents to be submitted for DCWP, DOT, PDC or LPC and Community
Board review. The application for a license to maintain and operate a newsstand
must include the following documents:
      (1)   Applications for newsstand licenses shall be made on forms approved
by DCWP.
      (2)   Site plan at 1/4" = 1' scale on paper no larger than 11" x 17",
showing all items for which clearance requirements are set forth in 6 RCNY §
2-65, within 25 feet of either side of the proposed newsstand location. The
site plan must indicate the dimensions of the proposed newsstand and the
distance from each listed obstruction. All plans, elevations and details that
form a part of the application must be clearly labeled and drawn to scale, and
such plans must give all necessary measurements to locate a proposed newsstand
in relation to curb lines, property lines and buildings including entrances,
marquees, canopies, fixed awnings, standpipes or siamese connections, other
projections from buildings, fixed planters, planting beds, distinctive
sidewalks or landscape treatments, sidewalk cafes, stoopline stands, bus stop
shelters, bus stop zones, elevated railroad structures, parking meters, access
plates, ventilation and other grills, and all other street obstructions listed
in 6 RCNY §
2-65. Except as otherwise provided in subdivision (b) of this section
concerning newsstands to be constructed by a franchisee, plans that are
required for review by PDC or LPC must be accurately drawn to scale, with
elevations and cross-sections, as detailed in this subdivision (a).
      (3)   Two sets of photographs (5" × 7" or larger) taken within 30
calendar days prior to submission from eye-level (approximately 5 feet high)
showing existing street obstructions and views that would be obstructed by
placement of the newsstand, taken in both directions parallel to the curb line
(2 photographs), and the elevation of the facade of the building(s) or
landscaping facing the site where the newsstand would be located indicating
street obstructions and all entrances on the block-face to every building
within 25 feet of either side of the proposed newsstand, taken perpendicular to
the curb line. The applicant should take as many photographs as necessary to
explain the location. At least one photograph should indicate the approximate
outline of the plan of the proposed newsstand on the sidewalk. Photographs that
do not reflect the current streetscape will not be accepted.
      (4)   Permission must be obtained in writing from the property owner(s)
for any newsstand located within 3 feet of their property. This permission must
be signed by the property owner(s) before a notary public. This requirement
applies to new applications for both curb-line and property-line newsstands
within 3 feet of any part of the private property, including but not limited to
fixed awnings, marquees, canopies, or any other overhead building projection or
fixtures that may extend from the property.
   (b)   Applications for newsstands to be constructed by franchisee. An
applicant for a license to operate a newsstand to be constructed by a
franchisee must select the size and interior accessories that are available,
pursuant to the franchise and must indicate his or her selection in the
application. Both new and replacement newsstands are limited to the sizes that
are available, pursuant to the franchisee.
   (c)   DCWP may waive the requirements of subdivisions a and b of this
section where an application is submitted pursuant to paragraph 13 of
subdivision a of 6 RCNY §
2-64 for a license to maintain and operate an existing franchise newsstand.
(Amended City Record 7/26/2018, eff. 8/25/2018; amended City Record 8/15/2024,
eff. 9/14/2024)
§ 2-64 Application Procedures.
   (a)   Procedures for applications for new licenses. 
      (1)   DCWP will process no more than two applications from a single
applicant at any given time. For purposes of this limit, an individual or sole
proprietor cannot submit more than two applications in his or her name, in the
name of a dependent child, or in the name of a business entity of which the
individual or sole proprietor is a shareholder, partner, officer, director,
member or manager. A business cannot submit more than two applications in the
name of the business, and/or the name of a shareholder, partner, officer,
director, member or manager of the business, and/or the name of a related
business entity, such as another corporation, partnership, or limited liability
company with a common shareholder, partner, officer, director, member or
manager or in which a common shareholder, partner, officer, director, member or
manager has a direct or indirect interest.
      (2)   Within 30 calendar days before the application is filed, the
applicant must provide the owner of record, or owner's agent, of each building
or lot directly adjacent to the site of the proposed newsstand, with notice
that a newsstand application will be submitted within 30 calendar days to the
DCWP. Such notice must be made by certified mail. The notice shall specify the
dimensions of the proposed stand and the distance and direction it will be
located from the closest intersection. Proof that such notice was given is
required at the time the completed application is submitted to the DCWP. The
applicant must submit a copy of such notice, the certified mail receipt, and an
affidavit attesting to the mailing of such notice.
      (3)   Within 5 business days after receipt of a completed application,
DCWP will forward a copy of such application and relevant documents to the
Community Board for the district in which the newsstand is proposed to be
located. The Community Board may, within 60 calendar days of receipt of such
application, provide comments to DCWP with respect to any of the factors
addressed in these rules, and its suggestions as to the peak hour(s) and day(s)
of pedestrian congestion for the proposed location. If the Community Board
provides no comments within 60 calendar days, it will be deemed to have waived
its opportunity to comment. DCWP will forward the Board's comments within 5
business days of receipt to DOT, and, should DOT approve the application, to
PDC or LPC.
      (4)   DOT will review the location of the proposed newsstand for its
compliance with the requirements of 6 RCNY §
2-65(a) and conduct pedestrian level of service counts in accordance with 6
RCNY §
2-65(a)(4) at the peak times and days, including those times and days suggested
by the Community Board. DOT will determine whether the location is acceptable
within 60 calendar days of receipt of the Community Board's comments or the
expiration of the Community Board's 60 calendar day period in which to provide
comments if no comments are received from the Board. DOT will transmit its
determination to DCWP within 5 business days of such determination. Such
determination expires one year from the date of transmittal to DCWP.
      (5)   DOT determination. 
         (A)   DCWP will, within 5 business days of receipt of DOT's
determination, transmit the results of such determination to the applicant.
         (B)   If DOT disapproves the location, the application is deemed
denied. The applicant may resubmit an amended application, provided:
            (i)   the applicant pays an additional $50 reapplication fee;
            (ii)   the amended application is submitted within 30 calendar days
of the date of DCWP's notification to the applicant of DOT's determination;
            (iii)   such application has not been previously amended; and
            (iv)   such amended application is limited to a site that is
located in front of the same building and on the same block-face of the site
identified in the original application.
         (C)   If DOT approves the location identified in the application, the
applicant must, within 30 calendar days of the date of DCWP's notification to
the applicant of DOT's approval, submit to DCWP the materials required for PDC
or LPC review in accordance with paragraph (7) of this subdivision (a).
      (6)   PDC or LPC review. If the proposed stand is located on a landmark
site or within an historic district, DCWP will transmit the application to the
LPC, which will conduct its review under this Part in lieu of a PDC review. If
the proposed stand is located anywhere else, DCWP will transmit the application
to the PDC. The PDC or the LPC will review the appropriateness of the proposed
newsstand's relationship to its surroundings.
      (7)   Notification of PDC or LPC determination. The PDC or the LPC, as
appropriate, will notify DCWP of its determination. Within 5 business days of
receipt of PDC or LPC determination, DCWP will transmit the results of such
determination to the applicant and send a copy of the notice to the Community
Board. Prior to the start of construction, DCWP may request a DOT inspection if
there have been any changes to the dimensions of the newsstand.
      (8)   Construction of stand. The license applicant is required to
reimburse the franchisee, to the extent required by the franchise, for the
costs of construction and installation by such franchisee of a newsstand that
is not a replacement newsstand, as defined in 6 RCNY §
2-61. No license will be issued to the applicant and no construction of a
proposed newsstand shall begin until the franchisee provides DCWP with
satisfactory proof that the costs of construction, to the extent required by
the franchise, have been paid or provided for by or on behalf of the applicant
to the satisfaction of the franchisee. The franchisee must obtain all necessary
construction, electrical, street opening, and other permits and approvals as
well as conduct all required tests of the proposed location site, including but
not limited to test pits before commencing construction and comply with all
other requirements of Article 36 of General Business Law, 16 NYCRR Part 753
(also known as Industrial Code 53) and NYC Highway Rules before excavation
begins. DOT may also direct the franchisee to perform preliminary test pits if
site conditions indicate that a vault, void, subway station or tunnel may
interfere with installation of the newsstand, even if not required under law.
Construction must begin within 150 calendar days from the date that the
applicant completes the required paperwork and makes the required payment to
the franchisee for the newsstand. In the event that construction is not
completed within such period due to conditions over which the franchisee or the
applicant for a license have no control, DCWP shall have discretion to extend
the timeframe for such construction for a reasonable period beyond the initial
150 calendar days. If, after DOT inspection of the proposed newsstand site, but
prior to construction of such newsstand, conditions surrounding such site
change so that the newsstand would no longer comply with the siting criteria in
6 RCNY §
2-65, or if preliminary test pits or full excavation reveals the presence of an
underlying condition which would make installation unfeasible such as the
presence of a vault, void, subway station or tunnel as approved, or if it is
determined that the sidewalk does not have sufficient depth required to contain
any conduits to electrical connections or structure foundation, it shall be the
responsibility of the applicant for a license to identify an alternate location
that fully complies with such siting criteria and to obtain approval of such
alternate location from DCWP, DOT, as well as the PDC or LPC. If the franchisee
is unable to obtain any necessary permits or approvals due to the fact that the
newsstand site is located within a capital project area, the newsstand
installation shall be placed on hold until the capital project is complete and
permits can be obtained.
      (9)   Notice of completion of construction. DOT will notify DCWP of the
completion of the newsstand. The franchisee must submit, for DCWP and PDC
records, photographs of all sides of the newsstand, including at least one
photograph each of the front, back, and both sides of the newsstand. Each
photograph must be clearly marked on the back to indicate the stand's location,
the applicant's name, the view of the stand depicted in the photograph, and the
date the photograph was taken.
      (10)   DCWP verification. Within 15 business days of receipt of the
notice that construction has been completed, DCWP and/or DOT will complete
their inspections of the newsstand to verify that it has been built according
to approved plans.
      (11)   Grant of license. 
         (A)   Within 5 business days after the inspections required by
paragraph (10) of this subdivision (a), DCWP will notify the applicant whether
the newsstand is satisfactory.
         (B)   If the newsstand is found to be satisfactory, the applicant
shall, in the case of the construction of a newsstand that does not replace an
existing newsstand already licensed to the applicant, provide DCWP with proof
that the applicant has applied for a New York State certification of authority
to collect sales tax and must pay the remaining license fee within 30 business
days of the date DCWP sends the notification of subparagraph A of this
paragraph. DCWP may extend this deadline upon good cause shown.
         (C)   If DCWP or DOT finds that the newsstand has not been constructed
in accordance with the approved plans or at the correct location, DCWP will not
issue a license until the stand is constructed in accordance with approved
plans and at the correct location in accordance with the timing requirements in
paragraph (8) of this subdivision (a).
         (D)   DCWP may deny an application at any time before the license is
issued if the applicant has failed to reimburse the franchisee for a new or
previously constructed newsstand, to the satisfaction of the franchisee.
         (E)   DCWP may deny an application upon a finding by the Commissioner
of DCWP that the applicant is attempting to rent the newsstand;
         (F)   After DCWP grants the license, the franchisee or DOT shall
furnish the keys to the applicant.
      (12)   Death or disability of licensee. At the discretion of the
Commissioner or his or her designee, upon the death or permanent disability of
the individual or sole proprietor who was licensed to operate a newsstand at a
location, DCWP may accept an application for a license to operate such existing
newsstand where:
         (A)   the applicant provides documentation sufficient to show that the
applicant is a dependent spouse, dependent domestic partner, dependent child or
one-time employee of the former licensee, or bears another pre-existing,
established relationship to such former licensee that included financial
dependence on such licensee;
         (B)   the applicant attests that such person will have no other
income, excluding investment income, which exceeds the income such person earns
from the operation of the newsstand or newsstands;
         (C)   the applicant is a person to whom the grant of such license
would be in the interests of fairness; and
         (D)   the applicant provides documentation sufficient to show that the
licensee is dead or permanently disabled.
         (E)   The Commissioner may grant a license to such an applicant who
demonstrates eligibility to operate such an existing newsstand where the
conditions in this paragraph (12) have been met, the applicable license and
application fees have been paid, the New York State certification of authority
to collect New York State sales tax has been provided, and the newsstand meets
all other applicable requirements of this Part including, but not limited to,
having passed a qualifying inspection by DOT.
      (13)   Application for an existing vacant newsstand. 
         (A)   The Commissioner may accept an application for a license to
operate an existing vacant newsstand where:
            (i)   an applicant is being required to relocate pursuant to
subdivision d of 6 RCNY §
2-68; or
            (ii)   an applicant has proposed a location that has been approved,
but construction of a new newsstand at such approved location has not begun
within 150 days from the date that such applicant completed the required
paperwork and made the required payment to the franchisee for the newsstand; or
            (iii)   the Commissioner has determined that such existing vacant
newsstand is not necessary to reserve for any other purpose, including but not
limited to ensuring availability of newsstands for applicants permitted to
apply for a license to operate an existing newsstand under (i) and (ii) of this
subparagraph.
         (B)   The Commissioner may grant a license to operate an existing
vacant newsstand where such newsstand meets all other applicable requirements
of this Part including, but not limited to, having passed a qualifying
inspection by DOT. The Commissioner may only grant such license to an applicant
where:
            (i)   the applicant demonstrates or the Commissioner determines a
condition in subparagraph (A) of this paragraph has been met,
            (ii)   the applicant attests that they will have no other income,
excluding investment income, which exceeds the income such person earns from
the operation of the newsstand or newsstands,
            (iii)   the applicant has paid the applicable license and
application fees, and
            (iv)   the applicant has provided the New York State certification
of authority to collect New York State sales tax.
   (b)   License renewal.
      (1)   The licensee shall obtain from DCWP the appropriate renewal
application form.
      (2)   Pursuant to § 20-231(c) of the Code, DOT will inspect all
newsstands, including those of 50 square feet or less, at the time they are
constructed by the franchisee or in the year 2008, whichever comes first, and
every 6 years following 2008, to determine whether their locations comply with
the applicable size and siting requirements of § 20-231 of the Code and 6 RCNY
§
2-65. Renewal of licenses within such 6 year interval will not be contingent
upon an inspection by DOT, except where DOT's previous determination was based
on a mistake of fact.
      (3)   No license shall be renewed for any newsstand that was first
licensed and has been in existence at the same location since prior to August
1, 1991 if the newsstand fails to comply with any provision of the Code or the
siting requirements of 6 RCNY §
2-65(b)(2). If the location of such newsstand does not meet the siting
requirements of 6 RCNY §
2-65(b)(2), such newsstand may either be reduced in size at the same location
to the extent a newsstand that complies with such siting requirements is
available pursuant to the franchise or be relocated to a site that complies
with the siting requirements that are applicable to newsstands that were first
licensed on or after August 1, 1991, set forth in 6 RCNY §
2-65(b)(1) within the catchment area of such newsstand in accordance with the
process described in 6 RCNY §
2-68(e).
      (4)   No license will be renewed for any newsstand that was first
licensed on or after August 1, 1991, if DOT determines pursuant to an
inspection, scheduled and conducted in accordance with paragraph (2) of this
subdivision (b), that the newsstand fails to comply with any provision of the
Code or the siting requirements of 6 RCNY §
2-65(b)(1). If the location of such newsstand does not meet the siting
requirements of 6 RCNY §
2-65(b)(1), such newsstand may either be reduced in size at the same location
to the extent a newsstand that complies with such siting requirements is
available pursuant to the franchise or be relocated to a site that complies
with such siting requirements within the catchment area of such newsstand in
accordance with the process described in 6 RCNY §
2-68(e).
      (5)   Prior to issuing a license renewal, DCWP may first determine that
the newsstand is in good repair, free of advertising, other than advertising
placed on the newsstand by a franchisee, and conforms with the previously
approved plans for such newsstand or, if constructed and installed by a
franchisee, has not been altered. If the newsstand is not in compliance, DCWP
will notify the operator in writing and allow the operator two weeks from date
of mailing of the notice to put the newsstand into compliance. If the operator
fails to put the newsstand into compliance after two weeks, then DCWP will deny
the renewal.
   (c)   Changes in license status. In addition to any other basis for revoking
a license, the Commissioner of DCWP may revoke or refuse to renew a license to
maintain and operate a newsstand for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   upon a finding by the Commissioner of DCWP that the location listed
in the license was not utilized for a period of two consecutive months or more;
      (2)   upon a finding by the Commissioner of DCWP that the licensee is not
using the newsstand primarily for the sale of newspapers and periodicals;
      (3)   that a judgment has been entered against the licensee for failure
to pay the franchisee the cost of the construction and installation of a
newsstand in accordance with § 20-229 of the Code;
      (4)   that a non-temporary change in conditions has rendered or will
render the newsstand a hazard because it obstructs pedestrian flow or the flow
of vehicular traffic or for any other reason. A licensee may propose the
relocation of such newsstand in accordance with the process in subdivision (d)
of 6 RCNY §
2-68; or
      (5)   upon a finding by the Commissioner of DCWP that the licensee is
renting or attempting to rent the newsstand to another person.
   (d)   Alteration or enlargement of newsstands. The licensee shall make no
structural alteration to a newsstand that is constructed and installed by a
franchisee. The licensee of any other newsstand shall maintain such newsstand
in conformity with previously approved plans for such newsstand and shall make
no structural alteration in the newsstand without the approval of DCWP. The
enlargement of a newsstand requires the application for a new license in
accordance with the process and procedures for applications for new licenses,
except as otherwise provided for newsstands that are to be constructed by a
franchisee to replace newsstands in existence at the time of the grant of a
franchise in accordance with § 20-231(k) of the Code and 6 RCNY §
2-68.
   (e)   Fees. The holder of a license to maintain or operate a newsstand,
including a licensee of a newsstand constructed and installed by a franchisee,
shall be liable for the payment to the department of the biennial fee for a
license to maintain or operate a newsstand in accordance with § 20-230(b) of
the Code.
(Amended City Record 7/26/2018, eff. 8/25/2018; amended City Record 8/15/2024,
eff. 9/14/2024)
§ 2-65 Siting Requirements for Newsstands.
   (a)   New newsstands. The clearance requirements of this subdivision (a)
apply to applications for the issuance of a license to install, construct and
operate newsstands at locations at which no newsstand is licensed at the time
of the application.
      (1)   Clear path. 
         (A)   All newsstands shall be installed so as to allow a straight
unobstructed path ("clear path") for pedestrian circulation on the sidewalk,
which must measure at least 9 1/2 feet of the sidewalk's width and cannot
contain a longitudinal grade-change of more than 5 percent within the clear
path.
         (B)   Clearance for pedestrians for curb-line newsstands. When
reviewing the relationship of newsstands to other obstructions on the sidewalk,
a principal concern is the maintenance of a straight clear path of 9 1/2 feet
in front of the stand. In addition, there must be a clearance of 15 feet on
either side of the 9 1/2 foot clearance in front of the stand. (See 6 RCNY §
2-70.1, Illustrations 1 and 2.)
         (C)   Clearance for pedestrians for property-line newsstands. For
property-line newsstands, the distance from curb to newsstand must be as
provided in the Code, which requires a minimum clear path of 9 1/2 feet. In
addition, the 9 1/2 foot clearance must extend 15 feet on either side of the
newsstand. Newsstands shall not be installed within 3 feet of the property line
without the property owner's written permission. (See 6 RCNY §
2-70.1, Illustration 3.)
         (D)   There shall not be any grate or cellar door included as a part
of the clear path directly in front of the proposed stand, beneath it or in the
15 feet clearance on either side of the newsstand.
      (2)   Clearances in general. 
         (A)   Newsstands may not be located within 1 1/2 feet of any curb line
of a street or within 10 feet of the property line extended at the intersection
of any two streets. (See 6 RCNY §
2-70.1, Illustration 4.)
         (B)   A minimum distance of 15 feet measured parallel to the curb must
be maintained between the newsstand and other newsstands, bus shelters,
automatic public toilets, computer information kiosks, enclosed or unenclosed
sidewalk cafes, and subway entrances and exits, including elevators, except for
stands at the rear of subway entrances or exits, as provided in § 20-231(f) of
the Code.
         (C)   A 15 foot clearance is required from curb cuts leading to
garages, driveways, parking lots, gas stations and truck service areas, city-
authorized bike share and micro-mobility parking areas, way finding kiosks, and
planters installed at the curb line. All clearances from such curb cuts must
also meet DOT safety and operational requirements.
         (D)   A 10 foot clearance is required from property lines extended at
the intersection of two streets (see 6 RCNY §
2-70.1, Illustration 4), fire hydrants (in any direction), standpipes (in any
direction), siamese connections (in any direction), crosswalks (in any
direction), pedestrian ramps (in any direction).
         (E)   A 5 foot clearance is required from the edge of tree pits or
planting areas (in any direction), benches, elevated subway stanchions or
support structures, or building canopies or marquees.
         (F)   A 3 foot clearance is required from street lights and traffic
signal poles, street signs, parking meters, telephones, fixed litter baskets,
and mail boxes, in any direction.
         (G)   A 2 foot clearance, in any direction, is required from
ventilation or other grills, cellar doors, utility access covers, access
plates, and valve boxes.
         (H)   A 1 1/2 foot clearance is required from curbs, measured
perpendicular to the curb-line. The newsstand shall be oriented away from the
adjacent roadway. In a pedestrian plaza the newsstand may be oriented towards
the roadway if it meets all other siting criteria.
         (I)   If DOT determines that a proposed location for a newsstand would
place it directly above or within 15 feet of an underground vault, as defined
in 6 RCNY §
2-61(u), the proposed location will be rejected.
         (J)   Newsstands may not be placed under fire escapes.
         (K)   Newsstands may not extend into taxi stands, bus stops, ambulette
stops, or any designated for-hire-vehicle passenger pick-up or drop-off
locations.
         (L)   Newsstands may not be placed within the frontage of any building
having more than 3 floors of retail use, measured from a line drawn between the
curb and the edges of each building.
         (M)   Newsstands may not be placed within 15 feet of any other
obstruction, such as scaffolding or construction material, that is present at
the time at which the proposed site for the newsstand is inspected by DOT. If
the removal of such obstruction may be reasonably expected within one year, an
applicant for a new newsstand may propose such a site for placement of a
newsstand upon the removal of such obstruction. DCWP will keep all such
applications on file for a maximum of one year from the date of application. It
shall be the responsibility of the applicant to notify DCWP that such
obstruction has been removed. After one year, any such application that is
still pending for any reason, including the continued presence of such
obstruction, will be denied.
         (N)   An 8 foot clearance is required from a bicycle rack.
         (O)   A 5 foot clearance is required from any fixed, above-grade
object, unless otherwise specified.
         (P)   Newsstands may not be placed on or within 25 feet of a bridge,
viaduct, overpass or other elevated roadway.
         (Q)   If a newsstand is to be placed on a sidewalk containing above-
ground or at-grade street improvements requiring a Revocable Consent from DOT,
the newsstand must comply with the siting distances required under 34 RCNY §
7-04.
      (3)   Clearances from elements of buildings. 
         (A)   Except as provided in subparagraph (B) and (C) of this paragraph
(3), a 15 foot clearance as measured parallel to the curb is required from
significant entrances to major buildings, defined as entrances to hospitals,
emergency rooms or other medical facilities, schools and universities, houses
of worship, governmental buildings, any entrance to the elevator lobby of a
building having non-residential uses above the street level floor and having 16
floors in height or more with a frontage of at least 100 feet on narrow streets
or 140 feet on wide streets, any entrance to the lobby of a hotel, any entrance
from a bank to the street providing access to tellers for members of the
general public, excluding automatic teller machine (ATM) rooms, unless the ATM
entrance also serves as the main entrance to the bank, entrances to theaters,
and entrances to box offices. Such clearances shall be measured from a line
drawn between the curb and the nearest edge of such entrance (see 6 RCNY §
2-70.1, Illustration 5). For purposes of this paragraph (3), the definition of
"narrow" and "wide" streets in § 12-10 of the New York City Zoning Resolution
shall apply.
         (B)   A 10 foot clearance is required from service or freight
entrances.
         (C)   A 5 foot clearance is required from all other retail entrances
and building entrances.
         (D)   For the purposes of this paragraph, "entrance" means the
physical entry point of ingress and egress directly into and from the adjacent
property.
      (4)   Pedestrian level of service. No newsstand will be permitted at any
location where DOT has determined that the level of service that would be
created by the proposed stand at that location for the peak 15 minutes of the
peak hour has a pedestrian flow rate equal to or greater than 11 people per
minute per linear foot of clear path.
         (A)   Pedestrian level of service will be determined by dividing the
number of pedestrians counted during the peak 15 minutes of the peak hour by
the clear path less the sum of 4.5 feet to allow for pedestrian behavior and
the width of any other obstructions.
         (B)   In the case of a curb-line newsstand, clear path will be
determined pursuant to 6 RCNY §
2-65(a)(1)(B). DOT will include in its determination any portion of the area
between the building line and the property line which it finds to be
immediately adjacent to and level with the public sidewalk, open to the sky,
and substantially unobstructed along its entire length, and level, paved, and
accessible so as to provide a useable walking surface.
         (C)   In the case of a property-line newsstand, clear path will be
determined pursuant to 6 RCNY §
2-65(a)(1)(C).
      (5)   Hazardous conditions. No license to maintain and operate a new
newsstand will be issued for any such newsstand if DOT determines that it
otherwise creates a hazardous condition. For purposes of this paragraph, a
hazardous condition includes, but is not be limited to, the location of a
newsstand within the sidewalk space between the building face and bollards
placed along the curb line, the location of a newsstand within 15 feet of a
security zone administered/authorized by the NYPD Counter Terrorism Task Force,
the New York City Fire Department, the New York City Office of Emergency
Management or within 10 feet of a public or private building encompassed by
improvements approved by the NYPD for security purposes. In addition, in a
pedestrian plaza, a hazardous condition shall include the location of a
newsstand within ten feet of any permanently affixed connection point(s) to
power, sound, water and/or other services.
      (6)   New newsstands within pedestrian plazas. 
         (A)   All new newsstands within pedestrian plazas shall be located
within the bounds of the sidewalk as determined by the original curb-line of
the street, and shall comply with all the siting requirements set forth in
paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4) and (5) of this subdivision.
         (B)   All new newsstands shall also comply with the following
clearances measured parallel to the curb:
            (i)   Newsstands shall be at least 12 feet from the front-facing
side of any backed fixed seating element, or any side of a backless fixed
seating element. Fixed seating elements may include seat walls, steps,
boulders, blocks or any other elements measuring 5 inches to 3 feet in height
and at least 4 inches deep.
            (ii)   Newsstands shall be at least 15 feet from any plaza amenity,
as defined in 6 RCNY §
2-61.
            (iii)   Newsstands shall not be located in any fire lanes or fire
access zones, as determined by the New York City Fire Department.
            (iv)   Newsstands shall not be located within any open programmatic
areas, as defined in 6 RCNY §
2-61.
            (v)   A 5 foot clearance is required from stand alone or in-ground
utility connection point(s).
            (vi)   Newsstands shall be at least 15 feet from any structure and
associated in-ground connections (such as vaults, anchors or footings) within
the pedestrian plaza, whether permanent or temporary and recurring.
            (vii)   Newsstands shall not be located on any permeable paving,
which may be part of any subsurface green infrastructure.
         (C)   A list of all designated pedestrian plazas is posted on DOT's
website.
   (b)   Renewals and replacement newsstands. 
      (1)   Post 7/31/1991 newsstands. No license to maintain and operate a
newsstand will be renewed for any newsstand that was first licensed on or after
August 1, 1991, if DOT determines pursuant to an inspection, scheduled and
conducted in accordance with subdivision (c) of this section, that the
newsstand:
         (A)   reduces the area maintained adjacent to the newsstand for
pedestrian movement below a width of 9 1/2 feet;
         (B)   places the proposed newsstand within 5 feet of a fire hydrant;
         (C)   creates a level of service at the proposed location for the peak
15 minutes of the peak hour of a pedestrian flow rate equal to or greater than
11 people per minute per linear foot of clear path, as determined by DOT. The
pedestrian level of service shall be determined by the method described in 6
RCNY §
2-65(a)(4);
         (D)   places the proposed newsstand within 15 feet of a subway
entrance or exit (except for newsstands located at the rear of subway entrances
in accordance with § 20-231(f) of the Code);
         (E)   extends into the area encompassed by the extension of the
property lines from the buildings to the curb at the intersection of two
streets and the area 10 feet on either side of such lines;
         (F)   extends into a bus stop;
         (G)   therwise creates a hazardous condition. For purposes of this
paragraph, a hazardous condition includes, but not be limited to, the location
of a newsstand less than 1 1/2 feet from the curb, under a fire escape, within
any fire lanes, within 10 feet of a driveway or parking lot or within 2 feet
from underground access points, such as utility access covers, ventilation
grills, or cellar doors, or the location of a newsstand within 15 feet of a
security zone administered/authorized by the NYPD Counter Terrorism Task Force,
the New York City Fire Department, the New York City Office of Emergency
Management or with 10 feet of a public or private building encompassed by
improvements approved by the NYPD for security purposes. In addition, in a
pedestrian plaza, a hazardous condition shall include the location of a
newsstand within 10 feet of any permanently affixed connection point(s) to
power, sound, water and/or other services.
      (2)   Pre-8/1/1991 newsstands. No license to maintain and operate a
newsstand will be renewed for any newsstand that was first licensed and has
been in existence at the same location since prior to August 1, 1991 which
fails to comply with any applicable provision of the Code, or:
         (A)   reduces the area maintained adjacent to the newsstand for
pedestrian movement below a width of 9 1/2 feet;
         (B)   places the proposed newsstand within 5 feet of a fire hydrant;
         (C)   creates a level of service at the proposed location for the peak
15 minutes of the peak hour of a pedestrian flow rate equal to or greater than
11 people per minute per linear foot of clear path, as determined by DOT. The
pedestrian level of service will be determined by the method described in 6
RCNY §
2-65(a)(4);
         (D)   places the proposed newsstand within 15 feet of a subway
entrance or exit (except for newsstands located at the rear of subway entrances
in accordance with § 20-231(f) of the Code);
         (E)   extends into the area encompassed by the extension of the
property lines from the buildings to the curb at the intersection of two
streets;
         (F)   otherwise creates a hazardous condition. For purposes of this
paragraph, a hazardous condition includes, but is not be limited to, the
location of a newsstand less than 1 1/2 feet from the curb, under a fire
escape, within any fire lanes, within ten feet of a driveway or parking lot or
within 2 feet from underground access points, such as utility access covers,
ventilation grills, or cellar doors, or the location of a newsstand within 15
feet of a security zone administered/authorized by the NYPD Counter Terrorism
Task Force, the New York City Fire Department, the New York City Office of
Emergency Management or with 10 feet of a public or private building
encompassed by improvements approved by the NYPD for security purposes. In
addition, in a pedestrian plaza, a hazardous condition shall include the
location of a newsstand within ten feet of any permanently affixed connection
point(s) to power, sound, water and/or other services.
      (3)   Renewals and replacement newsstands in pedestrian plazas. 
         (A)   Post 7/31/1991 newsstands. No license to maintain or operate a
newsstand within a pedestrian plaza will be renewed for any newsstand that was
first licensed on or after August 1, 1991, if DOT determines pursuant to an
inspection, scheduled and conducted in accordance with subdivision (c) of this
section, that such newsstand:
            (i)   does not comply with all the requirements set forth in
paragraph (1) above;
            (ii)   places the newsstand within any open programmatic areas as
defined in 6 RCNY §
2-61;
            (iii)   places the newsstand within 20 feet from any designated
performances areas; or
            (iv)   places the newsstand on permeable paving, which may be part
of any subsurface green infrastructure.
         (B)   Pre-8/1/1991 newsstands. No license to maintain and operate a
newsstand within a pedestrian plaza will be renewed for any newsstand that was
first licensed and has been in existence at the same location since prior to
August 1, 1991 which fails to comply with any applicable provision of the Code,
or:
            (i)   does not comply with all the requirements set forth in
paragraph (2) above;
            (ii)   places the newsstand within any open programmatic areas as
defined in 6 RCNY §
2-61;
            (iii)   places the newsstand within 20 feet of any designated
performance areas; or
            (iv)   places the newsstand on permeable paving, which may be part
of any subsurface green infrastructure.
         (C)   The requirements of subparagraph (A) and (B) of this paragraph
do not apply to any newsstand installed prior to DOT's designation of a
pedestrian plaza immediately around the newsstand.
   (c)   Inspections by DOT. Except as otherwise provided in 6 RCNY §
2-68 with respect to the reconstruction of newsstands by a franchisee, DOT will
conduct an inspection of newsstands in the year 2008 and every six years
thereafter in connection with applications to renew licenses to operate such
newsstands to determine whether such newsstands comply with applicable
requirements of the Code and this Part, including the applicable clearances in
paragraph (1) or (2) of subdivision (b) of this section.
   (d)   Franchise newsstands. If the PDC or the LPC has approved the type and
design of a model of a new newsstand to be constructed and installed by a
franchisee after the grant of a franchise, the PDC or LPC will review the
appropriateness of the franchise model for the proposed location and the design
relationship of the proposed newsstand to its surroundings.
(Amended City Record 7/26/2018, eff. 8/25/2018; amended City Record 8/15/2024,
eff. 9/14/2024)
§ 2-66 Operations.
   (a)   Display of merchandise. Licensees shall not display or offer for sale
merchandise from any public space adjacent to the licensed newsstand, whether
on racks, shelves, tables, doors, boxes, crates, or from any portion of the
newsstand exterior. Nothing may be affixed to or built into the exterior sides,
rear or roof of the newsstand, except for advertising placed on the exterior of
a newsstand by a franchisee. Nothing may be hung on rope, twine, or similar
material affixed to the exterior sides, rear or roof of the newsstand. No sales
may take place other than at the front of the newsstand.
   (b)   Advertising. A licensee shall not place any advertising on any
exterior side of a newsstand and shall not interfere with or cover or otherwise
block the view of any advertising placed by a franchisee on the exterior of a
newsstand.
   (c)   Electricity. A licensee shall not lease, assign, or sell the use of
the licensed newsstand's electricity.
   (d)   Alteration of design. The licensee shall make no structural alteration
in the design or dimensions of a newsstand constructed or installed by a
franchisee.
   (e)   Construction of future newsstands. After the grant of a franchise, no
person shall construct or install a newsstand other than a franchisee.
§ 2-67 Temporary Interruptions of Newsstand Operation.
If a capital project set to start within six months or a legally permitted but
temporary sidewalk obstruction due to construction, demolition and/or similar
activities substantially affects the conditions around the newsstand so that
such conditions cause or will cause the newsstand to no longer comply with the
siting criteria in 6 RCNY §
2-65 or otherwise pose a threat to the free use of the sidewalk by pedestrians,
the Commissioner may, upon notice and an opportunity to be heard, temporarily
suspend a newsstand's operation until the obstruction is removed. In such
cases, the operator may apply to DCWP for a temporary relocation of the
newsstand pursuant to the procedures specified in subdivision (d) of 6 RCNY §
2-68.
(Amended City Record 8/15/2024, eff. 9/14/2024)
§ 2-68 Review, Approval, Replacement and Relocation of Newsstands Constructed
by a Franchisee.
   (a)   Scope. This section applies to the review, approval, replacement, and
relocation of newsstands constructed and installed pursuant to a franchise to
replace newsstands that are in existence on the date of the grant of the
franchise and that are not in violation of any of the provisions of § 20-231 of
the Code or this Part. DOT will determine whether such newsstands require a
change in size or location pursuant to the franchise, and will perform any
inspections necessary to make its determination.
   (b)   If DOT determines that no change in size or location is required.
Notwithstanding any other provision of § 20-231 of the Code, this Part, or the
second undesignated paragraph of § 15-205 of the Code, a newsstand subject to
this section, the location or dimensions of which were not in violation of the
provisions of § 20-231 of the Code or this Part at the date of the grant of a
franchise and which complies with all of the terms and conditions of such
franchise, may be reconstructed at such location by such franchisee if such
reconstruction does not change the location of such newsstand or expand the
area occupied by such newsstand for any reason, including compliance with the
requirements of any provision of law in effect at the time of such
reconstruction, such as the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities
Act.
   (c)   If DOT determines that location or size must change. If such
reconstruction will result in a change in location or an expansion of the area
occupied by the newsstand for any reason, including compliance with the
requirements of any provision of law in effect at the time of such
reconstruction, such as the Americans with Disabilities Act, such stand may be
reconstructed at the changed or expanded location, provided that the location
complies with the following siting criteria:
      (1)   With respect to newsstands first licensed at the same location
prior to August 1, 1991:
         (A)   Such newsstand may be reconstructed at such changed or expanded
location provided such location does not violate any of the clearance criteria
in paragraph (2) of subdivision (b) of 6 RCNY §
2-65.
         (B)   If the reconstruction at such changed or expanded location of a
newsstand that was first licensed at the same location prior to August 1, 1991
would violate any of the clearance criteria in paragraph (2) of subdivision (b)
of 6 RCNY §
2-65, then (i) such newsstand may be relocated in accordance with the process
defined in subdivision (d) of this section to a location that meets the
criteria applicable to newsstands first licensed on or after August 1, 1991, in
paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of 6 RCNY §
2-65 or (ii) the licensee may select a newsstand that is available pursuant to
the franchise that would occupy an area that was equal to or smaller than the
area occupied by the newsstand it replaces and that meets the criteria
specified in paragraph (2) of subdivision (b) of 6 RCNY §
2-65.
      (2)   With respect to newsstands first licensed on or after August 1,
1991:
         (A)   Such newsstand may be reconstructed at such changed or expanded
location provided such location does not violate any of the clearance criteria
in paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of 6 RCNY §
2-65.
         (B)   If the reconstruction at such changed or expanded location of a
newsstand that was first licensed on or after August 1, 1991 would violate any
of the criteria in paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of 6 RCNY §
2-65, then (i) such newsstand may be relocated in accordance with the process
defined in subdivision (d) of this section to a location that meets the
criteria applicable to newsstands first licensed on or after August 1, 1991 in
paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of 6 RCNY §
2-65 or (ii) the licensee may select a newsstand that is available pursuant to
the franchise that would occupy an area that is equal to or smaller than the
area occupied by the newsstand it replaces and that meets the criteria
specified in subdivision (d) of this section to a location that meets the
criteria in paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of 6 RCNY §
2-65.
   (d)   Relocation of Newsstands.
      (1)   General rule. On or after the grant of a franchise, a newsstand,
the location of which fails to meet the siting criteria for the renewal of the
license of such newsstand in paragraph (1) or (2), as applicable, of
subdivision (b) of 6 RCNY §
2-65, or which must be relocated for any other reason, including but not
limited to capital projects scheduled to start within six months, shall cease
operation and shall be removed from such location. A newsstand required by the
provisions of this paragraph to be relocated at any time shall be eligible to
be relocated to a site within the catchment area, provided such site is
identified by the licensee and meets the siting criteria applicable to the
renewal of licenses for newsstands first licensed on or after August 1, 1991,
in paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of 6 RCNY §
2-65.
      (2)   If the licensee is unable to identify a compliant site within the
catchment area to which a newsstand may be relocated in accordance with
subdivision (d) of this section, the licensee of such newsstand may apply for a
license for a new newsstand in accordance with the applicable provisions of the
Code and subdivision (a) of 6 RCNY §
2-64.
   (e)   Procedures.
      (1)   All existing newsstands for which the licenses are in full force
and effect as of July 13, 2006 may be replaced by the franchisee pursuant to
the requirements of this chapter and according to a schedule devised by DOT and
DCWP at their sole discretion.
      (2)   Replacement of a newsstand at the location of the existing
newsstand or the relocation of a newsstand within the catchment area of such
newsstand in accordance with subdivision (d) of this section will not require a
renewal of the license for such newsstand prior to the expiration of the term
of such license.
      (3)   The licensee shall not be required to submit an application for a
license for a new newsstand pursuant to 6 RCNY §
2-63 or to comply with the requirements of 6 RCNY §
2-64 in order to operate the newsstand reconstructed pursuant to this
subdivision (e) unless there is no location that complies with the applicable
siting requirements in 6 RCNY §
2-65 within the catchment area in which such newsstand is located. The licensee
must comply with the applicable siting requirements in 6 RCNY §
2-65.
      (4)   DCWP or DOT will notify the licensee by certified mail, addressed
to the licensee at the address provided by such licensee on his or her most
recent application for a license or renewal of a license, of his or her option
to arrange for removal of his or her newsstand structure by a person other than
the franchisee, and of a time period in which the franchisee will otherwise
remove and reconstruct the licensee's newsstand. Such notice will be mailed by
DCWP or DOT at least 30 calendar days prior to the first day of such time
period during which the franchisee is scheduled to remove and reconstruct the
licensee's newsstand. DCWP will deem a licensee to have waived his or her right
to arrange for removal of the newsstand by a person other than the franchisee
unless DCWP or DOT receives, as required by the notice, within 15 calendar days
of the date such notice was mailed, written notice from the licensee that such
licensee intends to arrange for the removal of his or her newsstand structure
by a person other than the franchisee. Any removal by a person other than the
franchisee shall be completed at least 5 calendar days prior to the first day
of the period during which the franchisee is otherwise scheduled to remove and
reconstruct the licensee's newsstand. Any removal of a newsstand by a person
other than the franchisee shall comply with all applicable laws, rules,
regulations, and standards to ensure the protection of public safety, including
but not limited to the deactivation of any electrical current to the newsstand
premises.
      (5)   If the licensee does not elect to or waives his or her option to
elect to have his or her newsstand removed by a person other than the
franchisee, then the franchisee may remove and reconstruct the licensee's
newsstand during the period indicated in the notice referred to in paragraph
(4) of this subdivision (e) and the licensee shall have no right to intervene
in that process. If the licensee elects to have his or her newsstand removed by
a person other than the franchisee, but fails to have removed his or her
newsstand at least 5 calendar days prior to the first day of the period during
which the franchisee is otherwise scheduled to remove and reconstruct the
licensee's newsstand, the franchisee may remove and reconstruct the licensee's
newsstand and the licensee shall be subject to all applicable provisions of 6
RCNY §
2-69.
      (6)   All newsstand contents must be removed from the newsstand by the
licensee prior to the first day of the period during which the franchisee is
scheduled to remove and reconstruct the licensee's newsstand. If the licensee
fails to remove said contents within this timeframe, the licensee shall be
subject to all applicable provisions of 6 RCNY §
2-69.
      (7)   The operation of the newsstand shall cease during such time as the
franchisee constructs and installs the replacement newsstand and shall not
resume until the licensee receives notification from DCWP or DOT that he or she
may resume operations.
      (8)   The franchisee shall obtain the necessary construction, electrical,
street opening, and other permits or approvals required for the construction
and installation of the replacement newsstand.
      (9)   DOT may deny any proposed relocation site if the site fails any
necessary construction tests conducted by the franchisee, including but not
limited to test pits.
(Amended City Record 8/15/2024, eff. 9/14/2024)
§ 2-69 Enforcement.
   (a)   General. Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this Part
or the applicable provisions of the Code or any other law that applies to the
construction, reconstruction, relocation and operation of a newsstand may
result in the exercise by the Commissioner of powers granted to him or her in
Chapter 1 of Title 20 of the Code, including the power to impose fines and
penalties and to suspend or revoke any license issued by him or her in
accordance with the applicable procedures and provisions of such Chapter.
   (b)   Obligation to cooperate with replacement of newsstands by franchisee.
During the removal, reconstruction, relocation, and continuing operation of the
licensee's newsstand, the licensee shall not:
      (1)   Impede or interfere with the removal, reconstruction and/or
relocation of the newsstand;
      (2)   Create a hazardous condition; or
      (3)   Impede physical access to the newsstand by the franchisee after
completion of construction for the purpose of making reasonable repairs or
improvements to such stand, or for ongoing maintenance by the franchisee, or
for an inspection to determine compliance with applicable law.
   (c)   Waiver of options.
      (1)   Failure to remove a newsstand at least 5 calendar days prior to the
first day of the period during which the franchisee is otherwise scheduled to
remove and reconstruct the licensee's newsstand, as provided in notice given
pursuant to paragraph (4) of subdivision (e) of 6 RCNY §
2-68, will be considered a waiver of a licensee's written election to arrange
for non-franchisee removal.
      (2)   Failure of a licensee to communicate an available choice of
interior accessories of a replacement newsstand in a timely manner may result
in waiver of the right to choose such interior accessories.
      (3)   Failure to cooperate in any aspect of the transitional procedures
contained in subdivision (e) of 6 RCNY §
2-68, or in any other procedure contained in this Part, may result in the
forfeiture of options otherwise available to the licensee.
(Amended City Record 8/15/2024, eff. 9/14/2024)
§ 2-70 Inquiries and Complaints.
Direct all inquiries and complaints to:
Department of Consumer and Worker Protection
42 Broadway
New York, NY 10004
Telephone: 311
(Amended City Record 8/15/2024, eff. 9/14/2024)
§ 2-70.1 Illustrations.
Illustration 1: Typical full block front plan showing clear path for curb-line
newsstand.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-136.jpg]
 
Illustration 2: Illustrative example showing clear path.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-138.jpg]
 
Illustration 3: Typical full block front plan showing clear path for property –
line newsstand.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-140.jpg]
 
Illustration 4: Typical full block front plan showing clearance from corners
and curb of streets.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-142.jpg]
 
Illustration 5: Typical block front showing clearance from building entrances.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-144.jpg]
 
Part 2: Stoop Line Stands
§ 2-70.2 Physical Characteristics, Requirements and Prohibitions.
   (a)   Every stoop line stand must be constructed of wood or some other rigid
material and have a lip or barrier on both ends and in front to prevent
spillage. A stoop line stand must not be enclosed by any partition that extends
to the roof or awning above the stand. No items may be kept in the space
allotted for a stoop line stand unless such items are kept on a stoop line
stand. The outside surface of a stoop line stand must be kept smooth and free
and clear of all projections which might tend to damage the clothing of passing
pedestrians or which might cause bodily injury to such pedestrians. No items
may be kept on the sidewalk outside of a stoop line stand.
   (b)   On all sidewalks where the width is twelve feet or less, no stoop line
stand shall extend outward from the building line to a point beyond one-third
the width of the sidewalk.
   (c)   A stoop line stand license application may be denied if the Department
shows that pedestrian traffic movement or public safety or convenience would be
significantly impeded by the presence of the stand or that the area is not
zoned for retail commercial uses.
   (d)   A stoop line stand which uses ice or water in its display of food or
flowers must be constructed and maintained in a fashion such that ice or water
does not escape from the stand to the sidewalk. The sidewalk adjacent to the
stand must at all times be kept free of such ice or water.
   (e)   Payment for merchandise sold or displayed at a stoop line stand may
only be accepted inside of the store adjacent to the stoop line stand.
   (f)   A stoop line stand licensee and his or her employees or agents may not
use such stoop line stand or the sidewalk adjacent thereto for the preparation
of any articles sold or displayed at such stoop line stand, including, but not
limited to, the washing, trimming, or bunching of fruit, vegetables, or
flowers; the packaging of fruit salad; or the blending of smoothies or juices.
   (g)   A licensee shall not display or offer for sale on its stoop line stand
any item that is not specifically listed as an item that may be sold or
displayed on a stoop line stand in § 20-233(b) of Chapter 2 of Title 20 of the
Administrative Code of the City of New York.
   (h)   A stoop line stand license must be held by the same entity listed on
the certificate of authority for the store located behind the stoop line stand.
If the store located behind the stoop line stand does not hold a certificate of
authority, a stoop line stand license must be held by the same entity operating
the store located behind such stand.
(Amended City Record 9/29/2020, eff. 10/29/2020)
Subchapter H: Sightseeing Guides
§ 2-71 Documentation on Receipts.
A receipt containing the following information must be issued to each consumer
purchasing a ticket for a sightseeing tour: the name, address, telephone and
license numbers of the sightseeing guide conducting the tour or the name,
address and telephone number of the sightseeing tour organization sponsoring or
arranging the tour; the date the ticket was purchased; the specific tour it was
purchased for; and the total price for the tour.
§ 2-72 Additional Charges Prohibited.
No sightseeing guide shall charge or attempt to charge a sum greater than the
original charge for the trip whether in payment for unsolicited merchandise,
meals, services or for any other reasons.
§ 2-73 Tie-in Services Prohibited.
No sightseeing guide shall enter into any agreement to solicit the patronage of
any consumer for any business, nor shall any sightseeing guide receive any
commission, rebate or any money whatsoever directly or indirectly from any
person or business in exchange for conducting or directing consumers to such
person or business.
§ 2-74 Examination to be Taken by Applicants.
   (a)   Each person who applies on or after the effective date of this rule
for a sightseeing guide license pursuant to § 20-243 of the Administrative Code
of the City of New York shall be required to pass a professional examination
administered under the supervision of the Commissioner in accordance with § 20-
244(d) of the Administrative Code of the City of New York prior to the issuance
such license.
   (b)   Each person who applies for a renewal of a sightseeing guide license
that is current on or before the effective date of this rule shall be required
to pass a professional examination administered under the supervision of the
Commissioner in accordance with § 20-244(d) of such Code prior to such renewal
of such license.
   (c)   Each person holding a currently valid license issued pursuant § 20-243
of such code shall be required to take a professional examination administered
under the supervision of the Commissioner in accordance with § 20-244(d) of
such Code before the next renewal of such license whenever such renewal occurs
three or more months after the commissioner announces that the test
administered pursuant to § 20-244(d) has been substantially revised.
   (d)   The qualifying examination for sightseeing guide licenses shall be
offered on or before 2:00 p.m. each day the office is open for business.
Applicants who fail the examination may retake the examination.
   (e)   An applicant shall pay an examination fee of fifty dollars ($50), and
such applicant who fails such examination shall be entitled to retake it once
without paying an additional fee.
   (f)   A person holding a currently valid sightseeing license on the
effective date of this rule can apply to take the professional examination at
any time on or before the renewal date following the effective date of this
rule without paying the examination fee specified in subdivision (e). Such
person may retake the test one time without paying such fee, but shall
thereafter be required to pay the examination fee as provided in such
subdivision.
Subchapter I: Motion Picture Projectionists [Repealed]
§ 2-81 Written Examination Required. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 2/2/2024, eff. 3/3/2024)
Subchapter J: [Reserved]
Subchapter K: Dealers in Second-Hand Articles
§ 2-101 Identification of Persons Who Sell to Second-Hand Dealers.
It shall be the duty of every second-hand dealer to verify the identity of
every person from whom he purchases an article, and to make and keep a written
record of the nature of the evidence submitted by such person to prove his
identity. Only the following shall be deemed acceptable evidence of identity:
   (a)   Any official document issued by the United States government, any
state, county, municipality or subdivision thereof, any public agency or
department thereof, or any public or private employer, which requires and bears
signature of person to whom issued.
   (b)   Police, fire department and postal department badges containing
numbers.
In addition, and in every case, it shall be the duty of every second-hand
dealer, to require that every person from whom he purchases an article, sign
his name in the presence of the second-hand dealer, compare the signature with
the signature on the identifying document and retain on his premises the
person's signature together with the number and description of the identifying
document.
§ 2-102 Second-Hand Furniture.
   (a)   The words "discount," "finance," "credit," or others of similar
meaning, shall not be used as part of a firm, trade or corporate name or title
unless the licensee is actually engaged in the financing for other firms of
installment or other purchases of furniture.
   (b)   The words "warehouse," "storage," "unclaimed," or others of similar
meaning, shall not be used as part of a firm, trade or corporate name or title
unless the principal business of the licensee is the actual storage of
furniture for hire in a recognized storage warehouse.
   (c)   The words "railroad," "unclaimed freight," or others of similar
meaning, shall not be used as part of a firm, trade or corporate name or title
unless the licensee is actually a department of a railroad.
   (d)   No licensee shall sell or advertise for sale furniture from a private
residence under any circumstances, nor shall he be affiliated with, or
knowingly provide furniture to, any dealer selling furniture to the public from
a private residence.
   (e)   No licensee shall conduct any sale under the name of "auction sale"
unless an auctioneer, duly licensed by the City of New York, is employed to
conduct such sale. Such auction sale must be bona fide and without reserve and
in all other ways must comply with the laws relating to auctions.
   (f)   New, used or reconditioned furniture, respectively, must be advertised
and sold as such.
   (g)   The restrictions applying to the use of certain words as part of a
firm, trade or corporate name or title of licensees apply equally to the
misleading use of the said words in advertising. Licensees will be held to
strict accountability for any misleading or false advertising, and the use of
such shall be grounds for disciplinary action on the license.
§ 2-103 Second-Hand Automobiles.
   (a)   Every sale must be evidenced by a bill of sale, receipted invoice, or
other evidence of transferring title, which must contain the following
information:
      (1)   Name, motor and serial numbers of car sold.
      (2)   Year of manufacture as given in the Used Car Guide provided by the
National Automobile Dealers Association.
      (3)   Cash-selling price and/or time selling price, setting forth finance
charges and exact method of payment.
      (4)   Allowance on car traded in, if any, and description by year, make,
motor and serial numbers of same.
      (5)   If a dealer has serviced, repaired or replaced the odometer, such
fact must be stated.
   (b)   No car shall be sold or offered for sale by any dealer on deferred
payments except on the security of the car itself. No other property whatever
is to be used as collateral. If financed by a finance company recommended by
the dealer, the dealer must first acquaint the purchaser with the precise terms
which such finance company is entitled by law to charge, including nature of
collateral, interest rate, and other charges, if any.
   (c)   No automobile dealer licensed by this Department shall sell or offer
for sale a motor vehicle or motorcycle, the motor or serial number of which
shall have been so covered as to be effectually concealed.
   (d)   In any case where a dealer shall purchase a car from a private person
(not a dealer in automobiles) and pay for same in full or in part with notes,
postdated checks, or by deferred payments, the failure to meet such payments
shall be ground for punishment of the licensee by the imposition of a fine or
the suspension or revocation of his license.
   (e)   Licensees will be held responsible for statements, representations,
promises or acts of agents, representatives or salesmen on or away from the
premises of the licensee.
   (f)   No dealer in second-hand automobiles shall request or oblige any
purchaser to sign any undertaking unless all the facts are set forth in the
said undertaking or agreement before signature and a line shall be drawn from
the last word of the undertaking to the signature of the purchaser. No notation
made after the drawing of the line above referred to shall be binding upon the
purchaser unless initialed by both the purchaser and the dealer.
   (g)   (1)   (i)   No dealer shall sell or offer for sale to a person other
than another dealer a second-hand automobile unless such second-hand auto
mobile has been inspected in accordance with § 301 of the Vehicle and Traffic
Law and certified in accordance with § 417 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
         (ii)   All contracts for sale of second-hand automobiles shall contain
the following, in type which is 10 point or larger in scale, on that face of
the contract to which the buyer's signature is affixed:
NYC DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AND WORKER PROTECTION LICENSE NO. (INSERT DCWP
LICENSE NUMBER). IF YOU HAVE A COMPLAINT ABOUT THIS BUSINESS VISIT NYC.GOV/DCWP
OR CONTACT 311.
         (iii)   No dealer shall include terms in a contract for sale of a
second hand automobile to a buyer other than another dealer which purport to
limit the dealer's responsibility under § 417 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law or
under this regulation. Impermissible limitations shall include, but not be
limited to, sale of the automobile "as is," with a disclaimer of warranties, or
with a term or terms limiting the dealer's duty to repair, or pay for the
repair of, defects existing at the time of sale to a portion of the total cost
of parts and labor.
      (2)   No dealer shall misrepresent the mileage of a used motor vehicle
which he is offering for sale or exchange by changing the odometer of a used
motor vehicle so as to show a lesser mileage reading than recorded by the
instrument; provided, however, that this shall not be construed to prevent the
service, repair or replacement of an odometer which, by reason of normal use,
wear, or through damage, requires service, repair, or replacement. In the event
of service, repair or replacement of the odometer by the dealer, the mileage
and reading therein shall be set at zero mileage, after such service, repair or
replacement.
   (h)   In connection with the purchase of a used car, it shall be the duty of
every licensed dealer to make a thorough investigation as to the use to which
such car has previously been put, and if found to have at any time been used as
a public hack or taxicab, such fact shall be duly recorded with all other facts
in connection with such purchase and any future purchaser or prospective
purchaser of the said car shall be so informed. The dealer shall also include
as a part of his investigation and the record to be made by him the last
previous registration of the car, regardless of the State in which such
previous registration occurred. The dealer shall also keep a record of the
odometer reading at the time of purchase by him of a used car.
   (i)   The selling price of an automobile by a licensed second-hand dealer
shall be the price advertised, cited, quoted or marked thereon. It shall
include all charges connected with the sale of said automobile and shall be the
maximum charge to the purchaser. It shall be a violation of this regulation for
any licensee to exact a service charge, house commission or any such like
assessment above the selling price of the car. This regulation shall not affect
any charges that may be made by a finance company for financing the purchase of
an automobile.
   (j)   Any licensee who acts as a broker, agent, or for the account of
another person, or participates in any way, in the sale of a second-hand
automobile, will be held responsible for such sale as if he were the principal.
No licensee shall allow or permit any person not licensed as a dealer in
second-hand automobiles to sell or offer for sale at or from the licensee's
place of business any second-hand automobile, unless such automobile is the
property of the licensee.
   (k)   Deposits.
      (1) No dealer nor any person acting as his agent or employee (hereinafter
referred to as the "Dealer") shall accept a deposit unless the following
conditions are met:
         (i)   Said deposit obligates the Dealer to refrain for a specified
period of time, from offering for sale to any other person the automobile in
relation to which the deposit has been made by the customer; and
         (ii)   The Dealer has not accepted a prior deposit from any person
which is still binding upon the Dealer, unless the Dealer so informs the person
from whom he accepts a deposit.
      (2)   All deposits accepted by a Dealer shall be evidenced by dated
receipt stating the following information:
         (i)   Description of automobile, including make, color, and year of
manufacture; (ii) Cash-selling price and/or time selling price, finance charges
and method of payment;
         (iii)   Allowance on automobile to be traded in, if any;
         (iv)   Time during which the option is binding; and
         (v)   Whether said deposit is refundable and under what conditions.
      (3)   Each Dealer in second-hand automobiles shall keep a record of
deposits on second-hand automobiles offered for sale. The record shall indicate
the date of the receipt of the deposit, the amount, the name and address of the
payor, the receipt number, a description of the automobile upon which the
deposit has been made, and a statement of the disposition of the deposit at the
conclusion of the transaction setting forth whether the deposit has been
applied to a sales contract or has been refunded to the payor, or otherwise
used.
      (4)   Failure to keep records in accordance with 6 RCNY §
2-103(k)(2) and (3) shall be presumptive evidence that the Dealer has acted in
violation of subdivision (a) of the regulation in any case in which a customer
of said Dealer alleges that said Dealer has committed such a violation.
   (l)   (1)   Each dealer in second-hand automobiles shall keep complete and
accurate records of all income and expenses, all receipts and disbursements,
and of the investments made and funds provided to finance the business. The
Commissioner may prescribe the accounts and written records to be maintained,
and such requirements as may be necessary to permit adequate supervision of the
business.
      (2)   The records must include cash receipts and cash disbursements
journal, setting forth all payments in detail and identifying the source of all
receipts. All disbursements for the purchase of motor vehicles must be
traceable to the police book. Receipts shall be traceable to the supporting
sales documents.
   (m)   (1)   Definitions. 
         (i)   "Public space" means all publicly owned property between the
property lines on a street as such property lines are shown on City records
including, but not limited to, a park, plaza, roadway, shoulder, tree space,
sidewalk or parking space between such property lines.
         (ii)   "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curb
lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines,
intended for the use of pedestrians.
      (2)   A dealer in second-hand automobiles must not park, store, display,
or leave standing on public space any vehicle it owns, has in its possession,
or offers for sale or allow any such vehicle to occupy or encroach on public
space in any other manner.
(Amended City Record 7/5/2016, eff. 8/4/2016; amended City Record 3/19/2024,
eff. 4/18/2024)
§ 2-104 Exemption of Not-for-Profit Organizations.
Any not-for-profit organization, as defined in the Internal Revenue Code, 26
U.S.C. § 501, which deals in second-hand articles, shall be exempt from the
provisions of Subchapter 11 of Chapter 2 of Title 20. Exempt dealers in second-
hand articles shall maintain adequate proof of their tax status on their
business premises. For purposes of this regulation, an Internal Revenue Service
tax status determination letter is deemed adequate proof.
§ 2-105 Labeling of Secondhand Automobiles and Posting of Prices for Secondhand
Automobiles.
   (a)   Labeling of Used Automobiles, Products and Parts. 
      (1)   All secondhand automobiles, products and parts sold by licensed
secondhand automobile dealers that are not new shall be labeled as such. Easily
understood words such as "secondhand," "used," "not new," "demo model," "pre-
owned," "refurbished" and "recycled" may be used to indicate that an item is
not new.
   (b)   Total Selling Price Signs. 
      (1)   The total selling price sign required by § 20-271(b)(1) of the
Administrative Code of the City of New York shall be prominently displayed on
the dashboard or on the window of the secondhand automobile to which the sign
applies, or posted within five feet of the point of display of the secondhand
automobile to which the sign applies. If the dashboard or window of the
secondhand automobile is not visible to the consumer at eye-level or accessible
to the consumer, the sign shall be prominently displayed at the point of
display of such automobile.
      (2)   The total selling price sign shall display the total selling price
in lettering that is clear, legible, bold and at least one inch in height. The
sign must clearly indicate the automobile to which the total selling price
applies.
      (3)   The total selling price sign shall state, in lettering that is
clear, legible and at least one-half as high and one-half as broad as the
largest print on the sign, that taxes and fees for securing registration and
certificate of title are not included in the total selling price.
   (c)   Add-On Product Signs. 
      (1)   Secondhand automobile dealers shall list the total selling price of
add-on products, as defined in § 20-271(b)(2) of the Administrative Code of the
City of New York, very close to the product description. If multiple add-on
products are grouped together on the same sign, each add-on product must be
listed separately, one item per line, with the price of the add-on product
located to the right of the product description. If add-on products are listed
individually, the price of the add-on product must be very close to the product
description.
      (2)   Lettering for the description and the price of the add-on product
must be clear, legible and the same size which must be at least one inch in
height, unless the sign is posted on each individual vehicle, in which case the
lettering must be at least half an inch in height.
      (3)   Secondhand automobile dealers may list the range of total selling
prices for extended warranty products very close to the product description in
lieu of a specific price. The range of prices must include the minimum and
maximum price for the extended warranty, and must also include the factors that
may cause the price to vary, such as the vehicle's make, model, year and
mileage.
      (4)   All signs required by § 20-271(b)(2) of the Administrative Code of
the City of New York shall include the following language in lettering that is
clear, legible, bold and capitalized, and at least one-half as high and one-
half as broad as the largest print on the sign, but no less than one-quarter
inch in height: "YOU ARE NOT REQUIRED TO BUY ANY ADD-ON PRODUCTS IN ORDER TO
PURCHASE A CAR AT THE ADVERTISED PRICE."
   (d)   The requirements of subdivisions (b) and (c) of this section shall
apply to secondhand automobiles dealers that are licensed or required to be
licensed.
(Added City Record 3/23/2016, eff. 4/22/2016)
§ 2-106 Financing Disclosures.
   (a)   To comply with § 20-268.1(e)(2) of the Administrative Code, each
second-hand automobile dealer must provide to each consumer the financing
disclosure shown below on a paper no less than 8.5 inches by 11 inches in
dimension in the language in which the sales or finance contract was
negotiated, provided the commissioner has made such disclosure available in
such language.
{'{'}Click_here_to_view_the_referenced_financing_disclosure or follow this
link: https://www1.nyc.gov/site/dca/businesses/forms.page#car{'}'}
   (b)   To comply with § 20-268.1(e)(4) of the Administrative Code, a second-
hand automobile dealer must retain a copy of each financing disclosure shown in
subdivision (a), along with a written acknowledgement that the consumer
received the disclosure, for a period of no less than 6 years. The written
acknowledgement requirement is satisfied by obtaining the consumer's written
signature or initials on the disclosure document.
   (c)   It is a violation of § 20-268.1(f) of the Administrative Code for a
second-hand automobile dealer to attempt to have a consumer waive any of the
protections set forth in § 20-268.1. Each attempt shall constitute a separate
and independent violation.
   (d)   It is a violation of § 20-268.3 of the Administrative Code for a
second-hand automobile dealer to provide inaccurate translations of documents
to a consumer. Each inaccurate document provided to a consumer shall constitute
a separate and independent violation.
(Added City Record 5/25/2018, eff. 6/24/2018)
§ 2-107 Automobile Contract Cancellation Option.
   (a)   To comply with § 20-268.2(a) of the Administrative Code, each second-
hand automobile dealer must provide to each consumer the automobile contract
cancellation option form shown below on a paper no less than 8.5 inches by 14
inches in dimension, printed in color, in the language in which the sales or
finance contract was negotiated.
{'{'}Click_here_to_view_the_referenced_automobile_contract_cancellation_option
form or follow this link: https://www1.nyc.gov/site/dca/businesses/
forms.page#car{'}'}
   (b)   To establish that a trade-in automobile was sold or transferred
inadvertently under § 20-268.2(g)(1) of the Administrative Code, a second-hand
automobile dealer must have maintained written policies and procedures designed
to avoid such sale and must have distributed such policies and procedures to
all employees with responsibility in this area annually.
   (c)   If a second-hand automobile dealer determines that a consumer has
failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a contract cancellation
option under § 20-268.2(g)(2), it must provide the consumer a written
explanation of such determination. The second-hand automobile dealer must
maintain a record of such determination for no less than 6 years and must
provide a copy of such record to the commissioner upon request.
(Added City Record 5/25/2018, eff. 6/24/2018)
§ 2-108 Consumer Bill of Rights.
   (a)   To comply with § 20-268.4(b)(1) of the Administrative Code, each
second-hand automobile dealer must post a copy of the consumer bill of rights
shown below on a paper no less than 18 inches by 24 inches in dimension in
English, and in any other language in which the second-hand automobile dealer
transacts business, provided the commissioner has made the bill of rights
available in such language. A copy must be posted conspicuously in any office
or area of the dealer location where consumers negotiate and execute sales
contracts.
{'{'}Click_here_to_view_the_referenced_consumer_bill_of_rights or follow this
link: https://www1.nyc.gov/site/dca/businesses/forms.page#car{'}'}
   (b)   To comply with § 20-268.4(b)(2) of the Administrative Code, each
second-hand automobile dealer must provide to each consumer a written copy of
the consumer bill of rights shown in subdivision (a) on a paper no less than
8.5 inches by 14 inches in dimension in the language in which the sales
contract was negotiated, provided the commissioner has made the bill of rights
available in such language.
   (c)   A second-hand automobile dealer may comply with § 20-268.1(e)(1) of
the Administrative Code by providing each consumer with a consumer bill of
rights pursuant to § 20-268.4(b)(2) of the Administrative Code.
   (d)   The requirements of this section shall apply only to secondhand
automobile dealers that sell second-hand automobiles to consumers.
(Added City Record 5/25/2018, eff. 6/24/2018)
§ 2-109 Records and Reports.
   (a)   To comply with § 20-268.5(a) of the Administrative Code, a second-hand
automobile dealer must maintain a copy of the consumer bill of rights signed or
initialed by each consumer for six years after the date of execution of such
document.
   (b)   To comply with § 20-268.5(c) of the Administrative Code, a second-hand
automobile dealer must maintain an automobile contract cancellation option
report in the format shown below.
{'{'}Click_here_to_view_the_referenced_automobile_contract_cancellation_option
report.{'}'}
   (c)   A second-hand automobile dealer shall be in violation of § 20-268.5(c)
of the Administrative Code for failing to make available a copy of its
automobile contract cancellation option report to the commissioner within 20
business days of receiving a request. Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence, a
second-hand automobile dealer shall not be in violation of § 20-268.5(c) for
such a failure where he or she received and complied with a similar request in
the past 12 months.
   (d)   Records maintained by a second-hand automobile dealer in a manner
compliant with the Vehicle Electronic Reassignment and Integrated Facility
Inventory (VERIFI) system pursuant to Title 15, Part 78.9 of the Code, Rules
and Regulations of the State of New York satisfy the requirements of § 20-273
of the Administrative Code if the records contain the information required by
such section of the Administrative Code. Nothing in this subdivision affects a
second-hand automobile dealer's obligation to fully comply with §§ 20-273(e)
and 20-273(f) of the Administrative Code.
(Added City Record 5/25/2018, eff. 6/24/2018; amended City Record 12/5/2019,
eff. 1/4/2020)
Subchapter L: [Reserved]
Subchapter M: Auctioneers [Repealed]
§ 2-120 Auction Houses. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 8/15/2019, eff. 9/14/2019; repealed City Record 3/11/2022,
eff. 4/10/2022)
§ 2-121 Standards, Licenses and Application of Regulations. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 3/11/2022, eff. 4/10/2022)
§ 2-122 Requirements and Obligations of Licensees. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 8/15/2019, eff. 9/14/2019; repealed City Record 3/11/2022,
eff. 4/10/2022)
§ 2-123 Reserves. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 3/11/2022, eff. 4/10/2022)
§ 2-124 Prohibited Practices. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 3/11/2022, eff. 4/10/2022)
§ 2-125 Records; Miscellaneous. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 3/11/2022, eff. 4/10/2022)
Subchapter N: Industrial Laundry and Industrial Laundry Delivery
(Amended City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022)
§ 2-131 General Requirements. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/20/2018, eff. 7/20/2018)
§ 2-132 Definitions.
As used in this subchapter, the following terms have the meanings provided in §
20-297.1 of the Administrative Code: Industrial laundry; Industrial laundry
delivery; Laundry; Laundry service; and Retail laundry.
(Added City Record 6/20/2018, eff. 7/20/2018)
§ 2-133 Application.
   (a)   Industrial Laundry Delivery Vehicle Information. Any changes to the
vehicle information that an applicant is required to submit pursuant to § 20-
297.3(c)(4) of the Administrative Code that occur after a license has been
granted shall be submitted with an application for renewal of such license.
Notwithstanding this requirement, all vehicles used for industrial laundry
delivery must comply with all applicable laws, regulations and rules, including
§ 20-297.5(e) and § 20-297.6(b) of the Administrative Code.
   (b)   Liability Insurance. 
      (1)   Every industrial laundry licensee must secure and maintain
throughout the term of the license commercial general liability ("CGL")
insurance which shall:
         (i)   be issued by a company that may lawfully issue the CGL policy
and which has an A.M. Best rating of at least A-/VII, a Standard & Poor's
rating of at least A, a Moody's Investors Service rating of at least A3, a
Fitch Ratings rating of at least A-, a Demotech rating of at least A, or a
similar rating by any other nationally recognized statistical rating
organization acceptable to the Commissioner;
         (ii)   insure both the licensee and the City of New York and protect
the City of New York from any claims for injury (including death) or property
damage that may arise from, or allegedly arise from, the construction,
operation or use of the industrial laundry;
         (iii)   provide coverage of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000)
per occurrence and two million dollars ($2,000,000) aggregate; and
         (iv)   provide coverage at least as broad as that provided in the most
recently issued edition of Insurance Services Office ("ISO") Form CG 0001 and
be "occurrence" based instead of based on "claims made"; and
         (v)   name the City of New York as an additional insured with coverage
at least as broad as the most recent edition of ISO Forms CG 20 12 or CG 20 26.
      (2)   Each industrial laundry applicant shall submit proof of CGL
insurance by submission of the endorsement(s) listing the City as an additional
insured and either:
         (i)   a certificate of insurance in a form satisfactory to the
Department that satisfies the requirements of this rule, identifies the
insurance company that issued such insurance policy, the policy number, limit
(s) of insurance, and expiration date and is accompanied by a sworn statement
in a form prescribed by the Department from a licensed insurance broker or
agent certifying that the certificate of insurance is accurate in all material
respects; or
         (ii)   an original or true copy of the CGL policy as certified by an
authorized representative of the issuing insurance carrier.
   (c)   Workers' compensation insurance. 
      (1)   Every industrial laundry licensee shall maintain workers'
compensation insurance as required by law.
      (2)   Each industrial laundry applicant shall submit proof of the
insurance on one of the following forms:
         (i)   C-105.2 - Certificate of Workers' Compensation Insurance;
         (ii)   U-26.3 - State Insurance Fund Certificate of Workers'
Compensation Insurance;
         (iii)   SI-12 - Certificate of Workers' Compensation Self-Insurance;
         (iv)   GSI-105.2 - Certificate of Participation in New York State
Workers' Compensation Group Self-Insurance;
         (v)   equivalent or successor forms used by the New York State
Workers' Compensation Board; or
         (vi)   other proof of insurance in a form acceptable to the
Department.
      (3)   This requirement shall not apply to applicants that are not
required by law to maintain this coverage. Any industrial laundry applicant
that is not required by law to maintain this coverage shall submit to the
Department proof from the New York State Workers' Compensation Board on Form
CE-200 – Certificate of Attestation of Exemption.
   (d)   Disability benefits insurance. 
      (1)   Every industrial laundry licensee shall secure and maintain
disability benefits insurance.
      (2)   Each industrial laundry applicant shall submit proof of the
insurance on one of the following forms:
         (i)   DB-120.1 - Certificate of Insurance Coverage under the NYS
Disability Benefits Law;
         (ii)   DB-155 - Certificate of Disability Benefits Self-Insurance;
         (iii)   equivalent or successor forms used by the New York State
Workers' Compensation Board; or
         (iv)   other proof of insurance in a form acceptable to the
Department.
      (3)   This requirement shall not apply to applicants that are not
required by law to maintain this coverage. Any industrial laundry applicant
that is not required by law to maintain this coverage shall submit to the
Department proof from the New York State Workers' Compensation Board on Form
CE-200 – Certificate of Attestation of Exemption.
(Added City Record 6/20/2018, eff. 7/20/2018; amended City Record 12/20/2021,
eff. 1/19/2022)
§ 2-134 Reserved.
(Added City Record 6/20/2018, eff. 7/20/2018; amended City Record 12/20/2021,
eff. 1/19/2022)
§ 2-135 Requirements for Industrial Laundries and Industrial Laundry Delivery.
   (a)   Signs. 
      (1)   The sign containing procedures for complying with minimum standards
of cleanliness and hygiene required by § 20-297.6(a)(3) of the Administrative
Code shall be captioned at the top "Procedures for Minimum Standards of
Cleanliness and Hygiene," in bold lettering no less than two inches in height,
and the procedures shall be in lettering no less than one inch in height.
      (2)   The sign containing procedures for maintaining functional
separation of laundered and unlaundered laundry required by § 20-297.6(b)(2) of
the Administrative Code shall be captioned at the top "Procedures for
Maintaining Functional Separation of Laundered and Unlaundered Laundry," in
bold lettering no less than two inches in height, and the procedures shall be
in lettering no less than one inch in height.
      (3)   The signs required by § 20-297.6(a)(3) and § 20-297.6(b)(2) of the
Administrative Code may be combined into a single sign. Such combined sign
shall be captioned at the top "Procedures for Minimum Standards of Cleanliness
and Hygiene and Maintaining Functional Separation of Laundered and Unlaundered
Laundry," in bold lettering no less than two inches in height, and the
procedures shall be in lettering no less than one inch in height.
   (b)   Scales. Each licensee that charges for its services on the basis of
weight must use a scale of a type and design that has been approved by the New
York State Department of Agriculture & Markets and tested and sealed by the
Department pursuant to Chapter 3 of Title 20 of the Administrative Code. The
licensee must make the scale available for inspection by the Department during
business hours.
(Added City Record 6/20/2018, eff. 7/20/2018; amended City Record 12/20/2021,
eff. 1/19/2022)
§ 2-136 Prohibited Conduct.
   (a)   No licensee may transact for laundry service or laundry delivery
service with an unlicensed industrial laundry or industrial laundry delivery.
   (b)   If an industrial laundry licensee does not disclose to the Department
that it will be engaging in industrial laundry delivery when it applies for the
industrial laundry license, such licensee may not engage in industrial laundry
delivery until such licensee has complied with § 20-297.3(b)(11) of the
Administrative Code and has an amended license from the Department authorizing
licensee to engage in industrial laundry delivery.
(Added City Record 6/20/2018, eff. 7/20/2018; amended City Record 12/20/2021,
eff. 1/19/2022)
Subchapter O: Locksmiths
§ 2-140 Posting of Locksmith License Information by Employer.
No person shall employ or engage a locksmith to provide services to the public
for a fee that are required to be performed by a licensed locksmith unless the
person who employs or engages such locksmith displays in his place of business
in a conspicuous place where it can be readily seen by anyone entering the
premises the name and license number of every locksmith such person currently
employs or engages to provide such services. Such business shall also retain at
its business premises and at all times have available for inspection a copy of
the currently valid license of every such locksmith.
§ 2-141 Information to be Obtained and Recorded.
   (a)   Every locksmith requested to open a locked item shall, prior to
opening the item, make a good faith effort to obtain from the person requesting
that the item be opened (hereinafter the "Customer"), two forms of
identification and evidence that the Customer either owns the locked item or is
authorized to have it opened. One form of identification shall be a photo
identification or, if the Customer does not have a photo identification, the
locksmith shall obtain personal identification of the Customer by a witness,
such as a neighbor or a policeman. If personal identification is made by a
witness, the locksmith shall obtain the name, address, telephone number and
relationship of the person providing such identification and, if such person is
a policeman, his or her shield number. Evidence of ownership may include, but
shall not be limited to, a deed, a lease, an envelope addressed to the Customer
from the telephone, gas or electric company, verification by a family member, a
driver's license and registration, or such other evidence that the locksmith
deems appropriate to demonstrate that the Customer owns the locked item, a
description of which evidence the locksmith shall record in accordance with
subdivision (b)(1) below. Evidence of authority to open a locked item may
include, but shall not be limited to, a deed, a lease, a photo identification
of the Customer as an employee, an affidavit made by or on behalf of the
Customer's employer, or such other evidence that the locksmith deems
appropriate to demonstrate that the Customer is authorized to have the locked
item opened, a description of which evidence the locksmith shall record in
accordance with subdivision (b)(1) below.
   (b)   (1) Every locksmith shall complete, and cause to be completed, a two-
part form consisting of Part I, to be completed by the locksmith, and Part II,
to be completed by the Customer (hereinafter the "Form"), at the time of
opening a locked item. Every locksmith requested to open a locked item shall,
at the time of opening the item, record on Part I of the form the following
information:
         (i)   The license number of the locksmith;
         (ii)   The evidence obtained by the locksmith in accordance with
subdivision (a) of this section corroborating the Customer's statement in Part
II of the Form that he or she is authorized to have the item opened or a
statement in accordance with paragraph (2) of this subdivision that such
evidence is unavailable and the locksmith's reason(s) for proceeding without
it;
         (iii)   The location of the item to be opened, including street
address, building floor, and apartment or office number;
         (iv)   The date and time the item was opened;
         (v)   A description of the item requested to be opened and the means
to be employed to open the item;
         (vi)   The two forms of identification that are provided by the
Customer to identify himself or herself in accordance with subdivision (a) of
this section or a statement in accordance with paragraph (2) of this
subdivision that such evidence is unavailable and the locksmith's reason(s) for
proceeding without it; and
         (vii)   The signature of the locksmith who opened the locked item
certifying that all statements made by him on Part I of the Form are true to
the best of his knowledge.
      (2)   If the Customer cannot provide the locksmith with two forms of
identification or other evidence of ownership or authority to open the locked
item in accordance with subdivision (a) above at the time the locksmith opens
the locked item, the locksmith shall so indicate on Part I of the form and
state in writing his or her reason(s) for proceeding in the absence of such
identification or other evidence. If forms of identification or other evidence
of ownership or authority to open the locked item are made available by the
opening of the locked item, the locksmith shall, immediately after opening the
locked item, obtain the forms of identification and other evidence, and record
on Part I of the Form which forms of identification and other evidence were
provided by the Customer prior to the unlocking of the item, and which were in
the item unlocked by the locksmith.
   (c)   (1)   Every locksmith shall, at the time of opening a locked item,
obtain from the Customer, the following information, which the locksmith shall
record or cause to be recorded by the Customer on Part II of the Form:
         (i)   The name, address and telephone number of the Customer;
         (ii)   Whether the Customer is the owner of the locked item;
§ 2-142 Customer Copy.
A copy of the completed Form, including the signatures of the parties, shall be
given to the Customer.
§ 2-143 Forms to be Retained by Locksmith.
The original copy of the completed Forms shall be kept by the locksmith in
either a bond binder or as individual sheets in numerical order. Such Forms
shall be kept by the locksmith for eighteen months.
§ 2-144 Forms to be Available for Inspection.
The locksmith's copies of the Forms shall be available for inspection at all
reasonable times by the Commissioner, any inspector, any police officer, or any
person duly authorized by the Commissioner or any judge of the criminal court
to inspect such forms.
Subchapter P: Sales [Repealed]
§ 2-151 Advertising and Inventory. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021)
Subchapter Q: Garages and Parking Lots
§ 2-161 Operation of Parking Lots and Garages.
   (a)   Except within the discretion of the Commissioner, no license may be
issued or renewed unless the applicant certifies, in such form and manner as
determined by the Commissioner, that the premises proposed to be licensed
comply with all applicable Local, State, and Federal laws and regulations.
   (b)   (1)   The determination of the maximum motor vehicle capacity of each
garage and parking lot, which shall appear on the face of the license, shall be
made as follows:
         (i)   by adopting the maximum vehicle capacity requested by the
applicant or licensee if the requested maximum vehicle capacity does not exceed
the maximum vehicle capacity as stated on the previous license document for the
premises; or,
         (ii)   by requiring that newly licensed premises and previously
licensed premises seeking an increase in maximum vehicle capacity from the
previous license submit documents to show the maximum vehicle capacity allowed
by applicable local, state or federal laws and regulations, which may include a
certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy issued by the
New York City Department of Buildings.
      (2)   A licensee must notify the Department within 10 days of any change
that reduces the maximum vehicle capacity legally permitted at the premises,
including changes to a certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of
occupancy issued by the New York City Department of Buildings.
   (c)   The premises of licensed parking lots and garages must be adequately
attended at all times during operation.
   (d)   (1)   The number and types of insurance policies carried by the
applicant for a license, must be set forth on the face of the application and
must be reasonably adequate, in the opinion of the Commissioner, to protect the
public, which policies shall include coverage for legal liability resulting
from operation on the licensed premises of vehicles and bicycles owned by the
licensee or by third persons, for injury or damage to person or property and
garage keepers liability, in the sum of not less than $300,000 combined single
limit per accident.
      (2)   In the event of cancellation of any of the insurance policies
referred to in the application, the licensee must immediately notify the
Commissioner of such cancellation and of any substitutions. Such notification
may be made on behalf of the licensee by its insurance company or broker.
      (3)   The applicant must present for review and consideration at the time
of this application for a license, or renewal thereof, the original or a true
copy or copies of policies of insurance, or certificates of insurance.
   (e)   In the event of a change of ownership of licensed garage or parking
lot that does not require approval from the Commissioner pursuant to §§ 20-110
and 20-111 of the Administrative Code, the licensee of record must notify the
Commissioner within 30 days of such change in ownership.
   (f)   (1)   (i)   Motor vehicles must not be stored or parked by licensees
on public streets, avenues, highways, or public places except when permission
is given by the customer in a written agreement which is signed by the
customer.
         (ii)   Bicycles must not be stored or parked by licensees on public
streets, avenues, highways, or public places.
      (2)   Every licensee must report to the Police Commissioner, in writing,
the registration number, make and the name of the owner of every motor vehicle
stored on a transient basis and left in a licensed garage or parking lot and
remaining unclaimed for a period of more than seventy-two consecutive hours. No
additional report shall be required to be made concerning any such vehicle,
unless it shall have remained unclaimed for an additional thirty or more
consecutive days. In such case, an additional report or reports must be made at
least every thirty days after such prior report, during the period for which
such vehicle remains unclaimed. The term “transient basis” used in this
subdivision (f) means storage of cars for periods not covered by contractual
agreements for storage of cars by the week, month or longer periods.
   (g)   (1)   Licensed parking lots and garages with separate entrances and
exits, must have their main entrance and main exit clearly designated, with
illuminated signs marked “Entrance” and “Exit.”
      (2)   (i)   Each licensee must post conspicuously at the public entrance
or entrances to the garage or parking facility or, when impossible, in
immediate proximity thereto, a durable sign or signs composed of black letters
and numerals on white background, the upper-case (capital) letters and numerals
to be three inches (3”) high, the lower-case letters to be two inches (2”)
high; all letters “same serif,” as per attached specimen “No. I.” Letters and
numerals must be proportionately spaced and neither contracted nor expanded so
as to inhibit readability. Each classification and the applicable rate or rates
thereunder must be listed on a separate line not to exceed forty inches (40”)
in width. Said lines must be spaced one and one-half inches (1 1/2”) apart, as
measured between the upper-case (capital) letters. Rates for fractional or
hourly periods must be so listed as to reflect the total charge for each
aggregate period up to the maximum thereof.
   For Example:
      Up to 1 hour: $ . . . . .
      Up to 2 hours: $ . . . . .
      Maximum: . . . . . Hours: . . . . .
      or
      Maximum: 6 a.m. to 7 p.m. . . . . . . . . . .
      as per attached specimen "No. II."
         (ii)   Separate signs, having reverse color schemes placed in
juxtaposition to each other, must be used when DAY and NIGHT Rates differ,
provided that the DAY Rate sign (black letters on white background) is so
marked that a motorist parking a vehicle or a bicyclist parking a bicycle when
DAY Rates are in effect may, from said schedule, readily and easily determine
the total charges should they remove their vehicle or bicycle when NIGHT Rates
(white letters and numerals on black background) are in effect.
For Example:
 
DAY RATES               NIGHT RATES
Enter 7 a.m. to 6 p.m.: Enter 6 p.m. to 2 a.m.:
Up to 1 hour: $         Up to 1 hour: $
Up to 2 hours: $        Up to 2 hours: $
etc.                    etc.
Maximum to 6 p.m.: $    Maximum to 2 a.m.: $
 
One of the following may be used, (whichever policy the Licensee adopts) under
the last line of the "DAY Rates" sign.
For Example:
 
Either
After 6 p.m. $ .................. for
each additional hour or part thereof.
Maximum to 2 a.m.: $ ......
or
After 6 p.m. – NIGHT RATES apply.
(See attached specimen "No. II")
 
         (iii)   Licensees who maintain a different Rate Schedule for certain
days of the week or for special occasions such as Matinees, Ball Games, etc.,
shall list chronologically such rates directly under the normal rate schedule
applicable to DAY or NIGHT listings, as the case may be, or on a separate
adjacent sign, to permit easy and ready readability.
         (iv)   A replica or legible typewritten facsimile of such rate sign or
signs, at least eight inches (8”) by ten inches (10”), must be conspicuously
posted or displayed at the place designated by the Licensee for the payment of
charges so that it can be readily seen by the customer. A copy thereof shall
also be filed in quadruplicate with the COMMISSIONER OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
CONSUMER AND WORKER PROTECTION OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK simultaneously with the
filing of the Licensee’s rate schedule or change thereof.
         (v)   Auxiliary signs may be displayed, provided that all letters and
numerals are equal size and conform to the style of letterings as hereinabove
set forth, and further provided that such sign or signs neither mislead nor
confuse or tend to mislead or confuse the public. The license sign required to
be displayed by 6 RCNY §
1-03 (Chapter 1 of Title 20, Administrative Code) must be located in a
conspicuous position at the place designated by the licensee for the payment of
charges.
         (vi)   Each licensee must also post conspicuously at the public
entrance or entrances to the garage or parking facility or, when impossible, in
immediate proximity thereto, a separate sign or signs composed of letters and
numerals of the same dimensions and specifications as hereinabove set forth,
stating the name, address, license number of the Licensee, the licensed
capacity of said premises, the minimum number of bicycle parking spaces in said
premises, and the business hours thereof.
         (vii)   The Commissioner may, upon due application by a licensee, vary
any of the foregoing requirements, provided such variance is not inconsistent
with the aim and purpose of this subdivision (g) nor detrimental to the public
welfare. The sign posted at parking facilities accessory to multiple dwellings,
which provide parking services exclusively to the residential tenants of the
accessory multiple dwelling, and are subject to the Rent Stabilization Law and
Code in regard to the charges for such services, may contain the following
information on rates: “No transients or non-residents permitted. Residential
tenants only. Rates as fixed by rent laws,” or wording to such effect.
         (viii)   Licensees required to provide space for parking bicycles must
post the rate schedules for rates the licensee is authorized to charge for
parking bicycles in the same manner as required for posting the rate schedule
for vehicles, which may be on the same sign or separate signs. The signs for
the rate schedule applicable to each type of conveyance shall be clearly marked
as DAY or NIGHT RATES for VEHICLES or DAY or NIGHT RATES for BICYLES, as
appropriate.
         (ix)   The rates initially posted for parking bicycles on or after the
effective date of Local Law Number 51 for the year 2009 by licensees required
to provide space for parking bicycles by such law shall remain in effect
without having been filed with the Commissioner until January 14, 2010,
provided such licensee files such rates with the Commissioner prior to such
date. No rate shall be in effect thereafter unless a rate change is implemented
as provided by law and this subchapter.
         (x)   Licensees who elect to maintain different rates based on payment
method, in accordance with State and local requirements, must clearly and
conspicuously display at the public entrance or entrances to the garage or
parking facility or, if such display is impossible, in immediate proximity
thereto, the rate and any discount or incentive offered for each payment method
accepted (e.g., credit card, debit card, cash).
         (xi)   Licensees may charge different prices to consumers for monthly
parking or storage services so long as each such rate charged, and the
qualifications or requirements for obtaining such rate, are clearly and
conspicuously posted on a sheet of paper at least eight inches (8”) by ten
inches (10”) at the place designated by the Licensee for the payment of
charges, such that it can be readily seen by the customer. A copy of such rate
sheet must be provided to each consumer who purchases monthly parking or
storage services by mail, or email where agreed to by the consumer, prior to
the consumer’s initial purchase and at least sixty days prior to the effective
date of any change in rates.
      (3)   (i)   The sign must be sufficiently illuminated, clearly visible
and readable.
 
Specimen No. 1 Specimen No. II
ABCDEFGHIJKLMN          DAY RATES
OPQRSTUVWXYZ            Enter 7 a.m. to 6 p.m.
abcdefghijklmn          Up to 1/2 hour...........................$0.00
1/2 0123456789          Up to 1 hour.............................. 0.00
1/2 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Up to 2 hours............................ 0.00
                       Up to 3 hours............................ 0.00
                       Up to 4 hours............................ 0.00
                        After 6 p.m. .............................. 0.00
                       for each add'l hour
                        or part thereof
                       Max. to 2 a.m. ......................... 0.00
                        (or)
                       After 6 p.m.:
                        Night Rates Apply
 
         (ii)   Each licensee whose garage or parking facility is located in
Manhattan shall also post conspicuously at the public entrance or entrances to
the garage or parking facility or, when impossible, in immediate proximity
thereto, a separate sign, at least 12-inches by 18-inches in dimension with
black letters at least 1-inch high, on a white background, stating the
following:
 
 
ATTENTION MANHATTAN RESIDENTS

If you garage your car on a monthly basis or longer, you may be eligible for an
exemption from the 8% parking tax surcharge.

To apply for a certificate of exemption, contact:

N.Y.C. Department of Finance
Parking Tax Exemption Section
25 Elm Place
Brooklyn, NY 11201
1-(718) 935-6144
 
   (h)   (1)   In the event the maximum capacity of a licensed parking lot or
garage has been reached, a sign composed of letters at least six inches in
height, must be posted at the public entrance of such garage or parking lot,
stating, "Capacity full."
      (2)   In the event that all available bicycle parking spaces are
occupied, a sign composed of letters at least six inches in height, must be
posted at the public entrance of such garage or parking lot, stating, "Bike
Parking Capacity Filled."
   (i)   (1)   Every applicant for a license must file with his application a
schedule of rates showing the prices charged for hourly, daily, weekly, and
monthly parking or storage of motor vehicles and bicycles, and all other rates
charged therefor.
      (2)   No licensee license may make any charge for parking or storage in
excess of the rates set forth in such schedule, unless and until at least sixty
days prior to the effective date of such changed rates, such licensee:
         (i)   has filed with the Commissioner in writing, such changes in
rates;
         (ii)   in the case of a change to any hourly, daily, or weekly parking
or storage rates for motor vehicles and bicycles, has posted such changed rates
on a sign which conforms with the requirements of 6 RCNY §
2-161(g)(2) and (3). In addition, the sign shall have the following heading in
letters at least six inches in height:
"NEW RATE SCHEDULE
EFFECTIVE (DATE)."
         (iii)   in the case of a change to any monthly parking or storage
rates, has posted such changes on a sheet that conforms to the requirements of
6 RCNY §
2-161(g)(2)(xi). In addition, the rate sheet must have the following heading in
letters at least 1 inch in height:
“NEW MONTHLY RATES
EFFECTIVE (DATE).”
      (3)   Licensees are expected and will be required to charge for parking
the price scale filed with the Commissioner and advertised by sign on the
premises, except that the charges to residential tenants in multiple dwellings
shall be in accordance with the Rent Stabilization Law and Code if such charges
are subject thereto. Where a lesser amount is charged, except as prescribed and
controlled by the Rent Stabilization Law and Code for residential tenancies in
multiple dwellings, the schedule filed with the Commissioner will be deemed to
have been so amended and no higher price charged except after a formal sixty
days’ notice to the Commissioner.
      (4)   A licensee who has taken over the business of a previous licensee
may not increase the schedule of prices until formal notice has first been
filed with the Commissioner and sixty days have elapsed subsequent to such
filing. Such licensee must provide notice of the rate increase to each consumer
who purchases monthly parking or storage services by mail, or email where
agreed to by the consumer, at least sixty days prior to the effective date of
any increase in rates.
   (j)   No contract, agreement, lease, receipt, rule or regulation made or
issued by any licensee with or to a person who parks or stores a motor vehicle
or bicycle in a garage or parking lot operated by such licensee, license may
exempt such licensee from liability for damage or loss caused by the negligence
of such licensee or any employee of such licensee.
   (k)   Where a trade name is used by an applicant for a license, or a co-
partnership applies for a license, a certified copy of the certificate required
to be filed with the County Clerk must be filed with the application.
   (l)   Licensees may not reserve space for so-called regular customers unless
such customer has obligated himself to pay on a weekly or monthly basis whether
or not reserved space is actually used by the customer.
   (m)   A licensee is required to keep a written record of all weekly or
monthly space rentals and preserve such record for twelve months. The original
of said record, or a true copy thereof, is required to be kept at the garage or
parking lot at all times when the garage or parking lot is open for business.
   (n)   A licensee is not permitted to use a customer’s vehicle or bicycle
under any circumstances whatsoever except when indispensably necessary to the
operation of the business conducted by the licensee in connection with the
incidental movement of vehicles or bicycles solely for the purpose of storage.
   (o)   A licensee may not require a customer to purchase supplies or services
as a condition to parking on the licensed premises.
   (p)   A licensee may not require a customer to estimate or otherwise
indicate time of departure from the licensed premises as a condition to parking
on the premises.
   (q)   All licensed parking lots and garages shall comply with all applicable
zoning requirements and with all other laws, ordinances, rules and regulations
affecting the conduct of the licensed business as enforced by any city agency.
Any violation of such requirements, laws, ordinances, rules or regulations may
result in the suspension or revocation of the offender's license or the
imposition of a monetary penalty.
   (r)   (1)   Whenever a parking charge is determined by the time for which a
parking space is provided and the receipt cannot be immediately stamped or
marked with the time of return upon the customer's appearance at the licensed
premises, an auxiliary time clock shall be provided at each place designated by
the licensee for the payment of charges.
      (2)   For the purpose of determining the legal parking fee, the customer
shall be permitted to stamp the receipt using the auxiliary time clock and the
time shown thereon shall be the one utilized in making such determination.
      (3)   The time on an auxiliary time clock shall, at all times, correspond
to the time shown on the time clock ordinarily used by the person receiving the
parking fee.
      (4)   Whenever an auxiliary time clock is required to be provided as set
forth hereinabove, a sign must be conspicuously posted directly above or
adjacent to the clock stating:
 
"CUSTOMER'S TIME CLOCK. THIS CLOCK MAY BE USED BY CUSTOMER TO STAMP TIME ON
PARKING RECEIPT WHENEVER CASHIER CANNOT STAMP RECEIPT IMMEDIATELY UPON
CUSTOMER'S ARRIVAL TO PICK UP CAR OR BICYCLE"
 
Said statement shall be on a sign or placard at least 12 inches by 18 inches in
dimension and shall have letters thereon not less than 1 inch high.
   (s)   Licensees shall take reasonable care to prevent damage to or loss of a
customer's vehicle, bicycle or personal property. Licensees must also respond
in writing within 30 days to all written notices of claim from consumers. A
licensee's failure to meet its obligations under this subdivision(s) will
subject it to an order to pay damages to the affected party.
   (t)   A licensee must comply with §§ 25-80, 36-70 and 44-60 of the zoning
resolution regarding bicycle parking for the purpose of exempting licensees
from the requirements of subdivisions (a) through (f) of § 20-327.1 of the
Administrative Code of the city of New York only if such licensee files with
the Department an affidavit affirming it is in full compliance with the
requirements specified in such sections of the zoning resolution.
   (u)   A licensee who is granted a waiver from compliance with the
requirements of § 20-327.1 of the Administrative Code of the city of New York
as provided by § 20-327.1(a)(3) of such code must post a sign in letters at
least four inches high adjacent to the public entrance to its parking garage or
lot stating “Bike Parking Not Required by Law.” Such licensee must have a copy
of the waiver available on premises and must display it on request.
(Amended City Record 3/19/2018, eff. 4/18/2018; amended City Record 12/3/2024,
eff. 1/2/2025)
Subchapter R: Commercial Refuse Removal [Repealed]
Subchapter S: Debt Collection Agencies
§ 2-190 Documentation of the Debt to be Provided by Debt Collection Agency.
   (a)   The written documentation identifying the creditor who originated the
debt, which a debt collection agency is required to provide pursuant to § 20-
493.2(a) of the Administrative Code, shall be a copy of the debt document
issued by the originating creditor or an original written confirmation
evidencing the transaction resulting in the indebtedness to the originating
creditor. Computer documents or electronic evidence created or generated after
default on the indebtedness shall not qualify as such confirmation.
   (b)   The written documentation itemizing the principal balance of the debt
that remains or is claimed or alleged to remain due and all other charges that
are due or claimed or alleged to be due, which a debt collection agency is
required to furnish pursuant to § 20-493.2(a) of the Administrative Code, shall
consist of a copy of the final statement of account issued by the originating
creditor and a document itemizing: (1) the total amount remaining due on the
total principal balance of the indebtedness to the originating creditor and (2)
each additional charge or fee claimed or alleged to be due that separately (i)
lists the total for each charge or fee and the date that each charge or fee was
incurred; and (ii) identifies and describes the basis of the consumer's
obligation to pay it.
§ 2-191 Disclosure of Consumer's Legal Rights Regarding Effect of Statute of
Limitations on Debt Payment.
   (a)   The information about the consumer's legal rights, which a debt
collection agency is required to provide the consumer pursuant to § 20-493.2(b)
of the Administrative Code, shall be included in every permitted communication
for each debt that the debt collection agency is seeking to collect that is
beyond the applicable statute of limitations, and shall be: "WE ARE REQUIRED BY
LAW TO GIVE YOU THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION ABOUT THIS DEBT. The legal time limit
(statute of limitations) for suing you to collect this debt has expired.
However, if somebody sues you anyway to try to make you pay this debt, court
rules REQUIRE YOU to tell the court that the statute of limitations has expired
to prevent the creditor from obtaining a judgment. Even though the statute of
limitations has expired, you may CHOOSE to make payments. However, BE AWARE: if
you make a payment, the creditor's right to sue you to make you pay the entire
debt may START AGAIN."
   (b)   When delivered in writing, the required statement provided in
subdivision a of this section shall be included, for each debt that is beyond
the applicable statute of limitations, in at least 12 point type that is set
off in a sharply contrasting color from all other type on the permitted
communication, and shall be placed adjacent to the identifying information
about the amount claimed to be due or owed on such debt.
§ 2-192 Written Confirmation of Debt Payment Schedule or Settlement Agreement
With Consumer.
   (a)   The written confirmation of the debt payment schedule or settlement
agreement with a consumer that a debt collection agency is required to furnish
pursuant to § 20-493.1 (b) shall identify the originating creditor of the debt,
the debt collection agency, the employee of such agency who concluded the debt
payment schedule or agreement or the employee's direct supervisor, the name and
address of the consumer, the date on which the debt payment schedule or
agreement was made, the specific amount and due date of each payment, the
address where the payments are to be mailed or where payment may otherwise be
transmitted, any other terms of the debt payment schedule or agreement, and the
conditions for satisfying the outstanding balance.
   (b)   Whenever a debt collection agency agrees to a debt payment schedule or
a settlement agreement for debts originated by more than one creditor, such
agency shall clearly and separately identify on such written confirmation the
debt due to each originating creditor, the amount to be paid on each such debt,
and how the payment the consumer makes shall be applied to each debt covered by
the payment schedule or settlement agreement.
   (c)   Such written confirmation shall not include any terms or conditions
that were not specifically agreed to by the consumer.
   (d)   Upon a consumer's payment of a debt as stated in the debt payment
schedule or settlement agreement, the debt collection agency shall, within 21
calendar days after receipt of the final payment, send to the consumer a
written confirmation of the satisfaction of the indebtedness that identifies
the originating creditor and the original account number of the indebtedness.
§ 2-193 Records to be Maintained by Debt Collection Agency.
   (a)   Unless otherwise prohibited by federal, state or local law, a debt
collection agency shall maintain a separate file for each debt that the debt
collection agency attempts to collect from each consumer, in a manner that is
searchable or retrievable by the name, address and ZIP code of the consumer and
the creditor who originated the debt the agency is seeking to collect. The debt
collection agency shall maintain in each file the following records to document
its collection activities with respect to each consumer:
      (1)   A copy of all communications with the consumer.
      (2)   A record of each payment received from the consumer that states the
date of receipt, the method of payment and the debt to which the payment was
applied.
      (3)   A copy of the debt payment schedule and/or settlement agreement
reached with the consumer to pay the debt.
      (4)   With regard to any debt that the debt collection agency has
purchased, a record of the name and address of the entity from which the debt
collection agency purchased the debt, the date of the purchase and the amount
of the debt at the time of such purchase.
   (b)   A debt collection agency shall maintain the following records to
document its collection activities with respect to all consumers from whom it
seeks to collect a debt:
      (1)   A monthly log of all calls made to consumers, listing the date,
time and duration of each call, the number called and the name of the person
reached during the call.
      (2)   Recordings of complete conversations with all consumers or with a
randomly selected sample of at least 5% of all calls made or received by the
debt collection agency and a copy of contemporaneous notes of all conversations
with consumers. The method used for randomly selecting the recorded calls shall
be included in the file where the tape recordings are maintained.
      (3)   A record of all cases filed in court to collect a debt. Such record
shall include, for each case filed, the name of the consumer, the identity of
the originating creditor, the amount claimed to be due, the civil court index
number and the court and county where the case is filed, the date the case was
filed, the name of the process server who served process on the consumer, the
date, location and method of service of process, the affidavit of service that
was filed and the disposition for each case filed. Such record shall be filed
in a manner that is searchable or retrievable by the name, address and ZIP code
of the consumer and the creditors who originated the debts that the debt
collection agency is seeking to collect.
      (4)   The original copy of each contract with a process server for the
service of process, and copies of all documents involving traverse hearings
relating to cases filed by or on behalf of the debt collection agency. Such
records should be filed in a manner that is searchable by the name of the
process server.
      (5)   A record indicating the language preference of the consumer, except
where the debt collector is not aware of such preference despite reasonable
attempts to obtain it.
   (c)   A debt collection agency shall maintain the following records relating
to its operations and practices:
      (1)   A copy of all actions, proceedings or investigations by government
agencies that resulted in the revocation or suspension of a license, the
imposition of fines or restitution, a voluntary settlement, a court order, a
criminal guilty plea or a conviction.
      (2)   A copy of all policies, training manuals and guides for employees
or agents that direct, describe, suggest or promote how a collector is to
interact with consumers in the course of seeking to collect a debt.
      (3)   An annual report, in a form made publicly available on the
Department's website, identifying, by language, (i) the number of consumer
accounts on which an employee collected or attempted to collect a debt owed or
due or asserted to be owed or due in a language other than English; and (ii)
the number of employees that collected or attempted to collect on such accounts
in a language other than English.
   (d)   The records required to be maintained pursuant to this section shall
be retained for six years from the date the record was created by the debt
collection agency, a document was obtained or received by the debt collection
agency, a document was filed in a court action by the debt collection agency,
or a training manual or employee guide was superseded, except that recordings
of conversations with consumers shall be retained for one year after the date
of the last conversation recorded on each completed recording tape.
(Amended City Record 5/28/2020, eff. 6/27/2020)
§ 2-194 Call-Back Number Answered by Natural Person.
   (a)   The call-back number to be answered by a natural person, which a debt
collection agency is required to provide consumers pursuant to § 20-493.1(a)(i)
of the Administrative Code, shall be a number for a telephone for which a call
to that number shall be either (1) answered by a natural person qualified to
address consumer inquiries concerning communications the debt collection agency
has with consumers or (2) routed to such a natural person within 60 seconds
after the call is linked to the debt collection agency's telephone line for
such number and that shall be answered by such natural person within 60 seconds
after the call is routed.
   (b)   The required call-back number shall be answered by a natural person as
specified in subdivision (a) of this section during all times when a debt
collection agency conducts business with consumers.
Subchapter T: Public Dance Halls, Cabarets, and Catering Establishments
[Repealed]
§ 2-201 Charges for Food and Drink. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022)
§ 2-202 Accessibility to Authorities. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022)
§ 2-203 Entrances and Exits. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022)
§ 2-204 Community Board Input. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022)
§ 2-205 Security Guards. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022)
§ 2-206 Individual Designated to Receive Complaints. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022)
§ 2-207 Crowd Control. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022)
Subchapter U: Sightseeing Buses, Horse Drawn Cabs and Drivers
§ 2-211 Buses, Bus Owners and Drivers.
   (a)   All circulars, leaflets, posters, pamphlets or any other advertising
matter describing any trip, tour or excursion, except of buses exclusively
hired or engaged under a contract for a special trip or excursion, must receive
the approval of the commissioner prior to display or distribution to the
public.
   (b)   A schedule of rates of fare for each type of trip or tour, except
buses exclusively hired or engaged under a contract for a special trip or
excursion, shall be filed with the Department by the licensee.
   (c)   A schedule of rates charged for each trip or tour except of buses
exclusively hired or engaged under a contract for a special trip or excursion,
shall be conspicuously displayed at the starting point upon a sign attached to
the bus as near to the entrance as practicable, prior to and during the time
the passengers are entering such vehicle and shall remain thereon until the bus
departs. The figures on the sign must be at least 3 inches high and the sign
must be at least 13 inches long and 9 inches wide.
   (d)   The rate of fare (including all charges) for the particular tour about
to be conducted, except of buses exclusively hired or engaged under a contract
for a special trip or excursion, shall be set forth in a sign prominently
displayed in the forward part of the interior of the vehicle facing the
passengers and shall remain posted in its original position until the
termination of the tour. This sign shall be printed in letters and figures at
least three-quarters of an inch in height and shall read as follows:
 
"The fare for this tour (specifying tour number) including all expenses and
admissions is (insert price). Report all violations to the Department of
Consumer Affairs, (Insert the Department's current address and current
telephone number)".
 
   (e)   The owner, or his agent, shall deliver to all passengers upon payment
of fare, a printed receipt indicating the amount of fare paid, the description
or designated number of the trip and the time scheduled for the bus to leave
the starting point. This receipt shall become the property of the passenger and
shall not be collected or taken from him. Unless the bus leaves as scheduled,
the fare paid by the passenger must be refunded immediately upon request. This
provision shall not apply to buses exclusively hired or engaged under a
contract for a special trip or excursion.
   (f)   The owner, his agent, operator, sightseeing bus driver, sightseeing
bus guide or lecturer, shall not charge or attempt to charge, any passengers a
sum greater than set forth in the rate schedule. No additional charges shall be
made, solicited, collected or permitted to be made, for entering any building
or premises or for any purposes whatsoever, during the trip or tour or the
termination thereof.
   (g)   No vending of any articles of merchandise or literature to the
passengers shall be permitted in the bus.
   (h)   Each bus, except buses exclusively hired or engaged under a contract
for a special trip or excursion, shall have two conspicuously displayed signs,
showing the time the bus is scheduled to leave; one such sign shall be hung on
the windshield in the interior and the other on the outside at a conspicuous
point near the door where the passengers enter, which signs shall be removed
upon the departure of the bus. These signs shall read as follows:
"This bus leaves (specifying time) sharp or money refunded upon request."
   The figures on the signs must be at least 3 inches high and the signs must
be at least 13 inches long and 9 inches wide.
   (i)   No passengers, other than on buses exclusively hired or engaged under
a contract for a special trip or excursion, may be received or discharged at
the start or termination of any trip on any public highway within the city
except at locations designated by the commissioner. Where such stops are
permitted, they shall not be made for a period longer than is actually
necessary to expeditiously receive or discharge such passengers, but in no case
to exceed 10 minutes.
   (j)   A sightseeing bus, except buses exclusively hired or engaged under a
contract for a special trip or excursion, after leaving its starting point,
shall not receive additional passengers between such place of starting and its
ultimate destination, and shall operate on a prescribed route when one is so
designated.
   (k)   The owner or his agent shall keep a permanent daily record in a
separate book of each trip, tour or excursion made, or in which such owner acts
as intermediary. Such book shall be kept on the owner's premises and shall be
available at all times for inspection and shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   Date and time of the start and termination of the trip, tour or
excursion.
      (2)   Location of the starting point, and a description of the specific
trip, tour or excursion made.
      (3)   Name (and license number, if any) of the person, firm or
corporation who contracted or solicited the passengers or who contracted for
the specific trip, tour or excursion.
      (4)   The name and license number of the person acting as the guide or
lecturer during the trip, tour or excursion.
      (5)   The name and license number of the driver.
      (6)   The sightseeing bus license number of the vehicle.
      (7)   Whenever such owner or agent transfers any person, or persons, who
have contracted for any trip, tour or excursion, to another owner, or agent,
for the purpose of having the latter conduct such trip, tour or excursion, an
entry shall be made of the total number of passengers affected and the name of
the person, firm or corporation receiving them. A record shall not be required
of special trips or excursions in buses exclusively hired or engaged under a
contract for such a purpose.
   (l)   Owners shall keep accurate books and records of
      (1)   Receipts from operations.
      (2)   Payments from drivers.
      (3)   Corporation tax.
      (4)   Social Security Tax.
      (5)   Disbursements and receipts.
      (6)   Mileage run.
      (7)   Accidents incurred and Public Liability claims paid.
      (8)   Any information that this department may prescribe from time to
time by written notification to the licensee relating to the licensee and his
sightseeing bus operations. Such books and records shall be available at all
times for inspection.
   (m)   An owner shall not permit any one driver to operate a vehicle or
vehicles more than 12 hours in any continuous 24 hour period, except the driver
of a bus exclusively hired or engaged for a special trip or excursion.
   (n)   Each vehicle and its equipment shall be inspected at least once each
day.
   (o)   Each vehicle must be kept clean, sanitary, and in good mechanical
condition, with brakes, lights and signaling devices in good working order.
   (p)   Each vehicle shall be equipped with efficient windshield wipers.
   (q)   Any person employed by the owner to operate a sightseeing bus shall
possess a New York State chauffeur's license which permits the person to
operate a sightseeing bus and a sightseeing bus driver's license.
   (r)   A sightseeing bus driver must be
      (1)   A citizen of the United States or a declarant.
      (2)   At least 21 years of age.
      (3)   Of sound physique, with good eyesight, and not subject to epilepsy,
vertigo, heart trouble, or any other infirmity of body or mind, which might
render him unfit for the safe operation of the vehicle.
      (4)   Able to speak, read or write the English language.
      (5)   Licensed as a chauffeur or operator for at least 3 years.
      (6)   The holder of a New York State chauffeur's license.
      (7)   Be clean in dress and not addicted to the use of drugs or
intoxicating liquors.
   (s)   (1) Examination of drivers. Each applicant for a driver's license
under the provisions of this section shall be examined by a person or persons
designated by the Commissioner as to his physical condition, as to his
knowledge of the provisions hereof, the traffic regulations, and the geography
of the city, and if the result of the examination or examinations are
unsatisfactory, he shall be refused a license.
      (2)   Photograph of driver. Each applicant for a driver's license must
file with his application two recent photographs of himself, 1 1/2 inches
square, one of which shall be attached to the license when issued; the other
shall be filed with the application.
   (t)   Sightseeing bus drivers shall thoroughly search the interior of the
vehicle after termination of each trip for any article left or lost in the
vehicle. The driver shall immediately take any such property to the
stationhouse in the police precinct where the passenger or passengers were
discharged.
   (u)   A sightseeing bus driver shall report all accidents as required by the
Vehicle and Traffic Law and report all accidents to the owner.
   (v)   A sightseeing bus driver shall not smoke while the vehicle is carrying
passengers.
   (w)   A sightseeing bus driver shall not operate the vehicle for more than
12 hours of any continuous 24 hour period. This provision shall not apply to
the driver of a bus exclusively hired or engaged for a special trip or
excursion.
   (x)   A sightseeing bus driver shall not solicit or recommend patronage for
restaurants, nightclubs, cabarets, dance halls, hotels, or like places, nor
solicit for or recommend any place maintained in violation of law.
   (y)   A sightseeing bus driver shall shut off the engine in the vehicle when
the vehicle is parked. A sightseeing bus driver shall not run the engine while
the vehicle is standing unless it is necessary to warm the engine in cold
weather.
   (z)   A sightseeing bus driver shall keep the interior of the vehicle clean.
   (aa)   A sightseeing bus driver shall be required to inspect the vehicle to
determine that the vehicle is mechanically fit, with brakes, lights and
signaling devices in good working order.
   (bb)   A sightseeing bus driver shall carry his New York State chauffeur's
license and his license as a sightseeing bus driver at all times while engaged
in his employment.
   (cc)   A sightseeing bus driver shall not abandon his vehicle nor permit
another to drive it for him.
§ 2-211.1 Records Pertaining to the Operation and Maintenance of Sightseeing
Busses.
   (a)   The owner of each vehicle licensed to operate as a sightseeing bus
shall maintain the following records pertaining to the operation and
maintenance of each such bus:
      (1)   Records containing the following information about each of the
specified components of each sightseeing bus:
         (i)   The total time in service of each licensed bus, each major
component of the drive train, and all pollution control equipment required to
be installed on such vehicle;
         (ii)   The current status of "life-limited" parts of the drive train
and pollution control equipment installed in a vehicle. All parts on the
vehicle that are not "life-limited" by the original equipment manufacturer
shall be deemed "on-condition" replacement;
         (iii)   The time since the last overhaul of all items installed in the
vehicle which are required to be overhauled on a specified time basis; and
         (iv)   The current inspection status of the vehicle, drive train and
pollution control equipment, including the time since the last inspection
required by the inspection program under which the vehicle and its components
are maintained.
      (2)   Records of the maintenance, preventative maintenance, and
alterations, and records of the scheduled inspections to be performed pursuant
to the manufacturer's recommended inspection and maintenance schedule for the
vehicle, drive train and pollution control equipment. Such records shall
include:
         (i)   A description of the work performed.
         (ii)   The date of completion of the work performed.
         (iii)   The signature and printed name and employee identification
number of the person approving the satisfactory completion of the required
maintenance and/or inspection.
      (3)   A copy of the manufacturer's written recommendations prescribing
the schedule for the maintenance to be performed, and for conducting periodic
inspections and performing periodic maintenance and repair to keep the vehicle,
drive train and pollution control equipment operating at normal operating
efficiency.
   (b)   The records for each licensed sightseeing bus shall be kept in a
paginated volume, with the vehicle identification number and the license number
included on the first page. All entries shall be dated and included in
chronological order.
   (c)   The required records shall be retained for at least three years after
earliest entry in the record on each bus. The records shall be kept at the
office of business which holds the license to the bus, and shall be made
available on demand to personnel of the Department at such office, or shall be
produced at the office of the Department within five days after demand
therefore is received by such owner.
§ 2-212 Horse Drawn Cabs, Owners and Drivers.
   (a)   A current horse drawn cab license plate shall be permanently and
conspicuously affixed to the side of each vehicle and shall be sealed thereon
by the Commissioner or his designee.
   (b)   (1)   A schedule of permitted rates shall be conspicuously displayed
at all times upon two signs, which shall be permanently affixed to the vehicle.
These signs shall be at least six (6) inches by eight (8) inches and shall be
attached to or painted on each exterior side of the vehicle. Signs must read as
follows:
   "MAXIMUM RATE
   $50 first 20 minutes or fraction thereof;
   $20.00 each additional 10 minutes.
   Rates per trip – not per person.
   Licensed by New York City Department of Consumer Affairs
   (Insert the Department's current address and CALL 311)"
      (2)   The words "MAXIMUM RATE" and the dollar amounts must be written
with characters at least 3/4 inch in height. The words "CALL 311" shall be
written in letters at least 1/2 inch in height. All other characters must be a
minimum of 1/4 inch in height. Signs shall be obtained by the licensee. The
design of the signs must be submitted for approval to the Department of
Consumer Affairs prior to attachment to or painting on the vehicle. The signs
shall not be defaced or obscured in any manner, including complete or partial
concealment by a horse blanket or otherwise. No direct or indirect charge of
any kind shall be made to a passenger for any reason other than the charges
permitted by law.
      (3)   The maximum rate authorized to be charged shall be adjusted April
30 every third year following April 2010 to reflect the change in the
seasonally adjusted consumer price index published by the U.S. Department of
Labor for all urban consumers for December of the year that the maximum rate is
to be adjusted. The Department shall publish the adjusted rate on its web site
within 15 days thereafter.
   (c)   A card frame shall be permanently and conspicuously affixed to the
vehicle at the forward part of the passenger compartment facing the passenger's
seat. Such card frame shall contain, at all times, the current horse drawn cab
driver's license and Departmental inspection card.
   (d)   Each horse drawn cab, its harness and traces shall be clean, in good
working condition, and shall be inspected at least once daily by the licensee.
   (e)   Each vehicle shall be available for inspection by the Department of
Consumer Affairs as required by § 20-378 of the Administrative Code.
   (f)   Each licensee shall make repairs and alterations to the horse drawn
cab as may be required by the Department of Consumer Affairs or as is necessary
to maintain proper standards of comfort and safety.
   (g)   Each carriage horse shall be plainly and conspicuously marked by a
different number, 3/4 of an inch high, permanently branded onto its left front
hoof.
   (h)   All carriage horses shall be treated in a humane manner. An owner
shall be responsible for the humane care and treatment of his carriage horses
when they are under his direct supervision and control. At all other times, the
owner is required to take all necessary and reasonable steps to ensure the
humane care and treatment of his horses while under the direct supervision and
control of a licensed driver.
   (i)   Each owner shall maintain complete, accurate and permanent,
consecutive daily records in a bound volume, which volume shall be kept at the
owner's premises. Such records shall be available at all times for inspection
at the Department by the Commissioner or his designee, and shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   Receipts from drivers;
      (2)   Payments to drivers;
      (3)   Corporation tax;
      (4)   Disbursements and receipts;
      (5)   A record of accidents incurred and public liability claims paid;
      (6)   Any additional information that the Department of Consumer Affairs
may require by written notification to the owner relating to his horse drawn
cab.
   (j)   Each owner shall maintain a record, in type or ink, of the
identification number branded on each horse together with a description of the
horse. Such record shall be available at all times for inspection at the
Department by the Commissioner or his designee.
   (k)   Each owner shall maintain for inspection at the Department, a
consecutive daily record, in a bound volume, in type or in ink, of the
movements of each horse drawn cab and horse, as follows:
      (1)   Driver's name;
      (2)   Driver's identification;
      (3)   Horse's identification number;
      (4)   Vehicle license plate number;
      (5)   Exact time of leaving the stable;
      (6)   Exact time of return to the stable.
   (l)   No owner shall permit any one horse to be in harness more than 10
hours in any continuous 24 hour period. If more than one driver is assigned to
the same horse in any continuous 24 hour period, the records shall indicate the
time each driver and horse left and returned to the stable.
   (m)   Each applicant for a horse drawn cab driver's license must meet the
following requirements:
      (1)   Be at least 18 years of age;
      (2)   Have good eyesight, be in good physical condition and not be
subject to any infirmity of body or mind which might render him unfit for the
safe operation of the vehicle; (3) Be able to sufficiently speak and write the
English language to carry out the duties required of a licensed horse drawn cab
driver;
      (4)   Be clean in dress and not addicted to the use of drugs or
intoxicating liquors;
      (5)   Be a person of good character.
   (n)   Each applicant for a horse drawn cab driver's license shall be
required to satisfactorily establish that he knows:
      (1)   The applicable Department of Consumer Affairs regulations:
      (2)   The applicable traffic regulations;
      (3)   The geography of Central Park and its ingress and egress routes;
      (4)   And has mastered the proper care, handling and driving of carriage
horses.
   (o)   Each applicant for a horse drawn cab driver's license must apprentice
himself to a fully-qualified, licensed horse drawn cab driver for five days.
Such apprenticeship requires the applicant to:
      (1)   Learn the proper method of fitting a harness to a horse and
hitching and unhitching a properly harnessed horse to a carriage;
      (2)   Ride with a licensed driver for the first three days to observe
proper handling and driving of a horse drawn cab; and
      (3)   Drive the horse drawn cab under the licensed driver's supervision
for the last two days of the apprenticeship. Upon completion of such
apprenticeship, each applicant shall file with the Department a sworn statement
from the licensed horse drawn cab driver that the applicant has satisfactorily
completed his apprenticeship.
   (p)   Each horse drawn cab driver shall:
      (1)   Keep the interior of the vehicle clean;
      (2)   Inspect the vehicle and its equipment at least once daily to
determine that it is mechanically fit and in good working order;
      (3)   Report all accidents as required by the Vehicle and Traffic Law and
report each accident to the owner;
      (4)   Conspicuously post his current license in the card frame attached
to the vehicle;
      (5)   Upon request of any passenger, after payment of fare, deliver a
written receipt indicating the amount of fare paid. This receipt shall become
the property of the passenger and shall not be collected or taken from him;
      (6)   Thoroughly search the interior of the vehicle after termination of
each trip for any article left or lost in the vehicle. Any such property shall
be immediately taken to the stationhouse in the police precinct where the
passenger or passengers were discharged;
      (7)   At all times be responsible for the proper and humane care and
treatment of the horse under his direct supervision and control.
   (q)   No horse drawn cab driver shall:
      (1)   Solicit or recommend patronage for restaurants, nightclubs,
cabarets, dance halls, hotels, or similar places, nor solicit for or recommend
any place maintained in violation of law;
      (2)   Sell or offer for sale articles or merchandise or literature to the
passengers in his vehicle;
      (3)   Operate the vehicle for more than 12 hours within any 20 hour
period.
      (4)   After leaving the starting point, receive additional passengers
between such starting point and the ultimate destination, or operate on any
route other than the prescribed route, when such a route is designated;
      (5)   Abandon his vehicle, permit another to drive it for him, except an
apprentice, or permit any passenger to ride on the driver's seat;
      (6)   Operate the vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating
liquors or drugs;
      (7)   Carry more than four passengers in the vehicle at any one time.
   (r)   Each horse drawn cab driver shall maintain a daily log listing the
time each fare commenced, the route travelled, the number of passengers, the
time each fare ended and the amount charged. At the end of each day, the log
shall be given to the owner to be retained and made available at all times for
inspection at the Department by the Commissioner or his designee.
   (s)   Each horse drawn cab that is driven upon a public highway, path or
street from one half hour after sunset to one half hour before sunrise and at
such other times as visibility for a distance of three hundred fifty feet ahead
of such vehicle is not clear, shall display:
      (1)   at least two lighted lamps on the front of the vehicle, one on each
side, having light sources of equal power and visible from the front for a
distance of at least three hundred fifty feet;
      (2)   at least one lighted lamp on the rear, located between the center
and the left side of the vehicle, which shall display a red or amber fixed or
flashing light visible from the rear for a distance of at least five hundred
feet, and at least one lighted lamp affixed on the rear axle near where the
horse drawn cab license is affixed; and
      (3)   reflective material upon the shafts of the vehicle or other parts
thereof which shall normally parallel the body, head or legs of the horse
pulling such vehicle.
Subchapter V: Home Improvement Business
§ 2-220 Proof of Compliance with Escrow Account Requirements of State Lien Law.
   (a)   As used in this section, the term "financial institution" means a
bank, trust company, savings bank, or state or federal savings and loan
association located in this state.
   (b)   Every person who applies for a license or for a renewal for a license
to solicit, canvass, sell, perform or obtain a home improvement contract as a
contractor on or after June 25, 1996 shall submit with the application for such
license a true copy of either:
      (1)   An account statement from a financial institution where the
applicant has established an escrow account to comply with the requirements of
paragraph (a) of subdivision 4 of § 71-a of the lien law and a notarized
statement sworn to by the applicant in which the applicant identifies the
account for which the statement is issued by the name and address of the
financial institution that holds the account, the name of the account holder,
which shall be the same as the name of the applicant, and the account number
provided by the financial institution, and the applicant affirms that it is the
account that has been established for the purpose of complying with such
requirements of the state lien law. The account statement filed with the
application shall be a statement issued by the financial institution within the
preceding 60 days of the date of the application; or
      (2)   A commitment from a surety company licensed in this state under
which such surety company is irrevocably bound to issue to the applicant during
the term of the applicant's license a bond or contract of indemnity if the
applicant elects to post a bond or contract of indemnity with an owner pursuant
to paragraph b of subdivision 4 of § 71-a of the lien law, or a commitment from
a financial institution under which such institution is irrevocably bound to
issue to the applicant during the term of the applicant's license an
irrevocable letter of credit if the applicant elects to furnish a letter of
credit to an owner pursuant to paragraph b of subdivision 4 of § 71-a of the
lien law.
§ 2-221 Content and Cancellation of Contract.
   (a)   Every agreement to perform a home improvement shall be evidenced by a
written contract signed by all the parties to the contract and each home
improvement contractor shall furnish to the buyer a fully completed legible
copy of the entire home improvement contract at the time of its execution and
before any work is done. The home improvement contract shall be legible, in
plain English and any other language, that was principally used in the oral
sales presentation. The contract shall contain all of the following:
      (1)   the date of the transaction, the contractor's name, office address,
telephone number and license number.
      (2)   the approximate dates, or estimated dates, when the work will begin
and be substantially completed, including a statement of any contingencies that
would materially change the approximate or estimated completion date. In
addition to the estimated or approximate dates, the contract shall also specify
whether or not the contractor and the owner have determined a definite
completion date to be of the essence.
      (3)   a description of the work to be performed, the materials to be
provided to the owner, including make, model number or any other identifying
information, and the agreed upon consideration for the work and materials.
      (4)   a notice to the owner purchasing the home improvement that the
contractor or subcontractor who performs on the contract and is not paid may
have a claim against the owner which may be enforced against the property in
accordance with the applicable lien laws.
      (5)   a notice to the owner purchasing the home improvement that the home
improvement contractor is legally required to deposit all payments received
prior to completion in accordance with subdivision four of § 71-a of the New
York State Lien and that, in lieu of such deposit, the home improvement
contractor may post a bond or contract of indemnity with the owner guaranteeing
the return or proper application of such payments to the purposes of the
contract.
      (6)   if the contract provides for one or more progress payments to be
paid to the home improvement contractor by the owner before substantial
completion of the work, a schedule of such progress payments showing the amount
of each payment, as a sum in dollars and cents, and specifically identifying
the state of completion of the work or services to be performed, including any
materials to be supplied before each such progress payment is due. The amount
of any such progress payments shall bear a reasonable relationship to the
amount of work to be performed, materials to be purchased, or expenses for
which the contractor would be obligated at the time of payment.
      (7)   any advertised representation including, but not limited to, any
charge, guaranty, or warranty, shall be clearly stated and made a part of the
home improvement contract.
      (8)   a clause wherein the contractor agrees to furnish the buyer with a
certificate of Workers' Compensation Insurance prior to commencement of work
pursuant to the contract.
      (9)   a clause wherein the contractor agrees to procure all permits
required by local law.
      (10)   in immediate proximity to the space reserved in the contract for
the signature of the buyer, in bold face type a minimum size of 10 points, a
statement in the following form:
      YOU, THE BUYER, MAY CANCEL THIS TRANSACTION AT ANY TIME PRIOR TO MIDNIGHT
OF THE THIRD BUSINESS DAY AFTER THE DATE OF THIS TRANSACTION. SEE THE ATTACHED
NOTICE OF CANCELLATION FORM FOR AN EXPLANATION OF THIS RIGHT.
   (b)   The contractor shall furnish to the buyer at the time s/he signs the
home improvement contract a separate completed form in duplicate captioned
"NOTICE OF CANCELLATION" which shall be attached to the contract and easily
detachable, and which shall contain in ten point bold face type, in English and
in any other language used in the contract; the name and address of the
contractor, the date of the transaction, the date until which buyer may give
notice of cancellation, and the following statement:
NOTICE OF CANCELLATION
(enter date of transaction)
______________________
(Date)
   YOU MAY CANCEL THIS TRANSACTION, WITHOUT ANY PENALTY OR OBLIGATION, WITHIN
THREE BUSINESS DAYS FROM THE ABOVE DATE.
   IF YOU CANCEL, ANY PROPERTY TRADED IN, ANY PAYMENTS MADE BY YOU UNDER THE
CONTRACT OR SALE, AND ANY NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENT EXECUTED BY YOU WILL BE
RETURNED WITHIN 10 BUSINESS DAYS FOLLOWING RECEIPT BY THE SELLER OF YOUR
CANCELLATION NOTICE, AND ANY SECURITY INTEREST ARISING OUT OF THE TRANSACTION
WILL BE CANCELLED.
   IF YOU CANCEL, YOU MUST MAKE AVAILABLE TO THE SELLER AT YOUR RESIDENCE, IN
SUBSTANTIALLY AS GOOD CONDITION AS WHEN RECEIVED, ANY GOODS DELIVERED TO YOU
UNDER THIS CONTRACT OR SALE; OR YOU MAY IF YOU WISH, COMPLY WITH THE
INSTRUCTIONS OF THE SELLER REGARDING THE RETURN SHIPMENT OF THE GOODS AT THE
SELLER'S EXPENSE AND RISK.
   IF YOU DO MAKE THE GOODS AVAILABLE TO THE SELLER AND THE SELLER DOES NOT
PICK THEM UP WITHIN 20 DAYS OF THE DATE OF YOUR NOTICE OF CANCELLATION, YOU MAY
RETAIN OR DISPOSE OF THE GOODS WITHOUT ANY FURTHER OBLIGATION. IF YOU FAIL TO
MAKE THE GOODS AVAILABLE TO THE SELLER, OR IF YOU AGREE TO RETURN THE GOODS TO
THE SELLER AND FAIL TO DO SO, THEN YOU REMAIN LIABLE FOR PERFORMANCE OF ALL
OBLIGATIONS UNDER THE CONTRACT.
   TO CANCEL THIS TRANSACTION, MAIL OR DELIVER A SIGNED AND DATED COPY OF THIS
CANCELLATION NOTICE OR ANY OTHER WRITTEN NOTICE, OR SEND A TELEGRAM, TO (Name
of seller), AT (address of seller's place of business) NOT LATER THAN MIDNIGHT
OF
______________________.
(Date)
I HEREBY CANCEL THIS TRANSACTION.
______________________
(Date)
______________________
(Buyer's Signature)
   (c)   Cancellation occurs when written notice of cancellation is given to
the home improvement contractor. Notice of cancellation, if given by mail,
shall be deemed given when deposited in a mailbox properly addressed and
postage prepaid. Notice of cancellation shall be sufficient if it indicates the
intention of the owner not to be bound.
   (d)   The contractor shall inform the buyer orally, at the time s/he signs
the contract, of his or her right to cancel.
   (e)   The contractor shall not misrepresent in any manner the buyer's right
to cancel.
   (f)   Until the contractor has complied with 6 RCNY §§
2-221(a)(10) and
2-221(b) the buyer or any other person obligated for any part of the contract
price may cancel the home improvement contract by notifying the contractor at
any time, in any manner and by any means of his or her intention to cancel. The
period prescribed by 6 RCNY §
2-221(a)(10) shall begin to run from the time the contractor complies with 6
RCNY §§
2-221(a)(10) and
2-221(b).
   (g)   The buyer's notice of cancellation to the contractor need not take the
form prescribed and shall be sufficient if it indicates the buyer's intention
not to be bound.
   (h)   The contractor shall not fail or refuse to honor any valid notice of
cancellation by the buyer and within ten business days after the receipt of
such notice, the contractor shall
      (1)   refund all payments made under the contract;
      (2)   cancel and return any negotiable instrument executed by the buyer
in connection with the contract;
      (3)   take any action necessary or appropriate to terminate promptly any
security interest created in the transaction; and
      (4)   within ten business days of receipt of the buyer's notice of
cancellation the contractor shall notify the buyer whether the contractor
intends to repossess or to abandon any shipped or delivered materials.
   (i)   The contractor shall not negotiate, sell, transfer or assign any note
or other evidence of indebtedness to a finance company or other third party
prior to midnight of the fifth business day following the day the contract was
signed.
   (j)   A home improvement contract may not be cancelled if the buyer
initiated the contract and requested commencement of work without delay because
of an emergency, provided that the buyer furnishes the contractor with a
separate dated and signed personal statement in the buyer's handwriting
describing the situation requiring immediate remedy and expressly acknowledging
and waiving the right to cancel the contract within three business days.
   (k)   For purposes of this section a business day is any calendar day except
Sunday, or the following business holidays: New Year's Day, Washington's
Birthday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veteran's
Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day.
(Amended City Record 12/1/2020, eff. 12/31/2020)
§ 2-222 Advertising and Selling Practices.
   (a)   License number. All advertising and sales literature must contain the
license number of the contractor. For purposes of this section, an alphabetical
listing in a telephone directory shall not be considered advertising.
   (b)   Prices and illustrations. Prices and descriptions of articles
advertised shall be so placed in relation to any illustration that they will
not be deceptive or misleading. An advertisement shall not be so designed as to
give the impression that the price or terms of the featured merchandise apply
to other merchandise in the advertisement when such is not the fact. An
advertisement shall not be used which features merchandise at a price or terms
boldly displayed, together with illustrations of higher-priced merchandise, so
arranged as to give the impression that the lower price or more favorable terms
apply to the higher priced merchandise, when such is not the fact.
   (c)   Headlines. Headings shall be free from exaggeration or deception. For
example, a heading which refers to a different make, brand, grade, or quality
than the item or items illustrated or listed immediately, therewith shall not
be used. Headings and captions shall conform with the descriptions in the text.
   (d)   "Savings" not a selling price. A savings claim shall not be expressed
in any manner which implies that the amount specified is the selling price of
the merchandise.
   (e)   Descriptions and illustrations of advertised items or offers shall
accurately portray the products to be sold as to size, quality, quantity and
design.
   (f)   Materials. Any description in advertising or selling of materials to
be furnished shall be accurate and there shall be no statement or implication
that material will be of a particular type when such is not in fact the case.
   (g)   Advertised price, limitations. When a price or specific credit terms
are featured in an advertisement, the advertisement shall accurately describe
what is being offered at that price or terms (e.g. Where an item such as "10
feet by 16 feet Extension," "10 feet by 15 feet Basement," etc., is featured at
a price or specific credit terms, this shall mean that a finished extension,
basement, etc., will be built at the advertised price or terms). Any
limitations or conditions on what will be supplied at the featured price or on
credit terms shall be clearly and conspicuously stated in immediate conjunction
with the featured statement (e.g.: "14 feet by 21 feet Frame Garage-Unpainted,"
"10 feet by 15 feet Extension – Shell Only.").
   (h)   Installation charge. If installation is extra, the advertising shall
clearly and conspicuously disclose the fact in immediate conjunction therewith.
For example:
"Installation extra"
"Plus installation"
"Installation at extra cost"
   (i)   Accessories and extra charge. If the price advertised does not include
all of the accessories which either appear in the advertisement, or which are
necessary to effect proper installation and the use of the item (such as
hardware, panels, frames, etc.), the advertisement shall state that fact
clearly and prominently in dose conjunction with the advertised price. Extra
charges shall not be used as a device to disguise the actual selling price of
merchandise.
   (j)   Delivery charges. If an extra charge is required to make delivery of
any advertised home improvement or part thereof, such requirement shall be
clearly and conspicuously stated in the advertisement.
   (k)   "Factory to you," "No dealers." General statements such as "Factory to
You," "Direct to You," "Buy from Manufacturer," "Save the Middleman's Profit,"
or phrases of similar meaning shall not be used unless the advertiser is
actually the maker or producer of the merchandise advertised or offered for
sale.
   (l)   Guaranty or warranty. If reference is made to a guaranty or warranty
or the word "guaranteed" or "warranteed" is used, the terms, conditions, and
period of time covered thereby shall be clearly and conspicuously disclosed in
the advertisement. The terms shall indicate whether "labor and material only,"
"repair," "replacement," or "full (partial) refund" is offered. Any limitations
shall be disclosed in the advertisement.
   (m)   Reasonable fulfillment, "Lifetime." Guaranty shall not extend for a
period of time beyond the normal life of the item or service, or in the case of
guarantees against defective materials and workmanship, beyond the time within
which defective materials and workmanship are likely to show up. "Lifetime" and
other long-term guarantees shall not be made.
   (n)   Credit and credit charges. All statement and claims regarding
installment buying plans, and finance, credit service, carrying or service
charges, etc., including references to down-payments and amounts and frequency
of payments, shall be accurate and dearly understandable, and made in good
faith.
   (o)   Credit terms. Where any repayment price is offered, it shall be stated
in specific amounts per month.
   (p)   Price reductions. Claims which state or imply a price reduction or
savings from the advertiser's previous price, whether as a dollar amount or
percentage, must be based on the advertiser's usual and customary selling price
for the item in the normal and regular course of his or her business. Such
claims shall not be based on isolated or infrequent sales, on fictitious list
prices, or by "guesstimating."
   (q)   Phrases featuring a sale with a stated time limitation (e.g. "3-Day
Sale") shall be used only when the advertised items are to be taken off sale
and will revert to a higher price for a reasonable length of time, immediately
following the sale.
   (r)   Claimed results. Claims as to performance, protection, results which
will be obtained by or realized from a particular home improvement product or
service shall be based on known and provable facts. Extravagant claims such as
"cuts fuel bill 30 percent," "outlasts . . ." the accuracy of which is
dependent on factors over which the advertiser or seller has no control, should
not be used.
   (s)   Model home and referral offers. No advertisement shall promise to any
buyer or prospective buyer that his or her dwelling will serve as a so-called
"model home" or "advertising job," or other similar representation, wherein the
buyer or prospective buyer is led into believing that s/he will be paid a
commission or other compensation for any sale made in the vicinity or within
any specified distance from his or her home, or that the cost of the purchase
of any home improvement product or service will thereby be reduced or fully
paid.
   (t)   Insured and bonded. Where claims of being insured or bonded appear in
an advertisement, the nature of the insurance or bond shall be distinctly
stated in the advertisement.
   (u)   Pricing. If a price ("per square foot," or other basis) is quoted in
the advertising of residential aluminum siding which does not include all costs
for labor, parts, and accessories for the proper functioning and appearance of
such installed product (e.g. starter-strips, door and window trim, window head
flashing, back-up pieces and corner pieces), it shall be clearly and
conspicuously qualified in conjunction therewith by some explanatory statement,
such as "Panels Only – Necessary Accessories at Extra Cost."
§ 2-223 Prime Contractor's Duties and Responsibilities.
   (a)   In the performance of any Home Improvement Contract it shall be the
non-delegable duty and obligation of the prime contractor to secure or see to
the securing of each and every permit, license, certificate of occupancy,
special exception or the like necessary to the proper completion of such
contract in accordance with applicable state or local building laws.
   (b)   Each home improvement contractor shall maintain books of account,
copies of all contracts with buyers, and other such records as shall properly
and completely reflect all transactions involving the home improvement
business. These records shall be maintained for six years or the length of time
of the contract guarantee, whichever is longer.
   (c)   A home improvement contractor must treat all funds received from a
customer pursuant to a home improvement contract as trust funds to be applied
solely to the payment of expenses directly related to the home improvement.
Such funds may not be applied to the payment of expenses unrelated to the home
improvement unless and until the home improvement is completed and all the
expenses for direct labor, material and subcontractors related thereto have
been paid by the contractor.
   (d)   Except as provided in 6 RCNY §
2-221(j), the home improvement contractor shall not perform or cause or permit
the performance of any of the following actions until after the three day
cancellation period has expired and s/he is reasonably satisfied that the
customer has not exercised his or her right of cancellation:
      (1)   Disburse any money other than in escrow;
      (2)   Make any physical changes in the property of the customer;
      (3)   Perform any work or service for the buyer; or
      (4)   Make any deliveries to the residence of the customer if the
creditor has retained or will acquire a security interest other than one
arising by operation of law.
§ 2-224 Home Improvement Business Trust Fund.
   (a)   Establishment. A Home Improvement Business Trust Fund (hereinafter,
"the Fund") is hereby established to provide for the payment of outstanding
awards to aggrieved consumers and fines owed to the Department. The Fund shall
be administered by the Comptroller of the City of New York pursuant to Section
93(h) of the Charter.
   (b)   Participation in the Fund.
      (1)   Home improvement licensees may elect to participate in the Fund in
lieu of furnishing a bond as required by the Home Improvement Business Law Bond
Requirement which was imposed by the Commissioner on February 1, 1983, pursuant
to § 20-115 of the New York City Administrative Code. The Commissioner hereby
waives said bond requirement, which appears as 6 RCNY §
2-225, for any licensee who elects to participate in the Fund pursuant to the
provisions of this section.
      (2)   Any home improvement license applicant who elects to participate in
the Fund must submit to the Department a check in the amount of two hundred
dollars, made payable to the New York City Department of Consumer and Worker
Protection, before a license will be issued. Any bonded licensee may elect to
participate in the Fund in lieu of continued compliance with the Bond
Requirement of 6 RCNY §
2-225 by causing the Department to receive a check in the amount of two hundred
dollars, made payable to the New York City Department of Consumer and Worker
Protection, prior to the expiration or cancellation date of the licensee's
bond. All fund participants who elect to continue to participate in the Fund
shall contribute two hundred dollars upon each renewal of their license.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, fund participants who elect to continue to
participate in the Fund will not be required to contribute upon renewal of
their license if, on the first of July the previous year, the Fund contains a
balance of more than two million dollars. Any fund participant who elects not
to continue to participate in the Fund at the time of renewal shall furnish a
bond in accordance with paragraph four of this subdivision and 6 RCNY §
2-225 before the renewal license will be issued. Failure to comply with this
paragraph shall constitute a failure to comply with a lawful demand or
requirement lawfully made by the Commissioner for purposes of § 20-392 of the
Administrative Code.
      (3)   The Commissioner may, from time to time, amend this section to
require such additional contributions by participants in the Fund as the
Commissioner determines to be necessary to maintain an amount in the Fund which
is adequate to fulfill its purposes and to counteract depletion of the Fund
resulting from payments made out of the Fund pursuant to 6 RCNY §
2-224(c).
      (4)   Fund participants may discontinue their participation in the Fund
at any time by filing a bond pursuant to the Home Improvement Business Law Bond
Requirement. No participant will be entitled to a refund of any monies
contributed to the Fund unless the Fund is dissolved by the Commissioner. All
such refunds will be disbursed in accordance with regulations promulgated by
the Commissioner and in effect at the time of such dissolution.
      (5)   Participation in the Fund does not relieve a licensee of any
obligation to pay awards, fines, judgments, or arbitration awards rendered
against a licensee, or agreed upon settlement amounts. If the Fund is invaded
to pay an award, fine, judgment, or arbitration award rendered against such
contractor, or a settlement amount pursuant to the provisions herein, no
license shall be issued or reinstated to such contractor or to any home
improvement business in which such contractor is an officer, shareholder,
partner or principal, unless the amount(s) paid out of the Fund on behalf of
such contractor is reimbursed by such contractor in full. If the Fund is
invaded pursuant to the provisions herein to pay an award, fine, judgment, or
arbitration award rendered against a contractor, or a settlement amount, the
Department may suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew such contractor's license
unless the amount(s) paid out of the Fund on behalf of such contractor is
reimbursed by such contractor in full.
      (6)   In the event that a home improvement contractor's license is
suspended, revoked, surrendered or the contractor fails to renew its license
and the Fund invaded to pay an award, fine, judgment, or arbitration award
rendered against such contractor, or a settlement amount pursuant to the
provisions herein, the Commissioner or his or her designee shall have
discretion to exclude such contractor, or any home improvement business in
which such contractor is a principal, from future participation in the Fund.
The Commissioner or his or her designee may, in his or her discretion, require
such home improvement contractor to comply with the Home Improvement Business
Law Bond Requirement.
   (c)   Invasion of the Fund.
      (1)   The Commissioner may require that disbursements be made from the
Fund to pay outstanding amounts to consumers and Departmental fines when:
         (i)   the Department has (a) issued or received an administrative
hearing decision that found that a home improvement contractor violated a law,
ordinance or regulation enforced by the Department; (b) settled a summons or
petition that charged a home improvement contractor with the violation of a
law, ordinance, or regulation enforced by the Department; (c) resolved a
consumer complaint filed against a home improvement contractor with a
settlement agreement; or (d) received written notice of a judgment, arbitration
award, or settlement agreement against a home improvement contractor that
relates to activities for which a license is required; and
         (ii)   the Department has demanded that the home improvement
contractor pay an amount in restitution to a consumer as set forth in the
decision, settlement, judgment, or arbitration award required by subparagraph
(i) of this paragraph; and
         (iii)   the contractor has failed to pay such amount in restitution to
a consumer, a Departmental award or fine or satisfy a judgment or arbitration
award, within 30 days of the date of the Department's demand for payment or as
required by the terms of the settlement agreement; and
         (iv)   Notwithstanding the above, if a contractor has filed a petition
for relief under any chapter of Title 11 of the United States Code, the
Department may waive the requirements set forth in subparagraphs (ii) or (iii)
of this paragraph and (1) require disbursements to be made from the Fund.
      (2)   Disbursements will not be made from the Fund to pay an award, fine,
judgment, arbitration award, or settlement amount that is rendered against: a
licensee who has furnished a bond, pursuant to the Bond Requirement of 6 RCNY §
2-225; or home improvement contractor who was never licensed by the Department
or a participant in the Fund.
      (3)   Disbursements from the Fund will be made at the discretion of the
Commissioner or his or her designee and shall be limited to no more than forty
thousand dollars for all awards, fines, judgments, arbitration awards, or
settlement amounts, arising out of a single home improvement contract.
      (4)   The Commissioner or his or her designee may order that partial
payment of awards, fines, judgments, arbitration awards, or settlement amounts
be made from the Fund.
      (5)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed to limit the rights and
remedies of any party, including the Department, to pursue a cause of action
against a home improvement contractor who is a participant in the Fund.
      (6)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed to create a right of
any person to a portion of any of the Fund, except where the Commissioner
directs a disbursement be made from the Fund pursuant to the provisions herein.
      (7)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed to provide for the
payment of awards or judgments rendered against Fund participants in personal
injury actions.
   (d)   Consumer Claims Process as Alternative Invasion of the Fund. 
      (1)   Where a claim for restitution does not meet the requirements of
subparagraph (i) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (c) of this section, the
Commissioner may require that disbursements be made from the Fund to a consumer
who has fully cooperated, participated, and completed the Department’s
mediation process related to a claim against a home improvement contractor
involving an alleged violation of a law, regulation, or rule enforced by the
Department; provided, however, that such disbursements shall not be made if the
consumer’s initial complaint to the Department was made prior to January 1,
2015 or if the balance of the Fund is less than two million dollars. Whether a
home improvement contractor cooperated, participated, or completed the
Department’s mediation process shall have no impact on whether the Department
considers the consumer to have fully cooperated, participated, and completed
the Department’s mediation process.
      (2)   Disbursements will not be made from the Fund to pay a claim
against: a licensee who has furnished a bond, pursuant to the Bond Requirement
of 6 RCNY §
2-225; or a home improvement contractor who was not licensed by the Department
at the time of the contract.
      (3)   Disbursements from the Fund pursuant to this subdivision will be
made at the discretion of the Commissioner or their designee and shall be
limited to no more than twenty thousand dollars for all amounts arising out of
a single home improvement contract. Prior to disbursement from the Fund, the
Commissioner or their designee may require a consumer to submit a claim in a
form and format designated by the Commissioner, and provide documentation
related to the claim, including but not limited to:
         (i)   A signed contract between such consumer and the home improvement
contractor;
         (ii)   Evidence of any amounts paid to the home improvement contractor
by the consumer or indebtedness incurred by the consumer as a result of a loan
being paid by a lender to the home improvement contractor in the consumer’s
name;
         (iii)   Estimates, invoices, or amounts paid to another licensed home
improvement contractor to fix or complete the work that was the subject of the
contract;
         (iv)   A sworn and notarized statement detailing the claim, the amount
of restitution the consumer is seeking up to ten thousand dollars, and the
basis for seeking such amount from the Fund; and
         (v)   A sworn and notarized statement specifying account credits,
refunds or payments made to the consumer by the home improvement contractor or
a third-party, including by an insurance company.
      (4)   The Commissioner or their designee will not direct disbursements to
be made from the Fund to pay a claim against a home improvement contractor
unless the consumer has provided sufficient documentation to show the claim
relates to the home improvement contractor’s failure to duly observe the laws,
regulations, and rules governing the conduct of licensed home improvement
contractors, including, but not limited to, Subchapter 22 of Chapter 2 of Title
20 the Administrative Code and 6 RCNY
Chapter 2, Subchapter V.
      (5)   The Commissioner or their designee may order that partial payment
of an amount related to the claim be made from the Fund.
      (6)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed to limit the rights and
remedies of any party, including the Department, to pursue a cause of action
against a home improvement contractor who is a participant in the Fund.
      (7)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed to create a right of
any person to a portion of any of the Fund, except where the Commissioner
directs a disbursement be made from the Fund pursuant to the provisions herein.
      (8)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed to provide for the
payment of claims related to personal injury.
      (9)   Disbursements from the Fund pursuant to this subdivision shall not
be considered an award, fine, judgment, arbitration award, or settlement amount
for the purpose of paragraph (5) of subdivision (b) of this section.
   (e)   Accounting. The Commissioner shall, by January 31 of each year, cause
an accounting to be made of all of the Fund’s activities during the preceding
calendar year.
(Amended City Record 5/20/2015, eff. 6/19/2015; amended City Record 3/3/2023,
eff. 4/2/2023; amended City Record 9/20/2023, eff. 10/20/2023; amended City
Record 6/18/2025, eff. 7/18/2025)
§ 2-225 Notice of Bond Requirement.
Each home improvement contractor shall furnish a $20,000 bond to the Department
of Consumer Affairs conditioned upon:
   (a)   compliance with all laws, rules and regulations covering the conduct
of home improvement contractors;
   (b)   payment to the City of New York of any fine, penalty or other
obligation imposed by the Department of Consumer Affairs for non-compliance
with any law(s), rule(s) or regulation(s) within 30 days of its imposition; and
   (c)   payment of any final judgment against the home improvement contractor
pursuant to the requirements of 6 RCNY §
1-15. The bond shall be either a cash bond or a bond executed by a duly
authorized surety company in a form acceptable to the Commissioner.
§ 2-226 Written Examination Required.
   (a)   Every person who applies for a license as a home improvement
contractor shall be required to pass an examination prior to being issued a
home improvement contractor license in accordance with § 20-387 of the
Administrative Code of the City of New York. Such examination shall test the
knowledge of the applicant with respect to home improvement business practices,
procedures and regulatory requirements and shall be offered regularly by the
Department. The fee for taking the examination is $50. The $50 fee includes one
subsequent retake in case the applicant fails the first examination.
   (b)   An applicant who fails a second examination will be required to pay a
fee of $50 for two additional opportunities to take the examination.
   (c)   An applicant for renewal of a license shall not be required to take an
examination provided the application is submitted and payment of the license
fee is made within 59 days following the expiration of the term of the current
license.
(Amended City Record 12/1/2020, eff. 12/31/2020)
Subchapter W: Process Servers
§ 2-231 Definitions.
For the purposes of the application of Subchapter 23 of Chapter 2 of Title 20
of the Administrative Code, the following definitions apply, unless the context
indicates otherwise.
   Bound paginated volume. "Bound paginated volume" means a book or ledger that
at the time of purchase contains a specified number of unfolded sheets of paper
or other material that are permanently secured to covers by stitching, glue or
any other such method that is calculated to make readily discernible the
removal or insertion of one or more sheets after the first use of such volume
and that that each page in such book or ledger is sequentially numbered
starting with the number "1" or contains an indelible label stating the number
of pages the volume originally contained.
   Chronological. "Chronological" with respect to the notation in a process
server record or log means that each notation must be entered sequentially
according to the time and date of the activity recorded and without leaving any
blank spaces between each entry that would allow for the insertion of any
additional notation between any two entries.
   Conspicuous service delivery. "Conspicuous service delivery" means, if
permissible by law (e.g., CPLR § 308 or RPAPL § 735): affixing the process to
the door of either the actual place of business, dwelling place or usual place
of abode within the state of the person to be served; or affixing a copy of the
notice and petition upon a conspicuous part of the property sought to be
recovered or placing a copy under the entrance door of such premises.
   Contemporaneous. "Contemporaneous" in relation to entries in records means
at or near the time of the event as to which an entry is recorded, or within a
reasonable time thereafter.
   Corporate service. "Corporate service" means service of process on a
domestic or foreign corporation in accordance with the provisions of CPLR § 311
or RPAPL § 735; or governmental subdivision (including the City of New York) in
accordance with the provisions of CPLR § 311; or a domestic or foreign limited
liability company in accordance with the provisions of CPLR § 311-a; or the
state in accordance with the provisions of CPLR § 307.
   Department. "Department" means the New York City Department of Consumer and
Worker Protection.
   Engaged in the business of serving. "Engaged in the business of serving"
means the following:
      (1)   Service of five or more processes within the City of New York in
any one calendar year; or
      (2)   One who assigns, distributes or delivers processes to another for
actual service.
   Image file. "Image file" in relation to scans of the records kept by process
servers or process serving agencies means a file that contains graphic data
such that the file is an exact replica of a specific set of data and is saved
as a portable data file ("pdf").
   Legible. "Legible" with respect to the handwriting in the record kept by
process servers and in the scanned or copied images of such record means easily
read and discernable in all of its details, and in no way obscured.
   Partnership service. "Partnership service" means service of process on
persons conducting a business as a partnership in accordance with the
provisions of CPLR § 310, or on a domestic or foreign limited partnership in
accordance with the provisions of CPLR § 310-a.
   Person. "Person" means any individual, firm, company, partnership,
corporation, association or other organization.
   Personal delivery service. "Personal delivery service" means delivering
process within the state to the individual intended to be served process.
   Portable media device. "Portable media device" as it pertains to electronic
record-keeping means an electronic data storage device used to record and store
data, such as a flash memory device, CD-ROM or external hard drive.
   Process. "Process" means a summons, notice of petition, order to show cause,
subpoena, notice, citation or other legal paper issued under the laws of the
State of New York directing an appearance or response to a legal action, legal
proceeding or administrative proceeding; provided, however, that if under the
laws of the State of New York the mailing of such legal paper is sufficient to
effect service, such legal paper will not be process for the purpose of this
subchapter.
   Process Server. "Process Server" means a person engaged in the business of
serving process upon any person, corporation, governmental or political
subdivision or agency.
   Process Serving Agency. "Process serving agency" means any person, firm,
partnership, association or corporation, other than an attorney or a law firm
located in this state, or city marshal, who maintains an office, bureau or
agency, one purpose of which is to assign or distribute process to individual
process servers for actual service in the City of New York.
   Scanning. "Scanning" in relation to electronic record-keeping means the
process of translating a document into a digital form that can be recognized by
a computer. A "scan" with respect to electronic record-keeping is the image
file that is created by scanning.
   Substituted service. "Substituted service" means delivering process within
the state to an individual of suitable age and discretion at the actual place
of business, dwelling place or usual place of abode of the individual to be
served; or, as applicable, on an individual of suitable age and discretion who
resides or is employed at the property sought to be recovered.
   VTL service. "VTL service" means delivering process intended to be served
on: (1) a non-resident by service on the Secretary of State as permitted by and
in accordance with the provisions of Vehicle and Traffic Law § 253; or (2)
residents who departs from the state or on residents' executors or
administrators who are nonresidents or who depart from the state as permitted
and in accordance with the provisions of Vehicle and Traffic Law § 254.
(Amended City Record 9/23/2022, eff. 10/23/2022)
§ 2-232 License Requirement Exceptions.
   (a)   No license under Subchapter 23 of Chapter 2 of Title 20 of the
Administrative Code is required of any employee of any city, state or federal
department or agency, who is acting within the scope of his employment.
   (b)   No license under Subchapter 23 shall be required of any attorneys duly
admitted to practice in the State of New York.
   (c)   No license under Subchapter 23 shall be required of any employee of a
process server or attorney who does not actually serve process.
   (d)   The provisions of Subchapter 23 shall only apply to service of process
within the City of New York.
§ 2-232a Surety Bond Requirements for Process Server and Process Serving
Agencies.
   (a)   The surety bond required under § 20-406.1 of the Administrative Code
shall be paid in full and must be effective for the entire term of the license.
   (b)   If a process server or process serving agency's surety bond lapses for
any reason, the license issued pursuant to § 20-403 of the Administrative Code
shall become void for such process server or process serving agency.
§ 2-232b Employee Exemption from Bond.
   (a)   Any process server seeking exemption from the bond requirement
pursuant to § 20-406.1(a) of the Administrative Code because he or she serves
process exclusively as an employee of a licensed process serving agency shall
furnish to the Department upon application or renewal, a certification from the
licensed process serving agency for which he or she works in a form approved by
the Commissioner that affirms that
      (1)   the process server serves process exclusively as an employee of the
process serving agency;
      (2)   the bond that the licensed process server agency has furnished to
the commissioner is conditioned upon the process server's compliance with the
laws and rules governing the activities of a process server and upon the
further conditions set forth in § 20-406.1(a) of the Administrative Code; and
      (3)   the process serving agency acknowledges that it must notify the
Department in writing within five (5) days of the date that the process server
ceases to serve process exclusively as an employee of the process serving
agency.
   (b)   The process server or the process serving agency shall provide
additional documentation that the Department may seek regarding the process
server's employee status.
§ 2-232c Process Server Trust Fund.
   (a)   Establishment. There is hereby established a Process Server Trust Fund
(hereinafter, "the Fund") to provide for the payment of outstanding awards to
aggrieved consumers and fines owed to the City. The Fund will be administered
by the Comptroller of the City of New York pursuant to Section 93(h) of the
Charter.
   (b)   Participation in the Fund.
      (1)   To qualify for participation in the Fund, an applicant for a
process server license or renewal therefore must submit with such server's
application a copy of its completed application to two sureties approved by the
Commissioner for the bond required by § 20-406.1 of the Administrative Code of
the City of New York and the original copies of the rejection or denial of such
application by such sureties. Pursuant to such section, process serving
agencies are not eligible to participate in the Fund.
      (2)   Any process server who qualifies for participation in the fund may
participate by submitting with the application for a process server license or
renewal thereof a certified check or money order in the amount $1,000, made
payable to the New York City Department of Consumer and Worker Protection for
depositing the amount in such Fund.
      (3)   A bonded licensee may participate in the Fund in lieu of continued
compliance with the bond requirement of § 20-406.1(a) of such Code by
submitting proof that consists of an original copy from the process server's
current surety denying renewal and the completed applications and original
denials from two additional sureties approved by the Commissioner, and upon
submitting to the Department a certified check or money order in the amount of
$1,000 made payable to the New York City Department of Consumer and Worker
Protection, prior to the expiration or cancellation of the licensee's bond.
      (4)   The required deposit to be made by applicants to participate in the
Fund may not be refundable upon the issuance of a process server license. If
the Department denies issuance of a license or renewal thereof, the deposit
made by the applicant must be refunded within thirty days after the application
for a license or renewal thereof is denied.
      (5)   Participation in the Fund does not relieve a licensee of any
obligation to pay awards or fines imposed by the Department or judgments or
arbitration awards rendered against the licensee by a court of competent
jurisdiction. If a process server's license is revoked, surrendered or the
process server fails to renew its license, and the Fund is invaded to pay an
award, fine or judgment that was rendered against such process server pursuant
to the provisions of the Code or these rules, no license may be issued or
reinstated to such process server unless the amount(s) paid out of the Fund on
behalf of such process server is reimbursed by such process server in full.
   (c)   Invasion of the Fund.
      (1)   If the Department has revoked a process server's license or the
licensee has surrendered or failed to renew the license, the Commissioner may
require that disbursements be made from the Fund to pay to the City any fine,
penalty or other obligation the City imposes relating to the violation of
Subchapter 23 of Chapter 2, Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of
New York and any rules promulgated thereunder or to pay a final outstanding
judgment recovered in an action arising out of the violation of the provisions
of such subchapter.
      (2)   No disbursement may be made from the Fund to pay an award, fine or
judgment that is rendered against a licensee who has furnished a bond pursuant
to the requirements of § 20-406.1(a) of the Administrative Code of the City of
New York or against a process server who was not licensed by the Department or
a participant in the Fund at the time of the violation.
      (3)   Disbursement from the Fund may be made at the discretion of the
Commissioner or his or her designee, provided, however, that invasion of the
fund must be limited to no more than $10,000 for all awards, fines or judgments
arising out of a single service of process.
      (4)   The Commissioner or his or her designee may order that partial
payment of awards, fines or judgments be made from the Fund.
      (5)   Nothing contained herein may be construed to limit the rights and
remedies of any party, including the Department, to pursue a cause of action
against a process server who is a participant in the Fund.
      (6)   Nothing contained herein may be construed to provide for the
payment of awards or judgments rendered against Fund participants in personal
injury actions.
   (d)   Accounting. The Commissioner must, by January 31 of each year, cause
an accounting to be made of all of the Fund's activities during the preceding
calendar year.
(Amended City Record 9/23/2022, eff. 10/23/2022)
§ 2-232d Testing.
Every person who applies for a process server license or renewal thereof shall
be required to pass an examination prior to being issued a license or renewal.
Such examination shall test the applicant or licensee's knowledge regarding
proper service of process within the city of New York and familiarity with
relevant laws and rules. The fee for this examination will be $75 and is not
refundable. An applicant who fails the exam on the first attempt may take the
examination a second time without an additional fee. After the second
successive failure, the applicant's application or renewal will be denied and
he or she must reapply for a process server license.
§ 2-233 Records.
   (a)   Duty of individual process server to keep records. Each process server
must maintain records of all service made by them in compliance with the
provisions of section 89-cc of the New York General Business Law and § 20-406.3
of the Administrative Code of the City of New York, as follows:
      (1)   Maintenance of records of service. Process servers must maintain
records of all service and attempted service by keeping bound paginated volumes
or by storing electronic records with a third party contractor.
         (i)   Bound paginated volumes. Where a process server maintains
records in bound paginated volumes, the process server must record each entry
separately in chronological order contemporaneous with service or attempted
service. The process server must make entries in only one volume at a time,
which must contain every attempted and effected service made by the process
server, until all of the available space in the volume is filled. A process
server who maintains records in bound paginated volumes must also maintain an
electronic copy of such volumes by scanning records into an image file that
legibly reproduces in all details the original record the process server
maintains in bound paginated volumes. Such electronic record must be kept as
follows:
            (A)   the image file must be named with the date of the service or
attempted service recorded in the bound paginated volume and the process
server's license number, and must be date and time stamped with the date and
time that the file was created; and
            (B)   such scanning must be done within three business days from
the last event recorded in the records; and
            (C)   the process server must save the scanned image file in a
manner that:
               (I)   ensures the authenticity, reliability and integrity of the
scanned image file;
               (II)   permits the efficient retrieval of the scanned image
file;
               (III)   contains a backup support system such that the scanned
image file must be capable of being reconstructed if an electronic or computer
malfunction or unforeseen incident resulting in the destruction of the system
or the information contained therein; and
            (D)   where the process server stores scanned image files on a
portable media device, such portable media device must be labeled with the
process server's last name, license number and the date range of the records
stored on the device;
         (ii)   Electronic records with a third party contractor. Where a
process server maintains electronic records with a third party contractor, the
process server must submit recorded entries in chronological order to such
contractor within three business days of service or attempted service. The
process server must enter a contract with a contractor pursuant to which such
contractor must be required to provide services and perform functions
consistent with 6 RCNY §
2-233(c), provided, however, the process server may use the services and
functions for electronic record storage that a process serving agency has made
available to process servers under a contract with a third party contractor.
      (2)   Content of records of service. Each record of service and attempted
service must include, at a minimum, the following information:
         (i)   name of the process server, which will be entered as last name,
first name, provided, however, that where a process server keeps records in
bound paginated volumes, the name of such process server may be entered on the
first page of each bound paginated volume, rather than each record;
         (ii)   the license number of the process server, which will be
specified as a seven-digit number, where the first number must be zero if the
process server's license number is less than seven digits, provided, however,
that where a process server keeps records in bound paginated volumes, the
license number of such process server may be entered on the first page of each
bound paginated volume, rather than each record;
         (iii)   the name and license number of the process serving agency from
whom the process served was received, or, if not received from a process
serving agency, of such other person or firm from whom the process served was
received;
         (iv)   whether service was effected, as indicated by a Y for yes or N
for no;
         (v)   the title of the action or proceeding or a reasonable
abbreviation thereof;
         (vi)   the name of the intended recipient of the process, which must
be entered in two data fields such that the first data field is the last name
of the intended recipient, or, if not a natural person, the name of the entity,
and the second data field is the first name of the intended recipient if a
natural person;
         (vii)   the name of the individual to whom process was delivered,
which must be entered in two data fields such that the first data field is the
last name of the individual, and the second data field is the first name of the
individual;
         (viii)   the date that service was attempted or effected, which must
be entered as MM/DD/YYYY;
         (ix)   the time service was attempted or effected, which must be
entered as military time;
         (x)   the address where service was attempted or effected, which must
be entered in five different fields: the first field will be for the building
number; the second field will be for the street name; the third field will be
for address details, e.g., apartment, suite, floor or room number; the fourth
field will be for the city or borough; and the fifth field will be for the ZIP
code;
         (xi)   the nature of the papers served;
         (xii)   the court in which the action has been commenced, which must
be entered as either Civil Court NYC, Civil Supreme, Criminal, Housing (L/T),
or District Court, followed by the county of the court, the judicial department
if appellate, or the federal district;
         (xiii)   the full index number, which must be entered with all
information necessary to identify the case, such as XXXXX/XX, unless the case
is a Civil Local matter, in which case, it will include the prefix of CV, CC,
LT, MI, NC, RE, SC, or TS;
         (xiv)   if service was effected pursuant to subdivisions (1) through
(3) of CPLR § 308, a description of the person served which must consist of
seven fields, including sex, color of skin, hair color, approximate age,
height, weight, and any other identifying features provided by the process
server;
         (xv)   the type of service delivery, which must be entered as a P for
personal delivery service, an S for substituted service, a C for conspicuous
service delivery, a CO for corporate service, a PA for partnership service, and
a V for VTL service;
         (xvi)   if service was effected pursuant to subdivision (4) of CPLR §
308 or subdivision (1) of RPAPL § 735, a description of the door and the area
adjacent including the color and composition of hallway walls, color and
composition of hallway floor or doorstep, and location of premises in relation
to stairs, elevator or entranceway;
         (xvii)   if service is effected pursuant to RPAPL § 735(1) using
registered or certified mail, the postal receipt number of registered or
certified mail; and
         (xviii)   if an affidavit or affirmation of service is filed with the
court by the process server, the record shall include the date of such filing.
   (b)   Duty of licensed process serving agencies to keep records. Every
process serving agency must keep complete and accurate records for each
individual process server to whom it assigns or distributes process to be
served. Such records must be kept in a searchable manner that permits ready
identification of (i) the daily activity of each such individual process server
and (ii) any or all process assigned or distributed for service by the name of
the person or entity from whom the process serving agency received such papers
for service.
      (1)   Maintenance of records. Process serving agencies must maintain
electronic records by copying records to an electronic records management
system or by submitting records to a third party contractor.
         (i)   Electronic records management system. If the process serving
agency elects to store records itself rather than through a third party
contractor, it must save the record to an electronic records management system
within three business days from the last event recorded in the record. Such
electronic records management system must maintain electronic records,
including the required records described in 6 RCNY §
2-233(b)(2), in a manner that:
            (A)   ensures the authenticity, reliability and integrity of the
electronic records;
            (B)   permits the efficient retrieval of electronic records;
            (C)   contains a backup support system such that the electronic
records must be capable of being reconstructed if an electronic or computer
malfunction or unforeseen incident results in the destruction of the system or
the information contained therein.
         (ii)   Third party contractor. Where a process serving agency
maintains its records with a third party contractor, the process serving agency
must submit records to such contractor within three business days from the last
event recorded in the record. The process serving agency must enter into a
contract with such contractor pursuant to which such contractor must be
required to provide services and perform functions consistent with 6 RCNY §
2-233(c).
      (2)   Required records. Process serving agencies must maintain, at a
minimum, the following records:
         (i)   An electronic file that legibly reproduces the original record
of service or attempted service containing all of the individual process
server's records maintained pursuant to 6 RCNY §
2-233(a) of this rule for each day on which the individual process server
attempted or effected service of the process assigned or distributed to the
individual process server by the process serving agency;
         (ii)   A copy of every routing sheet, work order or other written
instruction given to the individual process server;
         (iii)   Copies of any notes, memoranda or other writings submitted by
the individual process server containing information related to the attempted
or effected service of process assigned by the process serving agency;
         (iv)   A copy of every affidavit of service and affirmation of service
signed by the individual process server for service assigned by the process
serving agency;
         (v)   If an affidavit or affirmation of service is filed with the
court by the process serving agency, the record must also include the date of
such filing.
   (c)   Storage of records with a third party contractor. Where a process
server or process serving agency uses a third party contractor to maintain
records consistent with 6 RCNY §
2-233(a)(1)(ii) or 6 RCNY §
2-233(b)(1)(ii), respectively, such process server or process serving agency
must enter a contract with such contractor pursuant to which such contractor
must be required to provide services and perform functions that include, but
are not limited to:
      (1)   maintain a daily backup of all submitted data, and ensure all data
is available for review upon request of any and all interested parties;
      (2)   maintain the original electronic record submitted by the process
server unaltered for a period of not less than seven years;
      (3)   prohibit the process server, the process serving agency, or any
person to alter the original record;
      (4)   maintain the records in a manner that will permit retrieval by the
DCWP license number of the process server, the DCWP license number of the
process serving agency that has distributed the process for service, the name
of the plaintiff or petitioner, the name of the defendant or respondent, the
docket number (if any), the name of the person to whom process is delivered and
a unique file identifier of the process being served;
      (5)   maintain the records in a manner that will ensure that their
integrity is adequate for admissibility in a judicial proceeding under the
rules of evidence applicable in the state of New York;
      (6)   provide a backup support system such that the electronic records
must be capable of being reconstructed if an electronic or computer malfunction
or unforeseen incident results in the destruction of the system or the
information contained therein;
      (7)   produce upon request by the Department, a copy of the electronic
records, or any reasonably described part involved, certified to be true and
accurate;
      (8)   produce to the Department upon request the electronic records
containing required information set forth in 6 RCNY §
2-233(a)(2) in the format provided by the Department on its website.
   (d)   Integrity of records. Corrections to bound paginated volumes and
electronic records with a third party contractor must be made only as follows:
      (1)   Bound paginated volumes. A process server may make corrections in
bound paginated volumes only by drawing a straight line through the inaccurate
entry and clearly printing the accurate information directly above the
inaccurate entry. All other methods of correction, including but not limited to
erasing, opaquing, obliterating or redacting, are prohibited.
      (2)   Electronic records with a third party contractor. A process server
and process serving agency must ensure that permissions pertaining to
electronic records submitted to a third party contractor will be secured so
that the data cannot be deleted upon submission to such contractor. No process
server or process serving agency may tamper with data or properties of any
electronic record kept pursuant to this section after a file is made by
modifying, amending, deleting, rearranging or in any other way altering any
such data or properties including, but not limited to, using a meta data
scrubber or similar device or program. If a typographical error has occurred or
if data contained in the process server or process serving agency's record was
accidentally omitted from the electronic data entry, the process server or
process serving agency must promptly make an amendment to their records of
service with the third party contractor. A process server who attempted or
effected process may make other corrective amendment, or supplement (such as
concerning filing or additional mailing), to the record of service with the
third party contractor. Any amendment must be made by creating a new entry in
which the original record must be identified by reference in italics within the
new entry.
   (e)   Retention and production of records. 
      (1)   Process servers and process serving agencies must retain all
records required to be maintained pursuant to this section for a period of
seven years from the date of service. Where a process server is employed as a
process server by any person, a copy of such records must also be maintained by
such person at such person's principal office for the same period;
      (2)   Upon request by the Department, process servers and process serving
agencies must produce a copy of any record they are required to maintain
pursuant to this section, or any reasonably described part involved, certified
to be true and accurate;
      (3)   Except where a process server maintains records in bound paginated
volumes, process servers must produce, upon request by the Department, the
information required to be maintained pursuant to 6 RCNY §
2-233(a)(2) in the format provided by the Department on its website;
      (4)   Upon request by the Department, process serving agencies must
produce the information required to be maintained pursuant to 6 RCNY §
2-233(a)(2) in the format provided by the Department on its website.
(Amended City Record 9/23/2022, eff. 10/23/2022; amended City Record 12/31/
2024, eff. 3/1/2025)
§ 2-233a Electronic Records. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/23/2022, eff. 10/23/2022)
§ 2-233b Electronic Record of Service / GPS Requirements.
   (a)   General Requirements for GPS. A process server licensed pursuant to
this subchapter must comply with the requirement of § 20-410 of the
Administrative Code to carry at all times during the commission of their
licensed activities, and operate at the time process is served or attempted, a
device to establish electronically and record the time, date, and location of
service or attempted service as follows:
      (1)   Equipment.
         (i)   The process server must obtain a mobile device, such as a
telephone or personal digital assistant, that utilizes the software necessary
to make an electronic record of the location where, and the time and date when,
the record is made as determined by Global Positioning System ("GPS")
technology or Assisted-Global Positioning System ("A-GPS") technology, and
labels the record with the network date and time maintained by the mobile
device, the DCWP license number of the process server, the DCWP license number
of the process serving agency that has distributed the process for service, the
name of the plaintiff or petitioner, the name of the defendant or respondent,
the docket number (if any), the name of the person to whom process is delivered
and a unique file identifier of the process being served.
         (ii)   The mobile device must be equipped with the software necessary
to make an electronic record of the location where and time and date when the
record is made, as determined by triangulated cell tower signals, if at the
time of the effected or attempted service of process a GPS signal is not
available.
         (iii)   The mobile device software must automatically add that
location, time and date information to the electronic record as soon as a GPS
or cellular signal reaches the device if neither a GPS nor a cellular signal is
present at the time the process server causes the electronic record to be made.
      (2)   Operation of Equipment.
         (i)   On every occasion that a process server attempts or effects
service of process, the process server must ensure that the mobile device makes
an electronic record of the GPS location, time and date of the attempted or
effected service immediately after attempting or effecting service. If no GPS
signal is available at the time of attempted or effected service of process,
the location, time and date will be determined by triangulated cell tower
signals. The process server is not in compliance with this provision if its
electronic record was made before the time of attempted or effected service.
There shall be a rebuttable presumption that the process server was not in
compliance with this provision if its electronic record is made more than five
minutes after the time of attempted or effected service.
         (ii)   Reserved.
         (iii)   Each electronic record must include, at a minimum, the
following information:
            (a)   a unique file identifier of the process being served;
            (b)   the name of the plaintiff or petitioner;
            (c)   the name of the defendant or respondent;
            (d)   the full index number, entered with all information necessary
to identify the case, such as XXXXXX/XX, unless the case is a Civil Local
matter, in which case, it will include the prefix of CV, CC, LT, MI, NC, RE,
SC, or TS;
            (e)   the date that service was effected or attempted according to
GPS or cellular signals, entered as MM/DD/YYYY;
            (f)   the time that service was effected or attempted according to
GPS or cellular signals, entered as military time;
            (g)   the location where service was effected or attempted, which
must include building number, street name, address details, e.g., apartment,
suite, floor or room number, city or borough, ZIP code, which must be five
digits, and latitudinal and longitudinal coordinates returned by the GPS device
in decimal degree format;
            (h)   the name of the person to whom process is delivered;
            (i)   the DCWP license number of the process server; and
            (j)   the DCWP license number of the process serving agency that
distributed the process for service.
      (3)   Contract for Services. The process server must enter into a
contract with an independent third party who will provide services and perform
functions described in paragraph (4) of this subdivision that enable the
process server to meet the data storage and retrieval requirements set forth in
such paragraph ("the GPS Contractor"), provided, however, that if the process
server performs process serving activities distributed to them by a licensed
process serving agency, the process server may utilize the device and
facilities for the electronic record of service that the process serving agency
obtains under a contract with a GPS Contractor.
      (4)   Data Storage and Retrieval. The electronic record must be
automatically transmitted electronically from the mobile device to the GPS
Contractor as soon as a GPS or cellular signal is available and location, date
and time are entered into the electronic record. The GPS Contractor must store
the electronic record according to the following terms:
         (i)   the original digital file must be maintained by the GPS
Contractor unaltered for a period of not less than seven years;
         (ii)   neither the process server nor the process serving agency will
be permitted to alter the original data, but may obtain copies of the original
data file;
         (iii)   the GPS Contractor must maintain the records in a manner that
will permit retrieval by the DCWP license number of the process server, which
will be specified as a seven-digit number, where the first number must be zero
if the process server's license number is less than seven digits, the DCWP
license number of the process serving agency from whom the process served was
received, or, if not received from a process serving agency, the name of such
other person or firm from whom the process served was received, the name of the
plaintiff or petitioner, the name of the defendant or respondent, the docket
number (if any), the name of the person to whom process is delivered and a
unique file identifier of the process being served;
         (iv)   the GPS Contractor must maintain the records in a manner that
will ensure that their integrity is adequate for admissibility in a judicial
proceeding under the rules of evidence applicable in the state of New York;
         (v)   the GPS Contractor must produce upon request by the process
server or the Department, and to any other party according to an appropriate
order or subpoena, a copy of the electronic records, or any reasonably
described part involved, certified by the GPS Contractor to be true and
accurate;
         (vi)   the GPS Contractor must provide to the process server or the
Department upon request a street map in hard copy format and access to an
interactive electronic street map that display the locations where the digital
records were recorded with a date and time provided by GPS or cellular date and
time;
         (vii)   the GPS Contractor must provide to the process server or the
Department upon request, and to any other party according to an appropriate
order or subpoena, the process server’s electronic record in the format
provided by the Department on its website.
   (b)   Provision of Equipment and Services by Process Serving Agency. A
process serving agency licensed according to this subchapter may provide to
licensed process servers the device and services required by subparagraph (a)
according to a contract with an independent third party. For purposes of this
Rule, a third party will not be considered independent if any officer or owner
of ten percent or more of the shares of the licensed process serving agency has
any interest, direct or indirect, in the third party.
   (c)   Report to Department.
      (1)   Within sixty days after the effective date of this Rule a licensed
process server must submit to the Department in a form approved by the
Commissioner a certification that he or she has secured the contract required
by this Rule and identifying the name, address and account number of the GPS
Contractor(s) providing the required device and services. After sixty days
after the effective date of this Rule, no process server license will be issued
or renewed unless the applicant submits such a certificate.
      (2)   A licensed process server must submit to the Department an amended
certification within two days of entering into a contract with a different GPS
Contractor.
      (3)   In place of submitting the certificates required by the preceding
provisions, the licensed process server may submit a certification in a form
approved by the Commissioner affirmed by an owner or officer of a licensed
process serving agency that the device and services the process server is
required to obtain are provided by the agency under a contract with an
independent third party.
   (d)   Compliance with all laws. Compliance with the requirements of this
Rule does not relieve a licensed process server of the obligation to make or
maintain records required by any other federal, state, or local law, rule or
regulation.
(Amended City Record 9/23/2022, eff. 10/23/2022; amended City Record 12/31/
2024, eff. 3/1/2025)
§ 2-234 Duty to Comply with Law.
The licensee shall at all times strictly and promptly conform to all laws,
rules, regulations and requirements of the federal, state and municipal
authorities relating to the conduct of licensees and the service of process in
the State of New York and the preparation, notarization and filing of
affidavits of service; and the preparation and filing of affirmations of
service and other documents, now in force or hereafter adopted during any
license period.
(Amended City Record 12/31/2024, eff. 3/1/2025)
§ 2-234a Duties of Process Serving Agencies.
   (a)   Assignment of Process to Individual Process Servers. A process serving
agency must not assign or distribute process for service to an individual
process server who:
      (1)   is not licensed to serve process;
      (2)   has not complied with the requirements of § 20-406.1 of the
Administrative Code;
      (3)   does not display integrity and honesty in his or her process
serving activities; and
      (4)   does not comply with the recordkeeping requirements applicable to
the service of process in the City of New York, including maintaining an
electronic record of service.
   (b)   Compliance Plan. A process serving agency must develop and implement
policies and procedures set forth in a written Compliance Plan to ensure that
an individual process server acts with integrity and honesty and complies with
the recordkeeping requirements applicable to process servers. Such Compliance
Plan must include, but not be limited to, the following requirements for
process serving agencies:
      (1)   The process serving agency must take appropriate disciplinary
action against an individual process server who fails to comply with the law,
including, but not limited to, suspending or terminating its employment, agency
or other relationship with the individual process server;
      (2)   To ensure each process server's compliance with recordkeeping
requirements, the process serving agency must:
         (i)   at least once each month, review for completeness and accuracy
the records of each individual process server to whom it assigns or distributes
process;
         (ii)   prepare a monthly written report of its review of the records
maintained pursuant to 6 RCNY §
2-233 of each individual process server to whom it assigns or distributes
process during that month;
         (iii)   maintain each monthly report for at least seven years;
         (iv)   maintain records of any disciplinary actions taken against the
individual licensed process server;
         (v)   report to the Department in writing the name and license number
of each individual licensed process server who does not comply with the law
governing process servers within ten (10) days of learning of such non-
compliance;
         (vi)   make available, upon request, to the Department a copy of its
record review procedures, any written reports of the reviews it maintains, and
copies of any referrals of individual process servers to the Department.
   (c)   Implementation Affirmation. A process serving agency in possession of
a license issued by the Department on the effective date of this Rule must
submit an affirmation to the Department that it has adopted a written
Compliance Plan within sixty (60) days of such effective date. After the
effective day of this Rule, no license will be issued or renewed until the
process serving agency files with the Department an affirmation that it has
adopted a Compliance Plan.
   (d)   Persons to Whom the Agency Assigns Service.
      (1)   A process serving agency must notify the Department in a manner
designated on its website at the time of its application or renewal, or at such
times as requested by the Department of:
         (i)   the names, addresses, and Department license numbers of each
process server who serves process exclusively as an employee of the process
serving agency; and
         (ii)   the names, addresses, and Department license numbers of each
process server who serves process on behalf of the process serving agency.
      (2)   If additional process servers are assigned process by the process
serving agency or a new process server is hired to serve process exclusively as
an employee of the process serving agency after the date of such application or
renewal, the licensee must notify the Department in a manner designated on its
website within five (5) days of the new assignment or employee with the names,
addresses and Department license numbers of such additional process servers.
      (3)   If a process server ceases to serve process exclusively as an
employee of a process serving agency after the date of such application or
renewal, the process serving agency must notify the Department in a manner
designated on its website within five (5) days that the process server ceases
to serve process exclusively as an employee with the name, address and
Department license number of such process server.
      (4)   The process serving agency must advise the Department of any
process server who is misrepresenting his or her license status or his or her
compliance with the requirements of § 20-406.1 of the Administrative Code.
(Amended City Record 9/23/2022, eff. 10/23/2022)
§ 2-234b Duty of Process Servers to Report Agencies That Assign Service.
   (a)   A process server must notify the Department in a manner designated on
its website of the name and license number of the process serving agency for
whom he or she serves process exclusively as an employee when applying for a
license or renewal thereof.
   (b)   A process server must notify the Department in a manner designated on
its website of when he or she ceases to exclusively serve process as an
employee of a process serving agency within five (5) days that he or she ceases
such employment. The process server must include the name and license number of
any other process serving agency that he serves process exclusively as an
employee.
   (c)   When applying for a license or renewal thereof, a process server must
notify the Department in a manner designated on its website of the name and
license number of every process serving agency which he or she has reason to
believe assigns process for service to the applicant.
   (d)   A process server applying for a renewal of a licensee must notify the
Department in a manner designated on its website of the name and license number
of every process serving agency from which it has accepted assignment of
service of process within the previous two years.
   (e)   A process server must keep a list of the name and address of each
process serving agency that assigns service to the process server. The process
server must maintain the list for seven years and produce it upon request by
the Department.
(Amended City Record 9/23/2022, eff. 10/23/2022)
§ 2-235 Preparation of Affidavits of Service or Affirmations of Service.
   (a)   A licensee may not sign an affirmation of service or notarize or cause
to be signed or notarized an affidavit of service until all factual averments
have been set forth. The licensee must include their license number on all
affidavits of service and affirmations of service signed by them. On each
affidavit of service and affirmation of service, the licensee must: (1) specify
the papers served; the person who was served; the individual who was delivered
service; the date, time and address or place of service; and the manner of
service; and (2) set forth facts showing that service was made in an authorized
manner. A process server purporting to serve a business entity by delivery of
papers to an individual that the process server, upon personal knowledge, avers
in the affidavit of service or affirmation of service to be the “agent,”
“managing agent” or “general agent,” or other individual authorized to accept
service, also must state in the affidavit of service or affirmation of service,
at a minimum: (1) that the process server inquired if that individual was
authorized to accept service and received an affirmative response; (2) that the
process server inquired of the individual their name and job or
responsibilities and the individual’s responses; and (3) facts confirming or
explaining the statement that the process server knew the individual served was
the type of agent specified in the affidavit of service or affirmation of
service. The licensee must maintain a copy of each affidavit of service and
affirmation of service for at least seven years in electronic form or as a
paper copy.
   (b)   A licensee must not make any false statement in an affidavit of
service or affirmation of service.
   (c)   The commissioner may deny any license application or refuse to renew
any license, and, after due notice and opportunity to be heard, may suspend or
revoke such license, if the applicant or person holding such license, or where
applicable, any of its officers, principals, directors, members, managers,
employees, or stockholders owning ten percent or more of the outstanding stock
of the corporation, has been found, in connection with the applicant’s or
licensee’s business, to have made a false statement in an affirmation of
service or affidavit of service.
(Amended City Record 9/23/2022, eff. 10/23/2022; amended City Record 12/31/
2024, eff. 3/1/2025)
§ 2-235a Duty to Testify Truthfully.
   (a)   A licensee may not make any other false statement orally or in writing
under oath or affirmation before any court, body, agency, public servant, or
other person authorized by law to administer an oath, where the false statement
is material to the action, proceeding or matter in which it is made.
   (b)   The commissioner may deny any license application or refuse to renew
any license, and, after due notice and opportunity to be heard, may suspend or
revoke such license, if the applicant or person holding such license, or where
applicable, any of its officers, principals, directors, members, managers,
employees, or stockholders owning ten percent or more of the outstanding stock
of the corporation, has been found, in connection with the applicant’s or
licensee’s business, to have made such a false statement. 
(Added City Record 12/31/2024, eff. 3/1/2025)
§ 2-236 Duty to Report Hearings Contesting Service.
   (a)   Whenever a process server or process serving agency receives any type
of notice, including an oral communication, that a court has scheduled a
hearing to determine whether service of process made or assigned by such
licensee was effective, the licensee must submit a report to the Department in
the manner designated by the Department on its website within ten days of
receiving such notice. Such written report must include:
      (1)   the title and index number of the action;
      (2)   the court and the judge before whom the hearing is scheduled;
      (3)   the date(s) of the hearing; and
      (4)   the name and license number of every licensee who effected service
or assigned or distributed the process for service.
   (b)   On request, such licensee must provide copies of all records,
including but not limited to, routing sheets, the pages of the licensee's log
book for each day on which service of the process in issue was attempted or
effected, and all affidavits of service and affirmations of service, pertaining
to the contested service.
   (c)   (1)   The licensee must attempt to learn the result of such hearing,
including any judicial order or voluntary settlement resolving the challenge to
service of process, by making a written or email request to the party on whose
behalf the challenged service of process was made or the party's attorney for a
written report of the result of the hearing. Sixty days after the date of the
scheduled hearing, if the party or its attorney has not provided to the
licensee a written report of the result of such hearing, the licensee must
search for the result in the file in the office of the clerk of the court where
such hearing was scheduled to occur. If the clerk's file does not contain a
result sixty days after the hearing, the licensee must search for the result in
the clerk's file ninety days after the scheduled date of such hearing.
      (2)   The licensee must report to the Department in the manner designated
by the Department on its website (i) within ten days of learning the result, or
(ii) that it made attempts to learn the result and was unable to do so not
later than one-hundred days after the scheduled date of such hearing.
(Amended City Record 9/23/2022, eff. 10/23/2022; amended City Record 12/31/
2024, eff. 3/1/2025)
§ 2-237 Wearing of Insignia Prohibited.
No licensee while serving process shall wear or display any badge, insignia,
shield, medal, decoration or facsimile thereof.
§ 2-238 Use of ZIP Codes.
All copies of process mailed pursuant to the requirements of CPLR § 308(4) or
RPAPL § 735(1) must include on the envelope as part of the address the proper
ZIP code of the person served.
(Amended City Record 9/23/2022, eff. 10/23/2022)
§ 2-239 Use of Email.
All process servers and process serving agencies must provide to the Department
a regularly used email address. The Department may send licensing documents and
subpoenas, notices, requests, or other communications to such address.
(Added City Record 5/11/2020, eff. 6/10/2020)
§ 2-240 Audits.
   (a)   Pursuant to subdivision c of § 20-406.3 of the Administrative Code,
the Department may audit any process server that has served at least one
summons, subpoena, notice, citation or other process, directing an appearance
or response to a legal action, legal proceeding or administrative proceeding
that is subject to the provisions of section 110 of the civil court act. In
conducting such an audit, the Department may issue a subpoena by email to a
process server for the period identified by the Department in such subpoena for
the following records no longer than two months:
      (1)   Records that a process server is required to maintain pursuant to 6
RCNY §
2-233(a);
      (2)   Affidavits of service and affirmations of service filed with a
court by a process server or on behalf of a process server related to service;
      (3)   Records of the GPS location, time and date of attempted or effected
service of process made pursuant to 6 RCNY §
2-233b(a)(2); and
      (4)   Documents sufficient to identify all traverse hearings scheduled to
occur, whether or not held, by any court, including courts outside of New York
City, concerning process served or attempted to be served, and any result of
such hearings.
   (b)   Records described by paragraphs one through three of subdivision a of
this section must be produced in electronic form, unless otherwise specified by
the Department, and records described by paragraph four of subdivision a of
this section may be produced in paper or electronic form. Records described in
paragraph two of subdivision a of this section must be produced in
chronological order.
   (c)   A process server must comply with each document production demand in a
subpoena from the Department within 20 days of the date on which the subpoena
was issued, provided that the monetary penalties authorized by 6 RCNY §
6-30 for violation of 6 RCNY §
2-240 will not apply while such subpoena is the subject of a pending judicial
proceeding. Each failure to comply with a document production demand in a
subpoena is a separate violation.
   (d)   By February 1st and August 1st of each calendar year, a process server
must submit, by electronic means, a certification to the Department stating
whether it has served at least one summons, subpoena, notice, citation or other
process, directing an appearance or response to a legal action, legal
proceeding or administrative proceeding that is subject to the provisions of
section 110 of the civil court act in the most recent six-month period, as
follows: the February 1st certification must cover the six-month period from
July through December of the previous year; the August 1st certification must
cover the six-month period from January through June of the current year.
   (e)   Nothing in this section limits the Department's authority to request
or inspect records or information pursuant to any other provisions of law or
rule, including, but not limited to, the Commissioner's authority to conduct
audits of process servers and process serving agencies pursuant to the first
sentence of subdivision c of § 20-406.3 of the Administrative Code.
   (f)   A process server or process serving agency must produce each
subpoenaed or requested document and record they are required to maintain
pursuant to law or rule, even where they maintain their records with a third
party. Each failure to comply is a separate violation.
(Added City Record 5/11/2020, eff. 6/10/2020; amended City Record 9/23/2022,
eff. 10/23/2022; amended City Record 12/31/2024, eff. 3/1/2025)
Subchapter X: Electronic or Home Appliance Service Dealers
§ 2-251 Prohibited Practices.
No service dealer or any of his or her agents or employees shall:
   (a)   charge for repairs that have not been made or for parts that have not
been replaced; (b) replace parts that are not defective or make repairs that
are unnecessary, without the consent of the customer unless it is a standard
trade practice or the manufacturer's recommended procedure to replace
interdependent parts;
   (c)   commence service work before the customer receives a Written Estimate
and authorizes the repair, except as provided in 6 RCNY §§
2-254(e) and (g) and
2-255(a); for the purpose of these regulations, that analysis and work which is
necessary to render a written estimate shall not constitute the commencement of
service work;
   (d)   refuse to return or reinstall an electronic or home appliance after
full payment has been made or tendered for repairs which were authorized and
performed;
   (e)   require a customer to sign a statement which attempts to absolve the
repair shop from liability in connection with the service work performed,
except that upon return of equipment, the service dealer may request a signed
statement that such equipment was "received in good working order, subject to
the customer's further inspection," which shall not constitute a waiver of
liability;
   (f)   make any false promises or false statements of a character likely to
mislead, deceive, influence, persuade or induce a customer to authorize or
accept the repair, service or maintenance of the electronic or home appliance
covered by this subchapter or withhold any information where such withholding
is likely to have such effect;
   (g)   engage in conduct constituting negligence while in possession of the
electronic or home appliance covered by this subchapter;
   (h)   depart from or disregard accepted trade standards for good and
workmanlike repair in any material respect, without the consent of the
customer;
   (i)   discriminate against a customer or fail to make repairs for a customer
without just cause because the customer is exercising a right to have an
electronic or home appliance repaired under a valid warranty or guarantee
agreement, when the dealer holds himself out as or is authorized by a
manufacturer to service or repair such electronic or home appliance;
   (j)   make a service call at a customer's home without taking or providing
appropriate tools, testing equipment and parts which in the trade are commonly
taken to make repairs in the home, unless prior notice is given to the customer
that no repairs are made in the home;
   (k)   allow or require a customer to sign or accept any document which is
blank or incomplete as to the information required by any of the regulations
promulgated pursuant to Subchapter 24 of Chapter 2 of Title 20 of the
Administrative Code or by the terms of such document itself;
   (l)   refuse to pay or fail to satisfy any legally enforceable final
judgment secured against the licensee by a customer, provided that such
judgment was secured against the service dealer for acts of commission or
omission with regard to the business maintained, operated or conducted by him
pursuant to the license issued under this subchapter;
   (m)   subcontract to a service dealer that is not licensed pursuant to this
subchapter, where, in the determination of this Department, a service dealer is
required to be licensed.
§ 2-252 Advertising by Service Dealers.
Advertising which is untrue, misleading or deceptive is prohibited. This
includes, but is not limited to, advertising which does not comply with the
following requirements:
   (a)   advertisements shall contain the true business identity of the
principal service dealer, as shown on the license issued by this Department;
   (b)   advertisements shall not list a location for a repair service unless
the service dealer actually maintains a place of business where repairs are
accepted at the designated location;
   (c)   the use of terms such as, "guarantee," "guaranteed," "warranty,"
"warranteed," "no fix-no pay," "service dealer warranty," "service dealer
guarantee," or words of like import, are prohibited unless a summary of the
significant terms or qualifications thereof are clearly and completely stated
including:
      (1)   the nature and extent of the guarantee or warranty as to duration
and whether it applies to parts or labor or both; and
      (2)   the identity of the guarantor or warrantor. The advertisement must
clearly identify whether the service dealer, the manufacturer, the retailer or
any combination thereof is the guarantor or warrantor;
   (d)   if such terms as "repaired in the home" or "estimates given" are
included in an advertisement, where there is a charge for this service, it
shall be so stated therein;
   (e)   when using the word "free" or other words of similar import or meaning
in advertising to which this section is applicable, all the terms, conditions
and obligations upon which receipt and retention of a free item of merchandise
or service are contingent must be set forth, clearly and conspicuously, at the
outset so as to leave no reasonable probability that the terms of the
advertisement or offer might be misunderstood. Stated differently, all of the
terms, conditions and obligations must appear in close conjunction with the
word "free," or similar words, in advertising. Disclosure of the terms of the
offer, set forth in a footnote of an advertisement to which reference is made
by an asterisk or other symbol placed next to the word "free" is not regarded
as making disclosure at the outset. The terms, conditions and obligations must
be printed in a type size at least half as large as the word "free" or the
words of similar import or meaning. Offers of "free" merchandise or services,
which may be deceptive for failure to meet the provisions of this section, may
not be corrected by the substitution for the word "free" of such similar words
and terms as "gift," "given without charge," "bonus," or other words and terms
which tend to convey to the consuming public the impression that an article of
merchandise or service is "free"
   (f)   terms such as "24 hour," "Day and Night," or "7-day" service, or words
of like import, shall not be used to describe the operations of the service
dealer unless, in close conjunction with such terms, it is also specified
whether the service dealer actually performs repair service, will actually
complete repairs or is open solely to accept repairs within such time or times;
   (g)   it shall not be stated or implied in any advertisement that repairs or
services will be performed by a person who is "Factory Trained," "Factory
Authorized," "Authorized," "Certified," or words of like import, unless such
words are true and unless the name of the organization which has trained,
authorized or certified such person appears in close conjunction with such word
or words. None of these terms shall be used, if its use is based upon the fact
that a license has been issued by the Department of Consumer Affairs.
§ 2-253 Display of Required Information.
   (a)   Required information on licensee's sign. Each licensee must
prominently display in the department or area where electronic and home
appliances are accepted for repair at each location of the service dealer a
sign which contains the following information:
      (1)   the true identity of the service dealer:
         (i)   in the case of a corporation, the true and complete corporate
name;
         (ii)   in the case of a partnership, the name of the partnership;
      (2)   the licensee's policy to accept "cash only" or "cash or certified
check only," where applicable; and
      (3)   the following notice, which must be not less than 18 inches by 24
inches in dimension with letters of not less than 1 inch case print:
         NOTICE NEW YORK CITY DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS REQUIRES THAT:
            1.   The customer is entitled to a Written Estimate for all
repairs.
            2.   No repair work shall be done without the customer's
authorization.
            3.   In most circumstances, the service dealer must return replaced
parts to the customer. If the service dealer charges for a written estimate,
this fact shall be disclosed in Item 1 of the Notice set forth above.
(Amended City Record 7/26/2018, eff. 8/25/2018)
§ 2-254 Disclosures Required for Repairs Made on Licensee's Premises.
   (a)   Definitions. 
Written estimate. For purposes of this subchapter, the term "Written estimate"
shall mean a signed writing containing:
      (1)   a list of the parts to be replaced and the costs of the
replacements, as well as a general description of the labor required for the
repair and its total cost; and
      (2)   a statement of the additional charges, if any, including any
already incurred for the Written Estimate, pick-up and delivery, service call,
storage, installation, the temporary loan of an electronic or home appliance
during the repair of the customer's property, or any other extra charges,
excluding tax; and
      (3)   the estimated delivery date or range of delivery dates of the
repair; and
      (4)   a statement that the final cost (excluding tax) will not exceed the
estimated cost by more than 20 percent. If such statement is not provided, it
shall be presumed that the final cost (excluding tax) will not exceed estimated
cost; and
      (5)   the licensee's policy regarding warranties and guarantees on parts
and labor, including:
         (i)   the licensee's warranties or guarantees given in connection with
repairs, and
         (ii)   any manufacturer's warranties or guarantees honored by the
licensee with respect to the servicing performed; and
      (6)   a brief description of the item's malfunction by the person or
persons who diagnosed the repair.
   (b)   Work order required. Any licensee or his or her employee who removes
an electronic or home appliance from a home or accepts the same for repair at
his or her place of business shall, before removing or taking custody thereof,
furnish the customer or his or her agent with a legible copy of a Work Order,
which shall also serve as a receipt, stating the following information:
      (1)   the legal business identity, address, license number and telephone
number of the principal licensee, as shown on the license issued by this
Department;
      (2)   the name and signature of the person who actually takes the
electronic or home appliance into custody;
      (3)   a description of the electronic or home appliance, including make,
model and serial number, where available, or such other features as will
reasonably identify the item accepted for repair;
      (4)   the date the set was accepted for repair;
      (5)   the name and address of the owner of the electronic or home
appliance;
      (6)   a brief description by the customer of the item's malfunction;
      (7)   the date or range of dates on which the customer is to receive a
Written Estimate, if not already furnished;
      (8)   a written schedule of charges, if any, for giving a Written
Estimate, pick-up and delivery, service call, storage, installation, and the
temporary loan of an electronic or home appliance during the repair of the
customer's property, and any other charges; where a licensee's policy is to
credit any of the above charges to the final cost of the repair, such credit
shall be clearly indicated in computation of the Written Estimate; and
      (9)   notice that "Pursuant to the Regulations of the Department of
Consumer Affairs, your property is covered against loss by fire, theft or
damage while in the custody of the service dealer."
   (c)   Written estimate and signed authorization required. Prior to the
commencement of work, a licensee must provide the customer or his or her agent
with a Written Estimate and on the same document secure the customer or agent's
signed authorization to repair at the Written Estimate price. The Work Order,
Written Estimate, authorization and Final Bill may be included in the same
document, so long as the information required by 6 RCNY §
2-254(a) and (b) and the provisions of 6 RCNY §
2-257 is included therein.
   (d)   Return of unauthorized repair. If, after receiving the Written
Estimate, the customer or his or her agent fails to authorize the repairs at
the estimated cost, the electronic or home appliance shall be returned within
five working days in substantially the same condition as when released to the
licensee. In this case, the licensee shall be entitled to receive payment only
for those items specified in 6 RCNY §
2-254(b)(8) which were actually provided and disclosed on the Work Order.
   (e)   Exemption from requirement of written estimate. 6 RCNY §
2-254(c) shall not apply and the Written Estimate of the total charges for
repair may be verbally communicated to the customer if the licensee informs the
customer of the customer's right to a Written Estimate, and if:
      (1)   time or distance constraints make it impractical to deliver a
Written Estimate and obtain a signed authorization before the date agreed upon
for repairs to commence; and
      (2)   oral agreement to proceed is reached with the customer before the
actual repair is commenced and the licensee:
         (i)   mails a copy of the Written Estimate to the customer before such
repairs are commenced, and
         (ii)   a notation is made of the date, time, person receiving the
authorization to commence, and the name of the person authorizing the repairs.
Once oral agreement is reached and the Written Estimate is mailed, the licensee
need not wait for the customer to receive the mailed Written Estimate or return
a written consent before commencing repairs.
   (f)   Charges in excess of estimate.
      (1)   Total charges (excluding tax) for repairs made shall not exceed the
original estimate or any subsequent estimate by more than 20 per cent, without
the previous written or oral consent of the customer. Such consent may be
communicated orally, provided that a notation is made of the date, time, person
receiving such consent, and the name of the person authorizing the additional
repairs and the licensee mails a copy of the Written Estimate to the customer
before such repairs are commenced.
      (2)   When the final total charges (excluding tax) exceed the estimate by
more than 20 percent and the customer does not authorize the increased cost
estimate, the licensee must reassemble the item and return same within five
working days, without charging the customer a sum in excess of repairs
completed and authorized in the Written Estimate.
   (g)   Exemption. Repairs made pursuant to an agreement between the customer
and the service dealer that, for a fixed fee and for a specified time of at
least nine months, an electronic or home appliance will be maintained or
repaired without additional charge, are exempted from all of the provisions of
this section, except 6 RCNY §
2-254(b)(1) through (6) and (8) and (9), but only to the extent of those
repairs covered by such agreement.
§ 2-255 Disclosure Required for Repairs Made in the Customer's Home.
   (a)   Estimate and authorization required. Every licensee who makes a repair
in the customer's home shall not commence work without:
      (1)   informing the customer of his or her right to request a Written
Estimate and, if there is a charge for a Written Estimate, the amount of such
charge; and
      (2)   furnishing the customer or his or her agent with an estimate, which
shall be in writing if the customer so requests and which conforms in substance
to the requirements of a Written Estimate, as defined in 6 RCNY §
2-254(a)(1), (2), (4), (5) and (6); and
      (3)   obtaining the customer's or his or her agent's signed authorization
to proceed with repairs, except that such authorization may be orally
communicated under the circumstances and in the manner specified in 6 RCNY §
2-254(e) and (f).
   (b)   Final bill required. Every licensee who makes a repair in the
customer's home shall not collect a fee for repair unless the licensee has
first delivered a Final Bill, as defined in 6 RCNY §
2-257, to the customer or his or her agent. If neither the customer nor his or
her agent is present, the Final Bill shall be left at the customer's premises.
The estimate, authorization and Final Bill may be contained in the same
document, so long as the information required by 6 RCNY §
2-255(a) and (b) is included therein.
   (c)   Charges in excess of estimate. The total charges (excluding tax) for
repairs shall not exceed the original estimate by more than 20 percent, without
licensee first receiving the customer's written or oral consent to proceed with
repairs, as provided by 6 RCNY §
2-254(f). When the customer does not authorize the increased cost estimate, the
licensee must reassemble the item, in which case the licensee shall receive
payment for only those repairs and costs which were authorized and completed,
and only to the extent of the price provided in the estimate.
   (d)   Disclosure of service call charge. A licensee who charges for a
service call separately from the costs of repair shall fully disclose these
policies prior to making a service call. If the charge for a service call is
not a fixed, but a variable amount, a licensee must also disclose the
applicable method of computation. Failure to make such disclosures shall be
deemed to be an untrue and misleading practice.
§ 2-256 Estimated Completion Date.
   (a)   A licensee shall conspicuously set forth on the Written Estimate a
delivery date or range of delivery dates, pursuant to 6 RCNY §
2-254(a)(3).
   (b)   Delivery of the repaired item, together with a Final Bill, as defined
in 6 RCNY §
2-257, shall be made by the latest date promised or stated for delivery in the
Written Estimate, unless the customer is notified of the delay and the new
anticipated delivery date or range of delivery dates in writing or by verbal
communication supplemented within one day by a writing. If the customer does
not accept a new delivery date, then he or she must be informed of his or her
right to request return of his or her property, completely reassembled, in
which case the licensee shall receive payment for only those charges specified
on the Written Estimate which were authorized and actually completed. If the
customer does not agree to the licensee's request for an extension of time, and
if the licensee originally picked up the property at the customer's premises,
then the property shall be returned to the customer's premises within five
working days; in all other cases, the property shall be ready within three
working days to be picked up by the customer or his or her agent.
   (c)   When failure to make timely delivery is caused solely by the customer,
a strike, or an act of God, it shall not be a violation of this section, except
that notice of the delay and the new anticipated delivery date or range of
delivery dates shall be given to the customer as soon as possible in the manner
provided in 6 RCNY §
2-256(b).
§ 2-257 Final Bill Required.
   (a)   A licensee shall give a legible copy of the Final Bill, together with
the repaired item, to every customer.
   (b)   A Final Bill shall mean a writing containing:
      (1)   the date of the Final Bill;
      (2)   the true legal identity, business address and license number of the
service dealer, as shown on the license issued by this Department;
      (3)   the name and address of the customer;
      (4)   a description of the item serviced, including make, model and
serial number, where available, or such other features as will reasonably
identify the item left for repair;
      (5)   the complete and legible signature of the licensee or his or her
agent, or in cases where service is performed and completed in the customer's
home, the signature of the licensee's agent who performed the service; and
      (6)   a statement of total charges.
   (c)   The statement of total charges shall include:
      (1)   an itemized list of and description of parts replaced, which must:
         (i)   include a description by make, model and serial number or by
class and type of each part, where available, or such other description as will
reasonably identify each part; and
         (ii)   state if a part is used, rebuilt or reconditioned, provided
however that if a picture tube is installed, the description of such
replacement tube shall conform to the requirements provided by 6 RCNY §
2-260; and
         (iii)   state the charge for each part replaced; and
         (iv)   not contain miscellaneous charges such as "shop materials" or
"shop supplies," or other similar all-inclusive phrases, which exceed $3.00;
and
         (v)   state if any part was replaced under a warranty or guarantee
arrangement or for "no charge" and
         (vi)   state the licensee's policy regarding warranties and guarantees
on parts and labor, including:
            (A)   the licensee's warranties or guarantees given in connection
with repairs, and
            (B)   warranties or guarantees honored by the licensee.
      (2)   a statement or description of the labor or technical services
performed for which a charge was imposed, which shall include:
         (i)   the total cost for such labor; and
         (ii)   if time is relevant to the computation of labor charges, the
total time spent on repair and the labor rate per hour; or
         (iii)   any other basis used for computation and a description of the
applicable method of computation.
      (3)   a statement of any additional charges, if any, for the Written
Estimate, pick-up and delivery, service call, storage, installation and any
other charges.
§ 2-258 Copies of Documents.
   (a)   A licensee must immediately give each customer a copy of every
document which the customer has signed and every document required by 6 RCNY §§
2-254,
2-255 and
2-257.
   (b)   A licensee must retain for a period of at least three (3) years, an
original or a legible copy of all documents required by these regulations.
§ 2-259 Return of Removed Parts.
   (a)   Unless a customer waives the right to have removed parts returned to
him or her, pursuant to 6 RCNY §
2-259(c), all such parts shall be returned to him or to her, except such parts
as the service dealer requires for return to the manufacturer or distributor
under a warranty agreement and except as provided by 6 RCNY §
2-259(b).
   (b)   Exhibit and tender of a removed part to the customer is sufficient,
      (1)   where the part:
         (i)   is replaced under a service contract or maintenance agreement
for a fixed fee and for a specified time of at least nine months, where no
additional charge is made to the customer for repairs; or
         (ii)   can be rebuilt and the licensee purchases it from the customer
for that purpose and so notifies the customer by indicating the credited value
in the Written Estimate; and
      (2)   where the licensee has so informed the customer; or
      (3)   where the licensee has determined that the part is unsafe, he or
she shall so inform the customer and give the customer the option of whether or
not to accept the returned part.
   (c)   A customer may not waive the right to have all removed parts returned:
      (1)   prior to the customer receiving a Final Bill, except where
replacement parts are to be mailed from a distance exceeding fifty miles from
the boundaries of New York City; and
      (2)   in all circumstances, unless the customer has signed a statement
acknowledging such waiver.
§ 2-260 Picture Tubes. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 1/6/2023, eff. 2/5/2023)
§ 2-261 Warranties and Guarantees Given in Connection with Repairs.
A licensee shall warrant or guarantee:
   (a)   the individual parts replaced, for a minimum period of 90 days after
the repaired item is delivered to the customer; and
   (b)   labor for such repairs, for a minimum period of 30 days after the
repaired item is delivered to the customer. If the cause of the difficulty
proves to be unrelated to parts replaced or servicing performed during the
prior service call, a charge may be made for the parts and labor required to
correct the problem.
§ 2-262 Insurance Coverage.
   (a)   A licensee shall at all times carry insurance which, in the opinion of
the Commissioner, is adequate to protect the public. Sufficient coverage shall
include protection against liability for damage done to the customer's property
and against loss by fire and theft of the average number of articles entrusted
to the licensee or his or her agents or left by customers at any one time with
the licensee for service. Where special circumstances make it difficult or
impossible to obtain the required insurance, an application may be made to the
Commissioner for approval of a substitute means of coverage.
   (b)   A certificate of insurance, in which the insurance company undertakes
to notify the Department of Consumer Affairs as an interested party, shall
accompany every application for a license. Where a licensee's insurance
coverage is suspended or revoked for any reason, the applicable insurance
carrier shall promptly notify this Department of the extent and terms of the
suspension or revocation.
   (c)   A licensee shall notify this Department within five working days of
damage to, theft or loss of customers' property which is in excess of 10 per
cent of the average number of articles entrusted to the licensee or his or her
agents or left by customers at any one time with the license for service.
   (d)   Failure to maintain such insurance at all times shall be considered
grounds for the suspension or revocation of a license issued pursuant to
Subchapter 24 of Chapter 2 of Title 20 of the Administrative Code.
§ 2-263 Construction.
   (a)   Nothing contained in 6 RCNY §§
2-251 through
2-263 shall be construed to relieve a licensee from compliance with any other
applicable laws of New York City, New York State or the United States.
   (b)   Nothing contained in 6 RCNY §§
2-251 through
2-263 shall be construed to waive any right that a customer may have under
common law or statute.
   (c)   In the event that all or any part of 6 RCNY §§
2-251 through
2-263 are in conflict with any other regulation of the Department of Consumer
Affairs, these regulations shall take precedence.
§ 2-264 Severability.
If any provision of 6 RCNY §§
2-251 through
2-263 or the application of such provision to any person or circumstances is
held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications
of these regulations which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions of these regulations are severable.
Subchapter Y: Products for the Disabled: Sale, Rental, Repair and Servicing
§ 2-271 Definitions.
   Dealer. "Dealer" as defined in § 20-425(f) of the Administrative Code:
      (1)   A person shall be deemed a "dealer" whenever:
         (i)   more than $4,000 of the annual gross receipts of the person's
business during the previous tax year resulted from the selling, renting,
repairing or adjusting of products for the disabled; or
         (ii)   more than 10 percent of the annual gross income of the person's
business during the previous tax year was derived from selling, renting,
repairing or adjusting of products for the disabled.
      (2)   A business located outside of New York City shall be deemed a
"dealer" whenever the amount of its annual gross receipts or income derived
from the sale, rental, repair or adjustment of products for the disabled for
consumers residing in New York City equals or exceeds the amounts set forth in
either subparagraph (1)(i) or (1)(ii) above.
   Licensed or registered by any other state or local law. A person "licensed
or registered by any other state or local law" for purposes of exemption from
the requirements of obtaining a license under the Products for the Disabled Law
does not include a person licensed or registered by state or local law for an
activity other than the selling, renting, repairing or adjusting of products
for the disabled as defined in this subchapter. Not exempt, for example, are
persons:
      (1)   certified by Medicaid;
      (2)   licensed by the New York City Department of Consumer Affairs as
secondhand dealers;
      (3)   licensed by the New York State Department of Education as
pharmacists; or
      (4)   possessing state tax certificates.
   Products for the disabled. "Products for the disabled" includes, in addition
to the items set forth in § 20-425 of the Administrative Code, the following:
      (1)   orthotic devices except stock orthotic devices that are not custom
fitted, nor substantially intended for use by the disabled (e.g. ace bandages
and stock support hose);
      (2)   prosthetic devices except stock breast prostheses;
      (3)   self-help aids except:
         (i)   assistic devices for the blind, and
         (ii)   walkers, walkerettes and canes;
      (4)   ostomy supplies except non-durable or disposable stock ostomy
supplies; (5) orthopedic or support shoes except those not designed
specifically or substantially for the disabled.
Written response. For purposes of this subchapter whenever a dealer is required
to obtain a "written" response from a consumer, such a response may be oral
when the consumer is physically unable to write.
§ 2-272 Prohibited Practices.
No dealer or any of his or her agents or employees shall:
   (a)   commence service work before the consumer receives a written estimate
and authorizes the repair, except as provided in 6 RCNY §
2-273(d);
   (b)   fail to make repairs for a consumer because the consumer is exercising
a right to have the product repaired under a valid warranty or guarantee
agreement, when the dealer holds himself out as, or is, authorized by a
manufacturer to service or repair such products;
   (c)   require or attempt to require a consumer to waive any rights provided
in this subchapter.
§ 2-273 Written Estimate.
   (a)   Prior to entering into an agreement for the repair or servicing of
products for the disabled, the dealer must inform the consumer of the
consumer's right to a written estimate, and of any charges attached thereto.
   (b)   If the written estimate does not contain a statement that the final
cost, excluding tax, will not exceed the estimated cost by more than twenty per
cent, then the final cost, excluding tax, may not exceed the estimated cost.
   (c)   Prior to beginning the repair or servicing, except as provided in 6
RCNY §
2-273(d) below, a dealer must obtain written approval of the charges disclosed
in the written estimate from the consumer or the consumer's agent.
   (d)   If the consumer requests that the repair or servicing of his or her
product commence without awaiting receipt of the written estimate, then the
dealer may orally communicate the information required to be contained in the
written estimate to the consumer and may obtain the consumer's oral consent
thereto. The dealer must then immediately mail or otherwise deliver a copy of
the written estimate containing the information required in the Notice in 6
RCNY §
2-275(c) to the consumer. Once the written estimate is mailed or otherwise
delivered to the consumer, the dealer may commence the repairs or servicing.
   (e)   If the consumer does not authorize the repair or servicing of a
product which has been delivered to the dealer for the purpose of making an
estimate, no charge may be imposed, other than any charge previously agreed
upon between the dealer and consumer for the estimate, pick up, or delivery of
the product, and the product shall immediately be returned or made available to
the consumer in the same condition as when released to the dealer.
§ 2-274 Delay in Delivery.
   (a)   Delivery of the repaired or purchased item must be made by the date
promised or stated for delivery in the written estimate, unless the consumer is
notified of the delay and the new anticipated completion date in writing or by
oral communication supplemented within one day by a writing. If complete repair
is going to be delayed more than ten days the consumer must be informed of his
or her right to request the immediate return of the property, completely
reassembled.
   (b)   In the event that the consumer chooses to exercise this right, the
dealer must immediately initiate and carry to completion whatever steps are
necessary to secure the return of the consumer's product, and may charge the
consumer only for work specified on the written estimate which was authorized
and actually completed prior to the requested return of the product. Any
deposit paid by the consumer in excess of what the dealer is entitled to
receive, as described above, shall be returned immediately to the consumer.
§ 2-275 Display of Required Information.
Each dealer shall prominently and conspicuously display, in the area where
products for the disabled are sold, rented, or accepted for repair or
servicing, a sign which contains the following information:
   (a)   The true identity of the dealer, i.e.:
      (1)   in the case of a corporation, the true and complete corporate name;
      (2)   in the case of a partnership, the name of the partnership and the
name of at least one of the partners;
      (3)   in all other cases, the name of at least one of the owners of the
business;
   (b)   The business' current Department of Consumer Affairs License Number,
and the telephone number of the Department's complaint division.
   (c)   The following notice, which shall be not less than 18 inches by 24
inches in dimension with letters of not less than 1 inch case print:
 
NOTICE
THE NEW YORK CITY PRODUCTS FOR THE DISABLED LAW PROVIDES THAT:
(1) The consumer is entitled to a written estimate for all repairs.
(2) No repair work shall be done without the consumer's authorization.
(3) The service dealer must return replaced parts to the consumer except:
   (i) when the consumer specifically gives up the right to have removed parts
returned;
   (ii) when the dealer must return such parts to the manufacturer;
   (iii) when there is no charge for the replacement of such parts;
   (iv) when the dealer purchases the parts from the consumer.
(4) The consumer is entitled to a final bill and an invoice at the time that the
repair is completed. It is advisable for the consumer to retain both the bill and
the invoice.
 
If the dealer charges for a written estimate, that fact shall be disclosed in
Item 1 of the Notice set forth above.
§ 2-276 Return of Removed Parts.
Unless a consumer expressly waives in writing the right to have removed parts
returned to him or her, all such parts shall be returned, except such parts as
the service dealer requires for return to the manufacturer or distributor under
a warranty arrangement and except where the part:
   (a)   is replaced under a service contract or maintenance agreement for a
fixed fee and for a specified time, and where no additional charge is made to
the consumer for repairs; or
   (b)   can be rebuilt and the dealer purchases it from the consumer for that
purpose and indicates the credited value in the written estimate; and
   (c)   is considered by the dealer to be unsafe in which case he or she shall
so inform the consumer and give the consumer the option of whether or not to
accept the returned part.
§ 2-277 Final Bill and Invoice.
The final bill and invoice shall be delivered to the consumer at the same time.
The final bill, in addition to the requirements specified in § 20-425(g) of the
Administrative Code, shall contain:
   (a)   the date of the final bill;
   (b)   the true legal identity, business address and license number of the
dealer, as shown on the license issued by this Department;
   (c)   the name and address of the consumer;
   (d)   the complete signature of the dealer or his or her agent;
   (e)   a statement of total charges, which shall include the basis for the
computation of labor charges including the total time spent on repair and the
labor rate per hour; and
   (f)   a statement of whether a replacement part is used, rebuilt, or
reconditioned.
§ 2-278 Records Required to be Maintained by Dealer.
   (a)   The dealer must maintain, for a period of at least three years, for
each consumer with whom business is transacted, a record containing the
following information:
      (1)   all documents required by or described in this subchapter
including:
         (i)   written estimates;
         (ii)   written authorizations of the estimates;
         (iii)   written notifications of delays in delivery dates;
         (iv)   final bills and invoices; and
         (v)   written waivers regarding the return of replaced parts.
      (2)   any document signed by the consumer or the consumer's agent,
including copies of all correspondence between the dealer and the consumer
regarding a product for the disabled.
      (3)   manufacturers' warranties or guarantees for repaired or serviced
products, as applicable.
      (4)   dealer's warranties or guarantees for repaired or serviced
products, as applicable.
      (5)   originals or copies of medical or other prescriptions for products
for the disabled filled by the dealer for consumers.
      (6)   when estimates or authorization to commence work were oral:
         (i)   the date(s) and time(s) of such conversations;
         (ii)   the name of the consumer, or the consumer's agent, authorizing
the dealer to commence work;
         (iii)   the name of the dealer or the dealer's agent receiving the
oral authorization to commence work.
   (b)   The records referred to in this subchapter must be maintained on the
licensed premises for a period of at least three years and be made available
upon request to the commissioner, the commissioner's designee or other law
enforcement officials.
Subchapter AA: General Vendors
§ 2-301 Proof of Payment of Sales Tax.
Each general vendor shall provide proof of payment of New York State and City
sales tax for the previous two years when applying for renewal of a license.
§ 2-302 Department Notification.
Each general vendor shall notify the Department of Consumer Affairs within ten
days if:
   (a)   he or she has been found to have committed 4 or more violations of any
provision of the general vendors law or any of these regulations on separate
occasions; or
   (b)   he or she has failed to answer a summons, appear for a hearing or pay
a fine imposed by a department or court for violation of the general vendors
law within 30 days of its imposition; or
   (c)   his or her home address or telephone number has changed.
   (d)   Each presently licensed general vendor shall notify the Department
within 10 days of the effective date of these regulations of the address and
names of the owners, manufacturers, suppliers, or distributors from whom the
vendor receives his or her goods, and shall notify the Department within 10
days whenever this information has changed.
§ 2-303 Records.
   (a)   Each general vendor shall keep full and complete records of all daily
gross sales receipts from vending in a format that includes the month and year,
the date, the daily sales, sales tax collected and the total sales for the
date. Such records may be kept in the following format:
 
 
Date Item Sold Sales Tax Collected Total Price
                                 
 
   (b)   All records shall be made available to Department of Consumer Affairs
personnel, upon request, at the Department's offices and the previous two
years' records shall be presented for review to the Department by the general
vendor when applying for renewal of a license.
§ 2-304 Restrictions on Vendor Vehicle Location.
   (a)   A general vendor shall not place a vehicle, pushcart or stand, or
conduct a general vending business at a location in the roadway where stopping,
standing or parking is prohibited, or during a time period when stopping,
standing or parking is restricted.
   (b)   A general vendor shall not place a vehicle, pushcart or stand, or
conduct a general vending business in the roadway in a metered parking space
unless such vendor has complied with the coin requirements of such meter. A
general vendor shall not remain in a metered parking space for a period of time
in excess of the maximum time permitted at such space. Moreover, a general
vendor shall not display, sell or offer merchandise for sale from any vehicle
parked at a metered parking space.
   (c)   A general vendor shall not place a vehicle, pushcart or stand or
conduct a general vending business in the roadway within fifteen (15) feet of a
fire hydrant or within a safety zone.
§ 2-305 Street Fairs; Street Fair and Non-Profit Association Exception.
   (a)   Definitions. 
      Bona fide affiliation. A "bona fide" affiliation shall be deemed to mean:
         (i)   residence on the block on which the fair is taking place, in the
case of a fair sponsored by a block association; or
         (ii)   membership in the association, where the association does not
have as its sole function the sponsorship of street fairs.
      Non-profit associations. For purposes of this section, a "non-profit
association" shall be deemed to be
         (i)   any governmental agency;
         (ii)   any charitable, educational, religious or political
organization, or any association incorporated in accordance with or subject to
the provisions of the New York Not-For-Profit Corporation Law; or
         (iii)   any other organization or association which does not exist for
purposes of pecuniary profit or financial gain and no part of the assets,
income or profit of which is distributable to its members, directors, or
officers.
      Street fair, block party, or festival (hereafter, "street fair"). For
purposes of this regulation, a "street fair" has the same meaning as set forth
in 50 RCNY §
1-01.
   (b)   License and Siting Exemptions. 
      (1)   Any non-profit association holding a street fair, and any person
who operates as a general vendor at such street fair, is exempted from the
provisions of § 20-465(g) of the Administrative Code.
      (2)   At any street fair sponsored by a non-profit association, a person
who sells or offers to sell goods or services (other than food) is not required
to comply with the provisions of § 20-465(a), (b), (d), (e), (g), (k), (i) of
the Administrative Code provided the person meets the following requirements:
         (i)   The person has a bona fide affiliation with the sponsor of the
street fair, does not act as a general vendor other than at street fairs, and
is making a contribution to the sponsoring association through participation in
the street fair; or
         (ii)   The person who sells or offers to sell goods or services has a
location during the fair on the street or sidewalk in front of a store normally
maintained by that person.
      (3)   In addition to information required by subdivision (e) of 50 RCNY §
1-05, the non-profit association holding a street fair must provide the Mayor’s
Office of Citywide Event Coordination and Management’s Street Activity Permit
Office (“SAPO”) with a list of the names and addresses of all persons that are
authorized to operate as vendors at the fair, including all persons covered by
paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subdivision. SAPO shall designate the required
content and form of such list. Such list must be provided to any police officer
or other authorized City officer for inspection at the fair.
      (4)   All persons that meet the requirements of paragraphs (1) and (2) of
this subdivision and are included on the list required by paragraph (3) of this
subdivision are exempt from the requirement of § 20-453 of the Administrative
Code to obtain a general vendor license for the purposes of vending at such
street fair.
(Amended City Record 7/31/2024, eff. 8/30/2024)
§ 2-306 Temporary Move Notice.
When a general vendor has received notice to temporarily move from any location
where exigent circumstances exist, such general vendor shall immediately stop
all vending business and within one minute begin to and as quickly as possible
move his or her goods, vehicle, pushcart or stand from the entire area in which
the exigent circumstances exist as determined and stated by a police officer or
other authorized person giving such notice to move. A general vendor shall not
return to the area of the exigent circumstance while such condition continues
to exist. In the absence of a statement to the contrary by an authorized
person, it shall be presumed that the exigent circumstances will continue to
exist in such area for a period of two hours from the time notice to move was
given to the vendor.
§ 2-307 Practices.
   (a)   No general vendor shall make any misrepresentations concerning
merchandise offered for sale. General vendors shall comply with all applicable
provisions of the Consumer Protection Law (Title 20, Chapter 5, Subchapter 1 of
the Administrative Code of The City of New York) and regulations promulgated
under that law, including, but not limited to, 6 RCNY §
5-32, relating to documentation of transactions.
   (b)   All items sold or offered for sale by general vendors shall have
conspicuously displayed, at the point of offering for sale, the total selling
price exclusive of tax by means
      (1)   of a stamp, tag or label attached to the item or
      (2)   a sign at the point of display which indicates the item to which
the price refers, provided that this information is plainly visible at the
point of display for sale of the items so indicated.
(Amended City Record 8/4/2025, eff. 9/3/2025)
§ 2-308 Return of Removed Property.
An unlicensed general vendor who has had any goods, or any vehicle, pushcart or
stand removed under the provisions of §§ 20-468(c) and 20-465(k) of the New
York City Administrative Code may serve notice of a request for the return of
such property after a judicial determination of the charge of vending without a
license has been made irrespective of the result of such determination. Unless
forfeiture proceedings are to be instituted pursuant to § 20-469 of the New
York City Administrative Code, or unless the judicial proceeding has terminated
in favor of the vendor, the owner or other person lawfully entitled to the
possession of such vehicle, pushcart, stand or goods which have been removed
under the provisions of § 20-465(k) may be charged with reasonable costs for
removal and storage payable prior to the release of such goods, vehicle,
pushcart or stand.
§ 2-309 Identification Cards. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 8/4/2025, eff. 9/3/2025)
§ 2-310 Streets Restricted to General Vendors and Food Vendors.
No general vendor or food vendor may vend on any of the streets specified below
(6 RCNY §
2-314); at the times specified. If a general vendor or food vendor peddles on
any street listed below at the times listed below, any member of the New York
City Police Department may remove his or her goods, vehicle or stand and charge
a removal fee for return of the items. Goods and vehicles are subject to
immediate removal without further warning if a general vendor or food vendor
peddles on the specified streets in violation of these regulations. General
vending continues to be prohibited at all times on the streets and in the
zoning districts specified in § 20-465(g) of the Administrative Code, except
that general vending is permitted in the following C4 zoning district:
   18th Ave. 64th to 65th St.
   65th St. 17th Ave. to 18th Ave.
However, only on the streets and at the times specified below is a general
vendor subject to having his goods immediately removed. No general vendor or
food vendor shall vend on any street or portion of street designated below
during the days of the week and times of day that are specified. This
prohibition also applies to an area of each cross-street that crosses each
designated street; this area is thirty feet of street and sidewalk in each
direction along the cross-street, measured from the building lines closest to
each designated street at each cross-street corner.
§ 2-311 Pushcart Permit Exemptions. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 8/4/2025, eff. 9/3/2025)
§ 2-312 Licensing of General Vendor Distributors.
The annual fee for a general vendor distributor's license shall be two hundred
dollars.
§ 2-313 Guidelines for Temporary General Vendors Licenses in Connection with
Street Fairs. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 7/31/2024, eff. 8/30/2024)
§ 2-314 List of Street Restrictions.
Note: The streets have been arranged by borough in roughly geographical order.
The Manhattan streets are listed in groups of east-west streets, moving north,
and north-south streets, moving west. For the other three boroughs, each list
begins with the southeasternmost streets, proceeding in a northwesterly
direction.
Note: The authority to adopt and amend the restrictions set forth in 6 RCNY §
2-314 (as well as 6 RCNY §
2-310) was transferred by Local Law Number 14 of 1995 from the Department of
Consumer Affairs to the Street Vendor Review Panel. Although amendments to
these restrictions have been adopted by the Street Vendor Review Panel since
1995, they continue to be codified as part of the rules of the Department of
Consumer Affairs, which regulates other aspects or general vending. This
provides the public with easy access to rules relating to general vending.
GENERAL VENDORS MANHATTAN
8th Street          Broadway to Sixth   Every day           24 hours
                    Ave.
14th Street         Broadway to Seventh Mon. through Sat.   Noon to 8 p.m.
                    Ave.
34th Street         Park Ave. to Fifth  Mon. through Sat.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Ave.
34th Street         Fifth Ave. to       Mon. through Sat.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Seventh Ave.
34th Street         Seventh Ave. to     Mon. through Sat.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Eighth Ave.
42nd Street         Third Ave. to       Mon. through Sat.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Eighth Ave.
43rd Street         Second Ave. to      Every day           6 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Lexington Ave.
48th Street         Park Ave. to        Every day           7 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Seventh Ave.
49th Street         Park Ave. to        Mon. through Fri.   7 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Seventh Ave.
50th Street         Park Ave. to        Every day           7 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Seventh Ave.
51st Street         Park Ave. to        Every day           7 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Seventh Ave.
52nd Street         Park Ave. to Avenue Every day           8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    of Americas
                    Fifth Ave. to Ave.
53rd Street         of Americas (north  Every day           8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    side)
                    Fifth Ave. to Ave.
53rd Street         of Americas (south  Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    side)
53rd Street         Park Ave. to Fifth  Mon. though Fri.    8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Ave.
56th Street         Park Ave. to        Every day           7 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Madison Ave.
57th Street         Third Ave. to       Mon. through Sun.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Eighth Ave.
60th Street         Third Ave. to Park  Mon. through Sat.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Ave.
Astor Place         Third Ave. to       Every day           8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Broadway
Avenue of Americas  W. Houston to       Every day           24 hours
                    Waverly Place
Avenue of Americas  Waverly Place to W. Mon to Sat.         8 a.m. to Midnight
                    10th St.            Sunday              8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Midway between W.
Avenue of Americas  12th St. and W.     Mon. through Sat.   Noon to Midnight
                    13th St. to W. 13th
                    St.
Avenue of Americas  33rd St. to 59th    Mon. through Sat.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    St.
Avenue of Americas  30th St. to 33rd    Every day           6 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    St.
                    W. 10th St. to
                    Midway between W.
Avenue to Americas  12 & W. 13 at       Every day           24 hours
                    intersection of C1
                    and C6 Zones
Beaver St.          William St. to      Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 10 a.m.
                    Broadway                                noon to 6 p.m.
Broad Street        Entire street       Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
Broadway            Bowling Green to    Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    Cortlandt St.
Broadway            Cortlandt St. to    Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Murray St.
Broadway            Murray St. to       Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    Leonard St.
Broadway            Third St. to Ninth  Every day           Noon to 11 p.m.
                    St.
Broadway            27th St. to 28th    Every day           9 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    St.
Broadway            32nd St. to 53rd    Every day           8 a.m. to Midnight
                    St.
Broadway            W. 164th St. to W.  Every day           24 hours
                    170th St.
Broadway            Sherman Ave. to     Mon. through Sat.   12 p.m. to 6 p.m.
                    Academy St.
Broadway (East      55th St. to 56th    Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 5 p.m.
Side)               St.
Canal Street        Bowery to Ave. of   Every day           7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Americas
Cedar Street        William St. to      Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    Pearl St.
Chambers St.        Centre St. to West  Mon. through Sat.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    St.
Church Street       Worth St. to        Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    Liberty St.
                    W. 65th St. to W.
Columbus Avenue     66th St. (east      Every day           9 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    side)
Columbus Avenue     W. 66th St. to W.   Mon. through Fri.   5 p.m. to 2 a.m.
                    77th St.            Sat., Sun.          Noon to 2 a.m.
Cortlandt St.       Entire Street       Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 7p.m.
Delancey St.        Orchard St. to      Mon. through Sun.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    Essex St.
Dey St.             Entire street       Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
Dyckman St.         Riverside to 10th   Mon. through Fri.   Noon to 6 p.m.
                    Ave.
Eighth Avenue       W. 34th St. to W.   Every day           8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    42nd St.
Eighth Avenue       56th St. to 58th    Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    St.
Eleventh Avenue     W. 33rd St. to W.   Every day           7:30 a.m. to 10:30
                    39th St.                                p.m.
Exchange Place      Broadway to Broad   Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    St.
Fifth Avenue        Washington Square   Every day           24 hours
                    North to W. 12 St.
Fifth Avenue        32nd St. to 59th    Mon. through Sat.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    St.
Fifth Avenue        47th St. to58th St. Sunday from 11/1 to 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                                        1/15
Fifth Avenue (East  81st St. to 84th
side of street      St.                 Every day           9 a.m. to 6 p.m.
only)
First Avenue        E. 42nd St. to E.   Every day           24 Hours
                    48th St.
Fourth Avenue       Seventh St. to      Friday              4 p.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Astor Place         Sat. through Sun.   Noon to 11 p.m.
Ft. Washington      W. 165th St. to W.  Every day           24 hours
Avenue              169th St.
Fulton Street       William St. to      Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Church St.
Fulton Street       Water St. to        Every day           24 hours
                    William St.
Gold Street         Fulton St. to       Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    Frankfurt St.
Grand Street        Broadway to Essex   Every day           7 a.m. to 9 p.m.
                    St.
Grand Street        Clinton St. to      Wed. through Sun.   10 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    Essex St.
                    Christopher St. to
                    W. 10th St. on the
Greenwich Avenue    South and Seventh   Every day           24 hours
                    Ave. E. South and
                    W. 11th on the
                    North
Greenwich St.       Albany St. to       Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    Liberty St.
John Street         Water St. to Gold   Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    St.
John Street         Gold St. to         Mon. Through Fri.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Broadway
Lafayette St.       Reade St. to Duane  Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    St.
Lafayette St.       Seventh St. to      Friday              4 p.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Astor Place         Sat. through Sun.   Noon to 11 p.m.
Lexington Avenue    E. 40th St. to E.   Mon. through Sat.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    57th St.
Lexington Avenue    E. 57th St. to E.   Mon. through Sat.   8 a.m. to 9 p.m.
                    60th St.
Lexington Avenue    E. 67th St. to E.   Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    68th St.
Lexington Avenue    E. 68th St. to E.   Every day           24 hours
                    69th St.
Lexington Avenue    E. 69th St. to E.   Every day           5 p.m. to 8 p.m.
                    70th St.
Lexington Avenue    E. 76th St. to E.   Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    78th St.
Lexington Avenue    E. 86th St. to E.   Mon. through Sat.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    87th St.
                    Church St. and                          8 a.m. to 10 a.m.
Liberty St.         Trinity Pl. to      Mon. through Fri.   noon to 6 p.m.
                    William St.
Madison Avenue      E. 34th St. to E.   Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    45th St.
Madison Avenue      E. 45th St. to E.   Mon. through Sat.   10 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    59th St.
Madison Avenue      E. 59th St. to E.   Mon. through Sat.   10 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    60th St.(west side)
Madison Avenue      E. 60th St. to E.   Mon. through Sat.   10 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    86th St.
Maiden Lane         William St. to      Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    Broadway
McDougal Street     W. 3rd St. to       Every day           Noon to Midnight
                    Bleeker St.
Mott Street         Canal St. to Broome Every day           10 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    St.
Mott Street         Canal St. to        Every day           24 hours
                    Chatham Sq.
Nagel Avenue        Academy St. to      Mon. through Fri.   12 p.m. to 6 p.m.
                    Broadway
Nassau Street       Entire street       Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
New Street          Entire street       Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    From the Northeast
                    corner of 9th Ave.
Ninth Avenue        at 40th St. to the  Every day           6 a.m. to 9 p.m.
                    southeast corner of
                    9th Ave. at 41st
                    St.
                    E. 17th St. to E.                       8 a.m. to 9:30 a.m.
Park Ave. South     34th St.            Mon. through Fri.   11 a.m. to 2 p.m.
                                                            3:30 p.m. to 6 p.m.
Park Avenue         E. 34th St. to E.   Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    42nd St.
Park Avenue         E. 46th St. to E.   Every day           8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                    55th St.
Park Avenue         E. 55th St. to E.   Mon. through Fri.   10 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    59th St.
Park Place          Broadway to West    Mon. through Sat.   10 a.m. to 4:30
                    Broadway                                p.m.
Pearl Street        Fulton St. to       Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    Frankfurt St.
Post Avenue         Dyckman St. to      Mon. through Fri.   12 p.m. to 6 p.m.
                    Academy St.
Prince Street       Broadway to West    Sat., Sun.          9 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Broadway
Rector Street       Washington St. to   Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    Broadway
Second Avenue       E. 57th St. to E.   Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    60th St.
Seventh Avenue      W. 27th St. to W.   Mon. through Fri.   10 a.m. to 2 p.m.
                    29th St.
Seventh Avenue      29th St. to 30th    Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    St.
Seventh Avenue      30th St. to33rd St. Every day           6 a.m. to 11 p.m.
Seventh Avenue      W. 32nd St. to W.   Every day           8 a.m. to Midnight
                    53rd St.
Sherman Avenue      Academy St. to      Mon. through Fri.   12 p.m. to 6 p.m.
                    Broadway
Spring Street       Broadway to West    Sat., Sun.          9 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Broadway
St. Nicholas Avenue W. 179th St. to W.  Mon. through Sat.   9 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    184th St.
Third Avenue        E. 40th St. to E.   Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    58th St.
Third Avenue        E. 58th St. to E.   Mon. through Sat.   8 a.m. to 9 p.m.
                    60th St.
Third Avenue        E. 68th St. to E.   Every day           24 hours
                    69th St.
Third Avenue        E. 69th St. to E.   Every day           5 p.m. to 8 p.m.
                    70th St.
Third Avenue        Seventh St. to      Friday              4 p.m. to 11 p.m.
(West Side)         Astor Place         Sat. through Sun.   Noon to 11 p.m.
Twelfth Avenue      W. 33rd St. to W.   Every day           7:30 a.m. to 10:30
                    39th St.                                p.m.
Vanderbilt Avenue   E. 42nd St. to E.   Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    45th St.
Vermilyea Avenue    Dyckman St. to      Mon. through Fri.   12 p.m. to 6 p.m.
                    Academy St.
Vesey Street        Church St. to       Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    Broadway
Wall Street         Water St. to        Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    Broadway
Water Street        Whitehall St. to    Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Wall St.
West Broadway       Canal St. to        Every day           10 a.m. to Midnight
                    Houston St.
Whitehall St.       South St. to Pearl  Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 10 a.m.
                    St.                                     Noon to 6 p.m.
William St.         Exchange Pl. to     Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    Pine St.
William St.         Pine St. to John    Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 10 a.m.
                    St.                                     noon to 6 p.m.
William St.         John St. to Fulton  Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    St.
E. 4th Street       Lafayette St to     Friday              4p.m.to 11p.m.
                    Broadway            Sat. through Sun.   Noon to 11 p.m.
E. 23rd Street      Third Ave. to       Mon. through Fri.   9 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                    Lexington Ave.
E. 23rd Street      Lexington Ave. to   Mon. through Fri.   9 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                    Park Ave. South
E. 23rd Street      Park Ave South to   Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                    Fifth Ave.
E. 40th Street      Third Ave. to       Mon. through Sat.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Lexington Ave.
E. 41st Street      Third Ave. to       Mon through Sat.    8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Lexington Ave.
E. 42nd Street      First Ave to Third  Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Ave.
E. 45th Street      Vanderbilt Ave. to  Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    DePew Pl.
E. 48th Street      Lexington Ave. to   Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Park Ave.
E. 49th Street      Lexington Ave. to   Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Park Ave.
E. 50th Street      Lexington Ave. to   Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Park Ave.
E. 51st Street      Lexington Ave. to   Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Park Ave.
E. 53rd Street      Third Ave. to Park  Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                    Ave.
E. 54th Street      Third Ave. to       Every day           7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Lexington Ave.
E. 58th Street      Third Ave. to Fifth Mon. through Sat.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Ave.
E. 59th Street      Third Ave. to Fifth Mon. through Sat.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Ave.
E. 68th Street      Third Ave. to       Every day           24 hours
                    Lexington Ave.
E. 68th Street      Lexington Ave. to   Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    Park Ave.
E. 69th Street      Third Ave. to       Every day           24 hours
                    Lexington Ave.
E. 77th Street      Park Ave. to Third  Every day           24 hours
                    Ave.
E. 85th Street      First Ave. to       Every day           24 hours
                    Lexington Ave.
E. 86th Street      First Ave. to Park  Every day           24 hours
                    Ave.
E. 87th Street      First Ave. to       Every day           24 hours
                    Lexington Ave.
W. 3rd Street       Sullivan St to      Every day           Noon to Midnight
                    McDougal St.
                    Ave. of Americas
W. 4th Street       (Sixth Ave.) to     Every day           11 a.m. to Midnight
                    Seventh Ave.
W. 23rd Street      Fifth Ave. to       Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6:30p.m.
                    Seventh Ave.
W. 32nd Street      Fifth Ave. to       Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 9 a.m.
                    Avenue of Americas                      4 p.m.to 6 p.m.
W. 32nd Street      Avenue of Americas  Every day           8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    to Seventh Ave.
W. 33rd Street      Fifth Ave to Ave.   Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 9 a.m.
                    of Americas
W. 33rd Street      Ave. of Americas to Every day           8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    Seventh Ave.                            4 p.m.to 6 p.m.
W. 33rd Street      Eleventh Ave. to    Every day           7:30 a.m. to 10:30
                    Twelfth Ave.                            p.m.
W. 34th Street      Eleventh Ave. to    Every day           7:30 a.m. to 10:30
                    Twelfth Ave.                            p.m.
W. 35th Street      Tenth Ave. to       Every day           7:30 a.m. to 10:30
                    Eleventh Ave.                           p.m.
W. 35th Street      Seventh Ave. to     Every day           7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Ninth Ave.
W. 36th Street      Tenth Ave. to       Every day           7:30 a.m. to 10:30
                    Eleventh Ave.                           p.m.
W. 36th Street      Seventh Ave. to     Every day           7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Ninth Ave.
W. 37th Street      Seventh Ave. to     Every day           7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Eighth Ave.
W. 38th Street      Seventh Ave. to     Every day           7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Ninth Ave.
W. 39th Street      Seventh Ave. to     Every day           7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Eighth Ave.
W. 39th Street      Eleventh Ave. to    Every day           7:30 a.m. to 10:30
                    Twelfth Ave.                            p.m.
W. 40th Street      Fifth Ave. to       Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 9 a.m.
                    Eighth Ave.                             4p.m.to 6 p.m.
                    1. North Side: From
                    8th Ave. west
                    approximately 125
                    ft. to the west
W. 40th Street      side of the 40th.   Every day           6 a.m. to 9 p.m.
                    St. entrance to the
                    Port Authority Bus
                    Terminal entrance
                    closest to 8th Ave.
                    2. North side:
                    Within 50 ft. of
                    the 40th St.
                   entrance to the     Every day           6 a.m. to 9 p.m.
                    Port Authority Bus
                    Terminal at mid-
                    block between 8th
                    Ave. and 9th Ave.
                    3. North side: From
                    a point 50 ft. east
                    of bus entrance to
                    Port Authority Bus
                   Terminal west to    Every day           6 a.m. to 9 p.m.
                    the northeast
                    corner of the
                    intersection of 9th
                    Ave. and 40th St.
W. 41st Street      Seventh Ave. to     Every day           7 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                    Ninth Ave.
                    From the southeast
                    corner of the
                    intersection of 9th
W. 41st Street      Ave. and 41st St.   Every day           6 a.m. to 9 p.m.
                    approximately 150
                    ft. east along the
                    south side of 40th
                    St.
                    South side from the
                    southwest corner of
                    the 8th Ave. and
                    42nd St.
W. 42nd Street      intersection, west  Every day           6 a.m. to 9 p.m.
                    approximately 390
                    ft. to the property
                    line of the Port
                    Authority Bus
                    Terminal.
                    Ave. of Americas to Wed., Sat.          Noon to Midnight
W. 44th Street      Eighth Ave.         Sunday              Noon to 7 p.m.
                                        Other Days          6 p.m. to Midnight
                    Ave. of Americas to Wed., Sat.          Noon to Midnight
W. 45th Street      Eighth Ave.         Sunday              Noon to 7 p.m.
                                        Other Days          6 p.m. to Midnight
                    Ave. of America to  Wed., Sat.          Noon to Midnight
W. 46th Street      Eighth Ave.         Sunday              Noon to 7 p.m.
                                        Other Days          6 p.m. to Midnight
                    Between Ave. of     Wed., Sat.          Noon to Midnight
W. 47th Street      Americas and Eighth Sunday              Noon to 7 p.m.
                    Ave.                Other Days          6 p.m. to Midnight
                    Between Fifth Ave.
W. 47th Street      and Ave. of         Mon. through Sat.   10 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    Americas
                    Seventh Ave. to     Wed., Sat.          Noon to Midnight
W. 48th Street      Eighth Ave.         Sunday              Noon to 7 p.m.
                                        Other Days          6 p.m. to Midnight
                    Seventh Ave. to     Wed., Sat.          Noon to Midnight
W. 49th Street      Eighth Ave.         Sunday              Noon to 7 p.m.
                                        Other Days          6 p.m. to Midnight
                    Seventh Ave. to     Wed., Sat.          Noon to Midnight
W. 50th St.         Eighth Ave.         Sunday              Noon to 7 p.m.
                                        Other Days          6 p.m. to Midnight
                    Seventh Ave. to     Wed., Sat.          Noon to Midnight
W. 51st Street      Eighth Ave.         Sunday              Noon to 7 p.m.
                                        Other Days          6 p.m. to Midnight
                    Ave. of Americas to Wed., Sat.          Noon to Midnight
W. 52nd Street      Eighth Ave.         Sunday              Noon to 7 p.m.
                                        Other Days          6 p.m. to Midnight
W. 58th Street      Fifth Ave. to Ave.  Mon. through Sat.   8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                    of Americas
W. 72nd Street      Central Park West   Mon. through Fri.   5 p.m. to 10 p.m.
                    to West End Ave.    From 5/1 to 1/1
                                      Sat., Sun. From     Noon to 10 p.m.
                                        5/1 to 1/1
W. 165th Street     Broadway to         Every day           24 hours
                    Riverside Dr.
W. 168th Street     Broadway to Haven   Every day           24 hours
                    Ave.
W. 181st Street     Audubon Ave. to Ft. Mon. through Sat.   9 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Washington Ave.
 
BRONX
Fordham Road       Webster Ave. to Jerome Mon. through Sat. 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   Ave.
Grand Concourse    E. 170th St. to Elliot Mon. through Sat. 9:30 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   Place                  Sun.              10 a.m. to 5 p.m.
Grand Concourse    E. 170th St. to E.     Mon. through Sat. 9:30 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   171st St.              Sun.              10 a.m. to 5 p.m.
Grand Concourse    184th St. to           Mon. through Sat. 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   Kingsbridge Road
Jerome Avenue      E. 170th St. to Elliot Mon. through Sat. 9:30 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   Place                  Sun.              10 a.m. to 5 p.m.
Jerome Avenue      E. 170th St. to E.     Mon. through Sat. 9:30 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   171st St.              Sun.              10 a.m. to 5 p.m.
Southern Boulevard 163rd St. to           Mon. through Sat. 9 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   Westchester Ave.
Third Avenue       148th St. to 156th St. Mon. through Sat. 9 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Third Avenue       148th St. to 156th St. Sunday            9 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Townsend Avenue    E. 170th St. to E.     Mon. through Sat. 9:30 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   171st St.              Sun.              10 a.m. to 5 p.m.
Walton Avenue      E. 170th St. to E.     Mon. through Sat. 9:30 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   171st St.              Sun.              10 a.m. to 5 p.m.
Walton Avenue      E. 170th St. to Elliot Mon. through Sat. 9:30 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   Place                  Sun.              10 a.m. to 5 p.m.
Westchester Avenue Simpson St. to         Mon. through Fri. 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                   Southern Blvd.
Wythe Place        E. 170th St. to E.     Mon. through Sat. 9:30 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   171st St.              Sun.              10 a.m. to 5 p.m.
E. 161st Street    River Ave. to Sherman  Mon. through Sat. 9 a.m. to 8 p.m.
E. 170th Street    Jerome Ave. to Grand   Mon. through Sat. 9:30 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   Concourse              Sun.              10 a.m. to 5 p.m.
 
BROOKLYN
13th Avenue         37th St. to 55th    Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                    St.                 and Sunday
18th Avenue         McDonald Ave. to    Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                    60th St.            and Sunday
18th Avenue         60th St. to 64th    Mon. through Sat.   7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    St.                 Sunday              8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
18th Avenue         65th St. to 68th    Mon. through Sat.   7 a.m. to 9 p.m.
                    St.                 Sunday              8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
48th Street         9th Ave. to Ft.     Every day           9 a.m. to 9 p.m.
                    Hamilton Pkwy.
49th Street         9th Ave. to Ft.     Every day           9 a.m. to 9 p.m.
                    Hamilton Pkwy.
60th St. to 64th    17th Ave. to 19th   Mon. through Sat.   7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
St.                 Ave.
65th Street         18th Ave. to 19th   Mon. through Sat.   7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Ave.
66th St. to 68th    17th Ave. to 19th   Mon. through Sat.   7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
St.                 Ave.
86th Street         18th Ave. to 26th   Mon. through Sat.   9 a.m. to 9 p.m.
                    Ave.
86th Street         4th Ave. to Ft.     Every day           9 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Hamilton Pkwy.
                    Fulton St. to       Sunday              10 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Albee Square        Flatbush Ave. Ext.  Thursday            8 a.m. to 10 p.m.
                                        Other Days          8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Avenue D            E. 29th St. to E.   Every day           8 a.m. to 10 p.m.
                    31st St.
Avenue J            Coney Island Ave.   Every day           9 a.m. to 9 p.m.
                    to E. 17th St.
Avenue M            Coney Island Ave.   Every day           9 a.m. to 9 p.m.
                    to Ocean Ave.
                    Emmons Ave. to      Fri. through Sun.
Batchelder St.      Shore Pkwy. Service 5/1 to 9/30         8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Rd. (eastbound)
Bedford Avenue      Emmons Ave. to Ave. Fri. through Sun.   8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    X                   5/1 to 9/30
Bond Street/Gold    Livingston St. to   Sunday              10 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Square              Willoughby St.      Thursday            8 a.m. to 10 p.m.
                                        Other Days          8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Bragg Street        Sheepshead Bay Rd.  Fri. through Sun.   8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    to Voorhies Ave.    5/1 to 9/30
                    Sheepshead Bay Rd.
Brigham Street      to Shore Pkwy.      Fri. through Sun.   8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Service Rd.         5/1 to 9/30
                    (eastbound)
Brighton Beach      Ocean Parkway to    Every day from      9 a.m. to 9 p.m.
Avenue              Corbin Place        Labor Day to 5/1
                                      Every day from 5/   7 a.m. to Midnight
                                        1 to Labor Day
                    Emmons Ave. to      Fri. through Sun.
Brown Street        Shore Pkwy. Service 5/1 to 9/30         8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Rd. (eastbound)
Church Avenue       Coney Island Ave.   Every day           7 a.m. to 9 p.m.
                    to Bedford Ave.
Church Avenue       Bedford Ave. to     Mon. through Sat.   8 a.m. to 9 p.m.
                    Nostrand Ave.
Coney Island        Parkside Ave. to    Every day           9 a.m. to 9 p.m.
                    Avenue P
Cortelyou Road      Coney Island Ave.   Every day           9 a.m. to 9 p.m.
                    to E. 17th St.
Court St. / Cadman  Remsen St. to       Every day           24 hours
Plaza               Pierrepont St.
Court Street        Livingston St. to   Mon. through Fri.   7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Montague St.
                    Emmons Ave. to      Fri. through Sun.
Coyle Street        Shore Pkwy. Service 5/1 to 9/30         8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Rd. (eastbound)
Cropsey Avenue      Bay 50th St. to Bay Every day from 5/   24 hours
                    24th St.            1 to Labor Day
                                      From Labor Day to   7 a.m. to Midnight
                                        5/1
                    Fulton St. to       Sunday              10 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Dekalb Avenue       Flatbush Ave. Ext.  Thursday            8 a.m. to 10 p.m.
                                        Other Days          8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                    Emmons Ave. to      Fri. through Sun.
Dooley Street       Shore Pkwy. Service 5/1 to 9/30         8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Rd. (eastbound)
Elm Place /         Livingston St. to   Sunday              10 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Duffield Street     Willoughby St.      Thursday            8 a.m. to 10 p.m.
                                        Other Days          8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Emmons Ave. (south  West End Ave. to    Fri. through Sun.   8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
side)               Knapp St.           5/1 to 9/30
Emmons Ave. (north  East 14th St. to    Fri. through Sun.   8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
side)               Knapp St.           5/1 to 9/30
Emmons Avenue       Shore Blvd. to      Every day from 5/   8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Knapp St.           1 to 9/30
Fifth Avenue        84th St. to 88th    Everyday            9 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    St.
Fifth Avenue        44th St. to 59th    Thurs. through Sat. 10 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    St.
Flatbush Avenue     Cortelyou Rd. to    Mon. through Sat.   8 a.m. to 9 p.m.
                    Avenue I            Sunday              9 a.m. to 9 p.m.
Flatbush Avenue     Parkside Ave. to    Every day           7 a.m. to 9 p.m.
                    Cortelyou Rd.
Flatbush Avenue     Livingston St. to   Sunday              10 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Ext.                Willoughby St.      Thursday            8 a.m. to 10 p.m.
                                        Other Days          8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Flatlands Avenue    East 88th to Utica  Every day           8 a.m. to Midnight
                    Avenue
                    Emmons Ave. to      Fri. through Sun.
Ford Street         Shore Pkwy. Service 5/1 to 9/30         8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Rd. (eastbound)
Foster Avenue       E. 29th St. to New  Every day           8 a.m. to 10 p.m.
                    York Ave.
Fourth Avenue       84th St. to 88th    Every day           9 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    St.
                    Adams St. / Boerum  Sunday              10 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Fulton Street       Pl. to Flatbush     Thursday            8 a.m. to 10 p.m.
                    Ave.                Other Days          8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Gallatin Place /    Livingston St. to   Sunday              10 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Lawrence Street     Willoughby St.      Thursday            8 a.m. to 10 p.m.
                                        Other Days          8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Graham Avenue       Broadway to Boerum  Every day           8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    St.
                    Livingston St. to   Sunday              10 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Hanover Place       Fulton St.          Thursday            8 a.m. to 10 p.m.
                                        Other Days          8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                    Emmons Ave. to      Fri through Sun.
Harring Street      Shore Pkwy. Service 5/1 to 9/30         8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Rd. (eastbound)
Hoyt Street/Bridge  Livingston St. to   Sunday              10 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Street              Willoughby St.      Thursday            8 a.m. to 10 p.m.
                                        Other Days          8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Jay Street/Smith    Livingston St. to   Sunday              10 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Street              Willoughby St.      Thursday            8 a.m. to 10 p.m.
                                        Other Days          8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Kings Highway       Ocean Ave. to Ocean Mon. through Sat.   8 a.m. to 9 p.m.
                    Parkway             Sunday              9 a.m. to 9 p.m.
Knapp Street        Emmons Ave. to      Fri. through Sun.   8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Voorhies Ave.       5/1 to 9/30
                    E. 37th St. to New
Lenox Road          York Ave. (north    Mon. through Fri.   9 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    side)
Liberty Avenue      Drew St. to         Mon. through Sat.   9 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Crescent St.
                    Flatbush Ave. Ext.  Sunday              10 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Livingston Street   to Boerum Pl./Adam  Thursday            8 a.m. to 10 p.m.
                    St.                 Other Days          8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Mermaid Avenue      Stillwell Ave. to   Every day from 5/   24 hours
                    W. 20th St.         1 to Labor Day
                                      From Labor Day to   7 a.m. to midnight
                                        5/1
Montague Street     Court St. to the    Every day           24 hours
                    Promenade
                    Livingston St. to   Sunday              10 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Nevins Street       Flatbush Ave. Ext.  Thursday            8 a.m. to 10 p.m.
                                        Other Days          8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Newkirk Avenue      Entire plaza        Every day           9 a.m. to 9 p.m.
Newkirk Avenue      E. 29th St. to E.   Every day           8 a.m. to 10 p.m.
                    31st St.
Nostrand Avenue     Avenue D to Foster  Every day           8 a.m. to 10 p.m.
                    Ave.
Nostrand Avenue     Emmons Ave. to Ave. Fri. through Sun.   8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    X                   5/1 to 9/30
Ocean Ave.          Emmons Ave. to Ave. Fri. through Sun.   8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    X                   5/1 to 9/30
Oriental Boulevard  West End Ave. to    Every day from 5/   8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Oxford St.          1 to 9/30
                    Livingston St. to   Sunday              10 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Pearl Street        northern extremity  Thursday            8 a.m. to 10 p.m.
                                        Other Days          8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Pierrepon St.       Cadman Plaza to     Every day           24 hours
                    Henry St.
Pitkin Avenue       Legion St. to       Every day           24 hours
                    Thatford Ave.
                    Emmons Ave. to      Fri. through Sun.
Poole Lane          Shore Pkwy. Service 5/1 to 9/30         8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Rd. (eastbound)
Remsen Street       Court St. to Henry  Every day           24 hours
                    St.
Sheepshead Bay Road Emmons Ave. to      Every day           8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Avenue Z
Sheepshead Bay Road Emmons Ave. to      Fri. through Sun.   8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Avenue X            5/1 to 9/30
Shore Boulevard     Emmons Ave. to      Every day from 5/   8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Pembroke St.        1 to 9/30
Shore Pkwy. Service East 14th St. to    Fri. through Sun.   8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
Rd. (eastbound)     East 19th St.       5/1 to 9/30
Shore Pkwy. Service East 19th St. to    Fri. through Sun.   8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
Rd. (eastbound)     Ocean Ave.          5/1 to 9/30
Shore Pkwy. Service Ocean Ave. to Knapp Fri. through Sun.   8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
Rd. (eastbound)     St.                 5/1 to 9/30
Shore Pkwy. Service East 14th St. to    Fri. through Sun.   8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
Rd. (westbound)     Ocean Ave.          5/1 to 9/30
Stillwell Avenue    Neptune Ave. to     Every day from 5/   24 hours
                    Boardwalk           1 to Labor Day
                                      From Labor Day to   7 a.m. to Midnight
                                        5/1
                                        Every day from 5/   24 hours
Surf Ave., to both  W. 5th St. to W.    1 to Labor Day       
sides of Boardwalk  20th St.            Every day from      7 a.m. to Midnight
                                        Labor Day to 5/1
Surf Ave. to both   W. 20th St. to W.   Every day from 5/   11 a.m. to Midnight
sides of Boardwalk  23rd St.            1 to Labor Day
Tenth Avenue        47th St. to 50th    Every day           9 a.m. to 9 p.m.
                    St.
Voorhies Avenue     East 14th St. to    Fri. through Sun.   8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Knapp St.           5/1 to 9/30
                    Flatbush Ave. Ext.  Sunday              10 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Willoughby Street   to Adams St.        Thursday            8 a.m. to 10 p.m.
                                        Other Days          8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                    Shore Blvd. to
West End Ave.       Shore Parkway       Fri. through Sun.   8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Service Rd.         5/1 to 9/30
                    (eastbound)
                                      From Labor Day to   7 a.m. to Midnight
                                        5/1
                    Emmons Ave. to      Fri. through Sun.
E. 15th Street      Shore Pkwy. Service 5/1 to 9/30         8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Rd. (eastbound)
                    Emmons Ave. to      Fri. through Sun.
E. 16th Street      Shore Pkwy. Service 5/1 to 9/30         8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Rd. (eastbound)
                    Emmons Ave. to      Fri. through Sun.
E. 19th Street      Shore Pkwy. Service 5/1 to 9/30         8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Rd. (eastbound)
                    Emmons Ave. to      Fri. through Sun.
E. 21st Street      Shore Pkwy. Service 5/1 to 9/30         8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Rd. (eastbound)
                    Emmons Ave. to      Fri. through Sun.
E. 22nd Street      Shore Pkwy. Service 5/1 to 9/30         8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Rd. (eastbound)
                    Emmons Ave. to      Fri. through Sun.
E. 23rd Street      Shore Pkwy. Service 5/1 to 9/30         8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Rd. (eastbound)
                    Emmons Ave. to      Fri. through Sun.
E. 24th Street      Shore Pkwy. Service 5/1 to 9/30         8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Rd. (eastbound)
                    Emmons Ave. to      Fri. through Sun.
E. 26th Street      Shore Pkwy. Service 5/1 to 9/30         8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Rd. (eastbound)
                    Emmons Ave. to      Fri. through Sun.
E. 27th Street      Shore Pkwy. Service 5/1 to 9/30         8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Rd. (eastbound)
                    Emmons Ave. to      Fri. through Sun.
E. 28th Street      Shore Pkwy. Service 5/1 to 9/30         8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Rd. (eastbound)
                    Emmons Ave. to      Fri. through Sun.
E. 29th Street      Shore Pkwy. Service 5/1 to 9/30         8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Rd. (eastbound)
                    Clarkson Ave. to
E. 37th Street      Lenox Rd. (west     Mon. through Fri.   9 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    side)
 
QUEENS
31st Street        Ditmars Blvd. to 23rd Every day         24 hours
                   Ave.
63rd Road          97th St. to Queens    Mon. through Sat. 9 a.m. to 9:30 p.m.
                   Blvd.                 Sunday            11 a.m. to 6 p.m.
70th Road          Queens Blvd. to       Every day         9 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   Austin St.
74th Street        Roosevelt Ave. to     Mon. through Sat. 9 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   37th Ave.
82nd Street        Baxter Ave. to 37th   Mon. through Sat. 9 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   Ave.
103rd Street       Roosevelt Ave. to     Mon. through Sat. 9 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   37th Ave.
108th Street       63rd Rd. to 65th Rd.  Every day         9 a.m. to 8 p.m.
160th Street       Archer Ave. to 90th   Mon. through Sat. 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   Ave.                  Sunday            11 a.m. to 6 p.m.
162nd Street       Jamaica Ave. to 89th  Mon. through Sat. 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   Ave.                  Sunday            11 a.m. to 6 p.m.
164th Street       Jamaica Ave. to 89th  Mon. through Sat. 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   Ave.                  Sunday            11 a.m. to 6 p.m.
165th Street       Archer Ave. to        Mon. through Sat. 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   Hillside Ave.         Sunday            11 a.m. to 6 p.m.
Austin Street      Yellowstone Blvd. to  Every day         9 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   Ascan Ave.
Continental Ave./  Queens Blvd. to Burns Every day         9 a.m. to 8 p.m.
71st               St.
                   Liberty Ave. and
Crossbay Blvd.     Rockaway Blvd. to 165 Every day         8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                   Ave.
Ditmars Blvd.      29th St. to 33rd St.  Every day         24 hours
Jamaica Avenue     170th St. to 146th    Mon. through Sat. 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   St.                   Sunday            11 a.m. to 6 p.m.
Junction Blvd.     Queens Blvd. to 62nd  Mon. through Sat. 9 a.m. to 9:30 p.m.
                   Dr.                   Sunday            11 a.m. to 6 p.m.
Junction Blvd.     L.I. Expwy. to 57th   Every day         9 a.m. to 10 p.m.
                   Ave.
Junction Blvd.     Roosevelt Ave. to     Every day         9 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   34th Ave.
Kissena Blvd.      41st Ave. to Sanford  Mon. through Sat. 9 a.m. to 9:30 p.m.
                   Ave.                  Sunday            11 a.m. to 6 p.m.
Liberty Avenue     103rd Ave. to Van     Mon. through Sat. 9 a.m. to 6:30 p.m.
                   Wyck Expway
Lipman Arcade      Roosevelt Ave. to     Mon. through Sat. 9 a.m. to 9:30 p.m.
                   39th Ave.             Sunday            11 a.m. to 6 p.m.
Main Street        Sanford Ave. to       Mon. through Sat. 9 a.m. to 9:30 p.m.
                   Northern Blvd.        Sunday            11 a.m. to 6 p.m.
Metropolitan Ave.  Woodhaven Blvd. to    Every day         9 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   75th Ave.
National Street    Roosevelt Ave. to     Mon. through Sat. 10 a.m. to 9 p.m.
                   45th Ave.
New York Boulevard Archer Ave. to        Mon. through Sat. 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   Jamaica Ave.          Sunday            11 a.m. to 6 p.m.
Parsons Blvd.      Archer Ave. to        Mon. through Sat. 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   Hillside Ave.         Sunday            11 a.m. to 6 p.m.
Queens Blvd.       Broadway to 60th Ave. Mon. through Sat. 10 a.m. to 9 p.m.
Queens Blvd.       63rd Drive to         Mon. through Sat. 9 a.m. to 9:30 p.m.
                   Junction Blvd.        Sunday            11 a.m. to 6 p.m.
Queens Blvd.       67th Ave. to Union    Every day         9 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   Turnpike
Queens Plaza North 24th St. to Northern  Mon. through Sat. 8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                   Blvd.
Rockaway Blvd.     148th Ave. to175th    Mon. through Fri. 8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                   St.
Roosevelt Ave.     Union St. to Prince   Mon. through Sat. 9 a.m. to 9:30 p.m.
                   St.                   Sunday            11 a.m. to 6 p.m.
Roosevelt Ave.     79th St. to           Every day         9 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                   Junction Blvd.
Roosevelt Ave.     69th St. to114th St.  Every day         24 hours
Steinway St.       36th Ave. to Astoria  Mon. through Sat. 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   Blvd.                 Sunday            11 a.m. to 6 p.m.
Sutphin Blvd.      94th Ave. to Hillside Mon. through Sat. 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   Ave.                  Sunday            11 a.m. to 6 p.m.
Union Hall St.     Archer Ave. to        Mon. through Sat. 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                   Jamaica Ave.          Sunday            11 a.m. to 6 p.m.
Woodhaven Blvd.    Furmanville Rd. to    Every day         24 hours
                   Cooper Ave.
 
FOOD VENDORS
 
MANHATTAN
32nd Street          6th Ave. to 7th Ave. Every day           8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
33rd Street          Park Ave. to 5th     Mon. through Sat.   7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                     Ave.
33rd Street          6th Ave. to 7th Ave. Every day           8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
34th Street          Park Ave. to Fifth   Every day           8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                     Ave.
34th Street          Seventh Ave. to      Every day           8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                     Eighth Ave.
42nd Street          1st Ave. to 3rd Ave. Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
47th Street          5th Ave. to Ave. of  Mon. through Sat.   10 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                     Americas
48th Street          Madison Ave. to Ave. Every day           7 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                     of Americas
48th Street          Ave. of Americas to  Every day           7 a.m. to 11 p.m.
(south side only)    Seventh Ave.
49th Street          Madison Ave. to Ave. Every day           7 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                     of Americas
50th Street          Madison Ave. to Ave. Every day           7 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                     of Americas
51st Street          Park Ave. to Ave. of Every day           7 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                     Americas
52nd Street          Madison Ave. to Ave. Every day           8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                     of Americas
                     Fifth Ave. to Ave.
53rd Street          of Americas (north   Every day           8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                     side)
53rd Street          Third Ave. to        Mon. through Sat.   7 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                     Lexington Ave.
53rd Street          Park Ave. to Madison Mon. through Sat.   7 a.m. to 8 p.m.
(south side only)    Ave.
53rd Street          Madison Ave. to      Mon. through Sat.   7 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                     Fifth Ave.
56th Street          Park Ave. to Madison Every day           7 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                     Ave.
56th Street          Lexington Ave. to    Mon. through Sat.   7 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                     6th Ave.
57th Street          Park Ave. to Eighth  Mon. through Sun.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                     Ave.
58th Street          Madison Ave. to      Mon. through Sat.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                     Fifth Ave.
58th Street          Fifth Ave. to 6th    Mon. through Sat.   8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                     Ave.
59th Street          Lexington Ave. to    Mon. through Sat.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                     Park Ave.
59th Street          Madison Ave. to      Mon. through Sat.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                     Fifth Ave.
60th Street          Lexington Ave. to    Mon. through Sat.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                     Park Ave.
Avenue of Americas   30th St. to33rd St.  Every day           6 a.m. to 11 p.m.
Broad Street         Wall St. to South    Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                     St.
Broadway             27th St. to 28th St. Every day           9 a.m. to 6 p.m.
Broadway             32nd St. to 52nd St. Every day           8 a.m. to 11 p.m.
Broadway             Bowling Green to     Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                     Wall St.
Broadway             Cortlandt St. to     Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                     Murray St.
Cedar Street         William St. to Pearl Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                     St.
Church Street        Vesey St. to Murray  Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                     St.
Church Street        Cortlandt St. to Dey Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                     St.
Columbus Avenue      W. 65th St. to W.    Every day           9 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                     66th St. (east side)
Cortlandt Street     Entire Street        Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
Delancey Street      Orchard St. to Essex Mon. through Sun.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                     St.
Dey Street           Entire Street        Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
Eighth Avenue        33rd St. to 42nd St. Every day           8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
Exchange Place       Broadway to Broad    Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                     St.
Fifth Avenue         47th St. to 58th St. Sunday from 11/1 to 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                                          1/15
Fifth Avenue (east   81st St. to 84th St. Every day           9 a.m. to 6 p.m.
side of street only)
Fulton Street        William St. to       Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                     Church St.
Fulton Street        Water St. to William Every day           24 hours
                     St.
Gold Street          Fulton St. to        Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                     Frankfurt St.
                     Centre St. to Mott   Sat., Sun.          8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
Grand Street         St. Bowery to Allen                      
                     St.                  Sat., Sun.          8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
John Street          Broadway to Gold St. Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
Lexington Avenue     74th St. to 79th St. Every day           7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
Madison Avenue       59th St. to 60th St. Mon. through Sat.   10 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                     (west side)
Maiden Lane          Broadway to Nassau   Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                     St.
Mott Street          Canal St. to Broome  Every day           10 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                     St.
Mott Street          Canal St. to Chatham Every day           24 hours
                     Sq.
New Street           Exchange Place to    Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                     Wall St.
Park Avenue          46th St. to 55th St. Mon. through Fri.   9 a.m. to 6 p.m.
Pearl Street         Fulton St. to        Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                     Frankfurt St.
Prince Street        Broadway to West     Sat., Sun.          9 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                     Broadway
Rector Street        Washington St. to    Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                     Broadway
Seventh Avenue       27th St. to 30th St. Mon. through Fri.   10 a.m. to 2 p.m.
Seventh Avenue       30th St. to 33rd St. Every day           6 a.m. to 11 p.m.
Seventh Avenue       34th St. to 35th St. Mon. through Sat.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
Seventh Avenue       46th St. to 52nd St. Mon. through Sat.   Noon to 2 p.m.
                                                              7 p.m. to 11 p.m.
Spring Street        Broadway to West     Sat., Sun.          9 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                     Broadway
Vesey Street         Church St. to        Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                     Broadway
Wall Street          Broad St. to         Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                     Broadway
Water Street         Wall St. to          Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                     Whitehall St.
William Street       Exchange Place to    Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                     Pine St.
William Street       John St. to Fulton   Mon. through Fri.   8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                     St.
E. 43rd Street       Second Ave. to Third Every day           6 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                     Ave.
E. 43rd Street       Third Ave. to Fifth  Every day           7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                     Ave.
E. 44th Street       Third Ave. to Fifth  Every day           7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                     Ave.
E. 45th Street       Third Ave. to Fifth  Every day           7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                     Ave.
E. 54th Street       Third Ave. to        Every day           7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                     Lexington Ave.
E. 77th Street       Park Ave. to Third   Every day           24 hours
                     Ave.
E. 86th Street       Third Ave. to        Every day           7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                     Lexington Ave.
W. 35th Street       Seventh Ave. to      Every day           7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                     Ninth Ave.
W. 36th Street       Seventh Ave. to      Every day           7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                     Ninth Ave.
W. 37th Street       Seventh Ave. to      Every day           7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                     Eighth Ave.
W. 38th Street       Seventh Ave. to      Every day           7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                     Ninth Ave.
W. 39th Street       Seventh Ave. to      Every day           7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                     Eighth Ave.
W. 41st Street       Seventh Ave. to      Every day           7 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                     Ninth Ave.
 
 
BRONX
Westchester Avenue Simpson St. to Southern Mon. through Fri. 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                   Blvd.
 
BROOKLYN 
13th Avenue         37th St. to 55th St.  Mon. through Fri. 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                                          and Sun.
18th Avenue         McDonald Ave. to 60th Mon. through Fri. 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                    St.                   and Sun.
18th Avenue         55th St. to 68th St.  Mon. through Fri. 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                                          and Sun.
Bridge St.          Fulton St. to Myrtle  Every day         6 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Ave.
Brighton Beach      Ocean Parkway to      Every day from    7 a.m. to Midnight
Avenue              Corbin Place          5/1 to Labor Day
Church Avenue       Coney Island Ave. to  Mon. through Sat. 8 a.m. to 9 p.m.
                    Nostrand Ave.
Court Street /      Remsen St. to         Every day         24 hours
Cadman Plaza        Pierrepont St.
Cropsey Avenue      Bay 50th St. to Bay   Every day from    24 hours
                    54th St.              5/1 to Labor Day
                                        Every day from    7 a.m. to Midnight
                                          Labor Day to 5/1
Dekalb Avenue       Fulton St. to         Every day         8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Flatbush Ave.
Emmons Avenue       Shore Blvd. to Knapp  Every day from    11 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    St.                   5/1 to 9/30
Flatbush Avenue     Parkside Ave. to      Mon. through Sat. 8 a.m. to 9 p.m.
                    Avenue I
Fulton Street       Adams St. to Flatbush Every day         8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Ave.
Graham Avenue       Broadway to Boerum    Every day         8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    St.
Hoyt Street         Fulton St. to         Every day         8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Livingston St.
Jay Street          Fulton St. to Tillary Every day         6 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    St.
Johnson St.         Adams St. to Flatbush Every day         6 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Ave. Ext.
Kings Highway       Ocean Ave. to Ocean   Every day         9 a.m. to 9 p.m.
                    Parkway
Lawrence St.        Fulton St. to Myrtle  Every day         6 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Ave.
                    E. 37th St. to New
Lenox Road          York Ave. (north      Mon. through Fri. 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    side)
Mermaid Avenue      Stillwell Ave. to     Every day from    24 hours
                    West 20th St.         5/1 to Labor Day
                                        Every day from    7 a.m. to Midnight
                                          Labor Day to 5/1
Montague Street     Court St. to the      Every day         24 hours
                    Promenade
Oriental Blvd.      West End Ave. to      Every day from    11 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Oxford St.            5/1 to 9/30
Pierrepont St.      Cadman Plaza to Henry Every day         24 hours
                    St.
Red Hook Lane       Fulton St. to         Every day         8 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Livingston St.
Remsen Street       Court St. to Henry    Every day         24 hours
                    St.
Sheepshead Bay Road Emmons Ave. to Avenue Every day         11 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Z
Shore Blvd.         Emmons Ave. to        Every day from    11 a.m. to 11 p.m.
                    Pembroke St.          5/1 to 9/30
Stillwell Avenue    Neptune Ave. to       Every day from    24 hours
                    Boardwalk             5/1 to Labor Day
                                        Every day from    7 a.m. to Midnight
                                          Labor Day to 5/1
Surf Avenue (both   West 5th St. to West  Every day from    24 hours
sides of Boardwalk) 20th St.              5/1 to Labor Day
                                        Every day from    7 a.m. to Midnight
                                          Labor Day to 5/1
Willoughby St.      Adams St. to Flatbush Every day         6 a.m. to 7 p.m.
                    Ave. Ext.
E. 37th Street      Clarkson Ave. to      Mon. through Fri. 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.
                    Lenox Rd. (west side)
 
 
QUEENS
Junction Blvd.  L.I. Expressway to 57th Everyday          9 a.m. to 10 p.m.
                Ave.
Junction Blvd.  Roosevelt Ave. to 34th  Everyday          9 a.m. to 8 p.m.
                Ave.
Liberty Avenue  103rd Ave. to Van Wyck  Mon. through Sat. 9 a.m. to 6:30 p.m.
                Expressway
Steinway Street 25th Ave. to Broadway   Mon. through Sat. 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.
Rockaway Blvd.  148th Ave. to 175th St. Mon. through Fri. 8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
 
§ 2-315 Application Procedures for Honorably Discharged Members of the Armed
Forces who are Eligible for Specialized Vending Licenses Pursuant to § 35-a of
the General Business Law.
   (a)   As used in this section, the following terms have the following
meanings:
      (1)   Block face. "Block face" means the area of sidewalk spanning from
one intersection to the next;
      (2)   City-specialized vending license. "City-specialized vending
license" means a specialized vending license for a block face in the city of
New York that is located outside the following areas: (i) the midtown core (ii)
Broadway between Murray street and Battery Place, (iii) Park Row between Ann
street and Spruce street; and (iv) the area including and bounded on the east
by the easterly side of Broadway, on the south by the southerly side of Liberty
street, on the west by the westerly side of West street, and on the north by
the northerly side of Vesey street;
      (3)   Midtown core. "Midtown core" means the borough of Manhattan in the
City of New York in the area bounded on the east by Second avenue, on the south
by Thirtieth street, on the west by Ninth avenue and Columbus avenue and on the
north by Sixty-fifth street; provided, however, that the "midtown core" shall
not include (and vending is prohibited on) Second avenue, Third avenue,
Lexington avenue, Park avenue, Vanderbilt avenue, Madison avenue, Fifth avenue,
Sixth avenue, Seventh avenue, Broadway, Eighth avenue, Amsterdam avenue, Ninth
avenue, Columbus avenue, Thirty-fourth street between Lexington avenue and
Seventh avenue, Forty-second street between Lexington avenue and Eight avenue,
Forty-ninth street between Lexington avenue and Seventh avenue, Fiftieth street
between Lexington avenue and Seventh avenue and Fifty-seventh street between
Lexington avenue and Seventh avenue;
      (4)   Midtown-specialized vending license. "Midtown-specialized vending
license" means a specialized vending license for a block face located in the
midtown core;
      (5)   Specialized vending license. "Specialized vending license" means a
license issued pursuant to § 35-a of the General Business Law;
      (6)   General vendor's license. "General vendor's license" means a
license issued by the Commissioner pursuant to Subchapter 27 of Chapter 2 of
Title 20 of the New York City Administrative Code; and
      (7)   Mobile food vending license. “Mobile food vending license” means a
license issued by the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene pursuant to
Subchapter 2 of Chapter 3 of Title 17 of the New York City Administrative Code
and 24 RCNY
Chapter 6.
   (b)   Applications for specialized vending licenses and the reissuance of
specialized vending licenses issued prior to March 1, 2003 are governed by the
following procedures:
      (1)   All persons who hold current specialized vending licenses that were
issued pursuant to the provisions of § 35-a of the General Business Law prior
to March 1, 2003, must apply for the reissuance of such specialized vending
licenses with new priority ranks to be accorded and assigned in accordance with
subdivision (c) of this section.
      (2)   Applications for the reissuance of such currently valid specialized
vending licenses issued prior to March 1, 2003, must be received by the
department during the period commencing on August 23, 2004 and ending no later
than 5 p.m. on September 22, 2004.
      (3)   Such applications must include the following information and
documentation:
         (i)   The applicant's name, home address and home telephone number;
and
         (ii)   Whether the applicant is seeking a midtown- or a city-
specialized vending license as their first choice. An applicant who fails to
indicate whether they seek a midtown or a city specialized vending license
shall be deemed to have chosen a midtown-specialized vending license; and
         (iii)   Proof that the applicant holds a currently valid general
vendor's license and a currently valid specialized vending license issued prior
to March 1, 2003; and
         (iv)   If a licensee exchanged a midtown-specialized vending license
for a city-specialized vending license, or vice versa, and has continuously
held a specialized vending license since the date on which the first such
license was issued, an indication of which license was received first.
   (c)   Each eligible applicant for the reissuance of specialized vending
licenses issued before March 1, 2003, shall be reissued such license with a new
priority rank, which shall be determined and assigned in accordance with this
subdivision.
      (1)   All eligible applications for the reissuance of such specialized
vending licenses that are received on or before 5 p.m. of September 22, 2004
shall be sequentially assigned a priority rank based on the earlier of (A) the
date of issuance of the applicant's currently valid specialized vending license
that was issued prior to March 1, 2003, or, (B) in the case of a licensee who
exchanged, prior to March 1, 2003, a midtown-specialized vending license for a
city-specialized vending license, or vice versa, and who has continuously held
a specialized vending license since the date on which the first such license
was issued, the date of issuance of such first license. Number one shall be the
rank assigned to the applicant whose specialized vending license has the
earliest date of issuance, determined in accordance this paragraph, and who is
therefore entitled to the highest priority rank.
      (2)   Any specialized vending license issued prior to March 1, 2003,
shall be deemed to have been surrendered as of 5 p.m. on September 22, 2004
unless such application for the reissuance of such license is received by the
Department on or before such date and time.
      (3)   If more than one qualified applicant holds a specialized vending
license with the same date of issuance determined in accordance with paragraph
one of this subdivision, all such applicants shall be ranked sequentially in
reverse order according to the number of their general vendor's licenses, with
the highest priority ranking being assigned to the applicant within such group
who holds the lowest numbered general vendor's license.
   (d)   Midtown-specialized vending licenses shall first be issued to the
holders of specialized vending licenses who have filed applications in
accordance with subdivision (b) of this section and who hold currently valid
midtown-specialized vendor's licenses issued prior to March 1, 2003. Such
licenses shall be issued with a priority rank assigned to such midtown-
specialized vending licenses, which shall be in the order in which such
applicants are ranked pursuant to subdivision (c) of this section.
      (1)   If not all of the 60 holders of midtown-specialized vending
licenses that are issued and outstanding as of March 1, 2003, have filed
applications that request the reissuance of, or are deemed to request the
reissuance of, a midtown-specialized vending license in accordance with such
subdivision (b), the remaining midtown-specialized vending licenses shall be
issued to eligible applicants who request the issuance of, or who are deemed to
request the issuance of midtown-specialized vending licenses and who have been
assigned the highest priority ranks established in accordance with such
subdivision (c).
      (2)   Any qualified applicants for the issuance of midtown-specialized
vending licenses remaining after the maximum of 60 authorized for issuance
pursuant to § 35-a of the General Business Law as of March 5, 2004, have been
issued shall be included on the waiting list maintained pursuant to subdivision
(e) of this section for midtown-specialized vending licenses that become
available at any time.
   (e)   The Department shall maintain a waiting list of applicants for
midtown-specialized vending licenses that become available.
      (1)   The applicants placed on the waiting list for midtown-specialized
vending licenses pursuant to paragraph two of subdivision (d) of this section
shall be ranked in the order of the priority rank assigned pursuant to
subdivision (c) of this section.
      (2)   Any other city-specialized vending licensee may request the
Department to add their name to such waiting list by filing an application with
the Department. The names of applicants shall be entered on such waiting list
in the order that such applications are received.
      (3)   Any midtown-specialized vending licenses that become available
after March 5, 2004, shall be offered by the Commissioner to persons included
on such waiting list in the order in which they are ranked on such list. Any
applicant on such list who fails to notify the Commissioner within the time
provided in the Commissioner's offer that such applicant requests that such
license be issued to them shall be deemed to have refused such license and to
have surrendered their place on such waiting list as of 5 p.m. on the last date
by which the applicant was required to so notify the Commissioner.
   (f)   No more than 105 midtown-specialized vending licenses shall be issued
at any single time on or after January 31, 2007. Such licenses shall be issued
according to the following schedule:
      (1)   A maximum of 60 such licenses on or after March 5, 2004.
      (2)   A maximum of an additional 15 such licenses commencing June 7,
2004.
      (3)   A maximum of an additional 10 such licenses in each of the
succeeding three years commencing on January 31 of 2005, 2006 and 2007.
      (4)   Only holders of city-specialized vending licenses that are in
effect at the time such additional midtown-specialized vending license become
available are eligible to be issued such additional midtown-specialized vending
licenses.
   (g)   The Department shall publish a notice in the City Record requesting
applications for midtown-specialized vending licenses whenever the Department
ascertains that a midtown-specialized vending license is available for issuance
and there are no applicants on the waiting list maintained by the Department in
accordance with subdivision (e).
      (1)   Applicants shall have 14 days from the date of publication of such
notice to submit an application containing the information and documentation
specified in such notice.
      (2)   Applicants responding to the notice for the issuance of available
midtown-specialized vending licenses shall include the following information
and documentation:
         (i)   the applicant's name, home address and home telephone number;
         (ii)   proof that the applicant holds a currently valid general
vendor’s license or a currently valid mobile food vending license; and
         (iii)   proof that the applicant holds a currently valid city-
specialized vending license issued after August 23, 2004.
      (3)   Midtown-specialized vending licenses shall be issued sequentially
to qualified applicants in the order of the priority ranks assigned to their
currently held valid specialized vending licenses until the number of midtown-
specialized vending licenses that are then available as specified in such
notice have been issued.
      (4)   Any applicant who is issued such additional midtown-specialized
vending license must surrender their city-specialized vending license upon the
issuance of the midtown-specialized vending license, and such midtown-
specialized vending license shall be assigned the same priority rank as had
been assigned to the surrendered city-specialized vending license.
   (h)   Any applicant who, pursuant to subdivision (b) of this section, makes
a timely application for the issuance of a midtown-specialized vending license
but who is not issued such license shall be reissued such city-specialized
vending license with the priority rank as provided in subdivision (c) of this
section.
   (i)   Applicants who apply on or after August 23, 2004 for the issuance of
city-specialized vending licenses, must provide the following information in,
and attach the following documentation to, the application for such license:
      (1)   The applicant's name, home address and home telephone number; and
      (2)   Proof that the applicant:
         (i)   has been honorably discharged from the armed forces of the
United States;
         (ii)   has sustained a service-related physical disability that is
verified in a letter to the veteran/applicant on original letterhead with an
original signature from the United States Department of Veterans Affairs or the
United States Veterans Administration; and
         (iii)   holds a currently valid general vendor’s license or a
currently valid mobile food vending license.
      (3)   Notwithstanding subparagraph (ii) of paragraph two of this
subdivision, an applicant whose currently valid general vendor's license
designates such applicant as a disabled veteran is not required to submit with
their application for a city-specialized vending license a letter from the
United States Department of Veterans Affairs or the United States Veterans
Administration verifying that such veteran / applicant has sustained a service-
related physical disability.
      (4)   Such applications for a specialized vending license shall be
assigned priority ranks in the order in which the applications are received.
   (j)   (1)   All persons who hold current specialized vending licenses that
were issued pursuant to the provisions of § 35-a of the General Business Law
after February 28, 2003, and before August 23, 2004, shall apply for the
reissuance of such specialized vending licenses with a new priority rank that
shall be accorded and assigned in accordance with paragraph four of this
subdivision.
      (2)   Such applications must include the following information and
documentation:
         (i)   The applicant's name, home address and home telephone number;
and
         (ii)   Proof that the applicant holds a currently valid general
vendor's license and a currently valid specialized vending license issued after
February 28, 2003.
      (3)   Individuals holding city-specialized vending licenses issued after
February 28, 2003, and before August 23, 2004 who do not apply by September 22,
2004 shall be deemed to have surrendered such license as of 5 p.m. on September
22, 2004 unless such application for the reissuance of such license is received
by the Department on or before such date and time.
      (4)   Such applications for a specialized vending license shall be
assigned the priority ranks based on the date of issuance of the applicant's
currently valid specialized vending license. If more than one such qualified
applicant holds a specialized vending license with the same date of issuance,
all such applicants shall be ranked sequentially in reverse order according to
the number of their general vendor's licenses, with the highest priority
ranking being assigned to the applicant within such group who holds the lowest
numbered general vendor's license.
   (k)   No disabled veteran vendor may hold more than one specialized vending
license issued by the Department, whether a midtown-specialized vending license
or a city-specialized vending license. A specialized vending license shall not
have a term and shall be valid until the date on which such specialized vending
license is surrendered to the Department, or until the specialized vending
licensee ceases to hold a currently valid general vendor's licenseor currently
valid mobile food vending license, or until otherwise provided by law.
   (l)   Any eligible disabled veteran may apply to exchange their specialized
vending license for a different type of specialized vending license issued by
the Department by making an application for the type of license he or she seeks
in accordance with the application procedures specified in this section.
   (m)   City-specialized vending licenses shall be yellow and midtown-
specialized vending licenses shall be blue and shall be clearly differentiated
from such licenses issued prior to March 1, 2003. Each such specialized vending
license also shall contain a photograph of the disabled veteran to whom such
license is assigned as well as their name, home address, specialized vending
license number, and such licensee's assigned priority rank.
   (n)   Upon the death of a holder of a specialized vending license, the
surviving spouse or, if there is no surviving spouse or the surviving spouse
elects not to use such license, the guardian of a minor child or children of
such holder, to whom such license is transferred by operation of law in
accordance with § 35-a of the General Business Law, must notify the Department
of the death of such holder and, upon submitting proof of the conditions upon
which such transfer is based, shall be issued a license in their name with the
same priority rank as that assigned to such holder.
   (o)   A holder who becomes totally or permanently disabled and wishes to
transfer their specialized vending license to their spouse or to an adult child
who assumes the duty to support such holder must notify the Department. Such
license shall be issued in their name, upon their submitting proof of the
conditions upon which such transfer is based, with the same priority rank as
that assigned to such holder.
(Amended City Record 9/10/2025, eff. 10/10/2025)
§ 2-316 List of Restricted Location Zones. [Repealed]
§ 2-317 Transfer of General Vending Licenses.
   (a)   Upon the death of a licensed general vendor, the Department shall
transfer the license to the surviving spouse, if any, of the general vendor if
the spouse informs the Department he or she desires to use the license. If
there is no surviving spouse or if the surviving spouse elects not to use the
license, the Department shall transfer the license to the guardian of a
surviving minor child or children of the general vendor, provided the guardian
intends to use the license for the support of the minor child or children. The
Department shall issue a general vending license to the applicable party in his
or her name upon submission to the Department of proof of the conditions upon
which the transfer is based. The license shall revert to the Department for
reassignment upon the death of the surviving spouse to whom the license has
been transferred, or when:
      (1)   the surviving spouse to whom the license has been transferred
remarries;
      (2)   the youngest minor child of the deceased licensed general vendor
reaches the age of eighteen; or
      (3)   the surviving spouse to whom the license has been transferred, or
the guardian of the minor child or children to whom the license has been
transferred, elects not to use the license to vend in the city of New York or
abandons the use of the license.
      Temporary periods when the surviving spouse or guardian do not vend shall
not cause the license to revert to the Department in the absence of other
evidence of an intent to abandon the use of the license; however, a period of
six months or more in which the holder of the license does not vend shall
create a rebuttable presumption that the spouse or guardian has abandoned the
use of the license.
      In the event that the surviving spouse to whom the license has been
transferred, or the guardian of a surviving minor child or children to whom the
license has been transferred, dies before the youngest minor child reaches the
age of eighteen, any new guardian must submit a request to the Department for
transfer of the license. Any license so transferred shall revert to the
Department by operation of law when the youngest minor child reaches the age of
eighteen.
   (b)   If a licensed general vendor becomes totally and permanently disabled,
he or she may transfer the license to his or her spouse or, if the licensee has
no spouse, to an adult child if the child assumes the duty to support the
licensee. The Department shall issue a general vending license to the
applicable party in his or her name upon submission to the Department of proof
of the conditions upon which such transfer is based. The license shall revert
to Department when:
      (1)   the general vendor who held the license immediately before the
transfer dies;
      (2)   the spouse to whom the license has been transferred dies or
divorces the general vendor who held the license immediately before the
transfer; or
      (3)   the child to whom the license has been transferred dies or
renounces the obligation to support the general vendor who held the license
immediately before the transfer.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, "spouse" includes a domestic partner.
   (d)   Except as provided for in this section, no general vending license,
and no interest in any general vending license, may be sold, lent, leased or
transferred.
(Added City Record 3/7/2016, eff. 4/6/2016)
§ 2-318 General Vendor Helpers.
   (a)   Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      "Disability" means a physical or mental impairment that substantially
limits one or more major life activities or major bodily functions and that
permanently or temporarily impairs an individual's ability to operate a general
vending business.
      "Major bodily functions" include functions of the immune system, normal
cell growth, digestive, bowel, bladder, neurological, brain, respiratory,
circulatory, endocrine and reproductive functions.
      "Major life activities" include caring for oneself, performing manual
tasks, seeing, hearing, eating, sleeping, walking, standing, lifting, bending,
speaking, breathing, learning, reading, concentrating, thinking, communicating
and working.
   (b)   Request for Authorization. 
      (1)   Subject to the restrictions set forth in this rule, a general
vendor holding a current General Vendor's license with a disability may use
individuals as helpers in the operation of his or her general vending business,
even if such individuals do not have general vending licenses.
      (2)   A general vendor must request authorization to use helpers on forms
prescribed by the Department, including a certification form to be completed by
an appropriate licensed health care professional who has examined the general
vendor. The licensed health care professional must: (i) attest to the existence
of a disability; (ii) describe with specificity how the disability impairs the
vendor's ability to operate a general vending business; and (iii) state whether
the disability is permanent or temporary, and in the case of a temporary
disability, the likely duration of the disability. The Department may require
applicants to submit supplemental medical reports or certifications to verify
the continued existence of a temporary disability.
      (3)   The Department shall maintain the confidentiality of all medical
records and information submitted by the general vendor seeking authorization
to use helpers unless required to be produced pursuant to law.
      (4)   The Department shall make a determination as soon as is practicable
after receiving all requested documents and information. The Department shall
then inform the party seeking authorization in writing whether the request has
been approved or denied.
      (5)   If the request is approved, the Department shall provide the vendor
with an amended license, with an endorsement on the front or back of the
license that the licensee is authorized to use helpers. The endorsement shall
specify the period during which the licensee is authorized to use helpers.
      (6)   The licensee shall surrender his or her current license to the
Department upon receipt of the amended license.
   (c)   Use of Helpers. 
      (1)   The licensee must be physically present at the vending display at
all times that his or her general vending business is being operated. Helpers
may not engage in the operation of the general vending business unless the
licensee is physically present. In the event that the licensee is temporarily
absent from the vending display and the helper remains at the vending display,
the vending display must be covered so as to alert potential purchasers that
the display is closed for business. The presence of a helper at an uncovered
vending display, without a licensee present, shall constitute unlicensed
vending activity.
      (2)   The licensee may use the services of only one helper at any given
time. Use of more than one helper at a time shall constitute unlicensed vending
activity.
      (3)   The licensee shall maintain a chronological log of his or her use
of helpers, on a form prescribed by the Department, which shall indicate the
date and time of all helper use, and the name, address and phone number of each
helper used. The log shall be available for inspection at all times during
which the licensee's general vending business is operating, and may be
inspected by an inspector of the Department or by a police officer.
      (4)   The licensee will be responsible for ensuring that helpers comply
with all applicable laws, rules and regulations at all times that the helpers
are assisting with the general vending business, and the licensee shall be
deemed liable for any breach caused by any act or omission of a helper.
      (5)   The licensee will be responsible for ensuring that helpers are in
possession of photo identification at all times such helper is assisting with
the general vending business.
      (6)   The Department may revoke authorization to use helpers, or revoke
authorization for a particular helper, in the event that either the licensee or
any of his or her helpers has failed to comply with applicable laws, rules or
regulations, or if the Department determines that the licensee is not, or does
not continue to be, a general vendor with a disability.
      (7)   The Department will provide the licensee with notice and a
reasonable opportunity to cure non-compliance with applicable laws, rules or
regulations prior to revoking authorization to use helpers or a particular
helper.
      (8)   The Department will not revoke authorization to use helpers without
giving the licensee notice and an opportunity to appear and rebut any claim
that the licensee (i) has violated applicable laws, rules or regulations, and
has failed to cure any violation, or (ii) is not, or does not continue to be, a
general vendor with a disability.
   (d)   Termination of Authorization for the Use of Helpers. 
      (1)   For disabilities deemed permanent by a licensed health care
professional pursuant to subdivision (b)(2)(iii) of this section,
authorizations to use helpers will terminate on the license expiration date of
the then active license. Upon renewal of the license, the renewal license will
carry the helper endorsement or other indication of authorization, which will
terminate on the license expiration date of the renewal license.
      (2)   For disabilities deemed temporary by a licensed health care
professional pursuant to subdivision (b)(2)(iii) of this section,
authorizations to use helpers will terminate at the end of the endorsement
period indicated on the license or on the license expiration date, whichever is
sooner. If a temporary authorization is needed beyond the license expiration
date, the renewal license will carry the temporary helper endorsement, which
will terminate at the end of the endorsement period or on the expiration date
of the renewal license, whichever is sooner.
(Added City Record 5/26/2016, eff. 6/25/2016)
§ 2-319 Waiting List for General Vendor Licenses.
   (a)   The Department shall establish and maintain a waiting list of
prospective applicants for general vendor licenses that become available to
individuals who are not veterans that are automatically granted a general
vendor license under article four of the general business law or § 20-455.1 of
the Administrative Code.
   (b)   Publication and Notice. The Department shall publish in the City
Record and on the Department's website a notice inviting individuals to submit
requests to be included on the waiting list. This notice shall be republished
whenever the Department determines that the number of prospective applicants on
the waiting list has fallen below 300. The notice shall be published no later
than 60 days after the Department makes this determination and at least 45 days
before the Department accepts requests to be included on the waiting list.
   (c)   Content of Notice. The notice shall specify: (1) the date on which the
Department will begin accepting requests; (2) that requests will be accepted
for the next 30 days; (3) that on the 31st day, the waiting list will close and
will not be open again until the Department determines that the number of
prospective applicants have fallen below 300; (4) that requests may be
submitted in person at any of the Department's Licensing Centers, on-line via
the Department's website or by regular mail via an envelope postmarked within
the 30 day acceptance period; (5) that all requests must include the
prospective applicant's' full name and contact address; (6) that prospective
applicants must provide written notification to the Department's Licensing
Division of any change of address and that failure to so provide may result in
the loss of the waiting list position; (7) that prospective applicants may not
occupy more than one position on the waiting list; (8) that positions on the
waiting list are not transferrable; and (9) the street and web addresses where
requests and changes of address could be sent to the Department.
   (d)   Assignment to the New Waiting List. Prospective applicants will be
assigned positions on the waiting list pursuant to the following procedure:
      (1)   Within 60 days after the close of the waiting list, each
prospective applicant will be assigned a number using a computer-generated
random number selection program.
      (2)   The Department will then assign waiting list positions to
prospective applicants in ascending order using the numbers assigned by the
selection program ("prospective applicant rank").
      (3)   The Department will notify prospective applicants of their number
on the waiting list in writing to the address provided in the request.
   (e)   Withdrawal From That Waiting List. A prospective applicant may
withdraw from the waiting list by providing written notice to the Department's
Licensing Division in person or by mail.
   (f)   Offer of Available General Vendor Licenses to Waiting List Applicants.
The Department shall offer the opportunity to apply for available general
vendor licenses to prospective applicants on the waiting list in the order of
their prospective applicant rank. The Department shall provide written notice
of the offer at the address provided in the prospective applicant's request or
in the change of address. Such notice shall specify that:
      (1)   Prospective applicant must submit a completed general vendor
application, together with required fees, within 60 days of the date of the
offer; and
      (2)   If the Department does not receive the completed application and
fees within the specified time period, the offer will be deemed refused and the
waiting list position surrendered.
   (g)   Issuance of General Vendor License. General vendor licenses will be
issued to those prospective applicants who successfully complete the general
vendor application, pay all related fees and satisfy all other eligibility
criteria set forth in the relevant laws and rules.
(Added City Record 9/2/2016, eff. 10/2/2016)
Subchapter BB: Storage Warehouses
§ 2-321 Definitions.
For purposes of this subchapter:
   Bill for services. "Bill for services" means a writing signed by the storage
warehouse operator or his authorized agent stating the total costs for the
following:
      (1)   the monthly charge for storage of the goods;
      (2)   if applicable, the charge for a minimum number of months' storage;
      (3)   the charge for packing, containers, warehouse labor in,
transportation to the warehouse, padding or sanitizing;
      (4)   any charges imposed by the storage warehouse operator, including
the charges for warehouse labor out and transportation from the warehouse, if
applicable.
   Inventory. "Inventory" means an itemized list, signed by the storage
warehouse operator or his authorized agent, indicating the condition of each
item which is being stored.
   Written estimate. "Written estimate" means a writing signed by the storage
warehouse operator or his authorized agent setting forth:
      (1)   the charge, if applicable, but not exceeding $20 for the written
estimate based upon an actual physical inspection;
      (2)   a tally of the household goods included in the estimate, which
shall not be construed to be an inventory as defined by 6 RCNY §
2-321 "Inventory"
      (3)   the estimated monthly charge for storage of the goods;
      (4)   if applicable, the estimated charge for packing, containers,
warehouse labor in transportation to the warehouse, padding or sanitizing;
      (5)   if applicable, the minimum monthly charge or the minimum number of
months' storage charge;
      (6)   any other charges imposed by the storage warehouse operator,
including a statement that there will be a charge for "warehouse labor out" and
"transportation from the warehouse" and a description of how these charges will
be calculated;
      (7)   any limitation on liability for loss or damage to household goods;
      (8)   the name, principal place of business and telephone number of the
storage warehouse operator, and the street address, borough and telephone
number where the goods will be stored.
(Amended City Record 7/26/2018, eff. 8/25/2018)
§ 2-322 Oral Disclosures.
   (a)   It is a deceptive practice for a storage warehouse operator to fail to
disclose to a consumer in response to a telephone inquiry about storage:
      (1)   that the consumer has a right to a written estimate based on a
physical inspection of the consumer's goods before any goods are removed by the
warehouse operator;
      (2)   the charge, if applicable, but not exceeding $20, for the written
estimate based upon a physical inspection;
      (3)   the street address and borough where the goods will be stored;
      (4)   whether there is a minimum monthly storage charge or charge for a
minimum number of months' storage and, if so, the amount of the charges;
      (5)   the warehouse operator's storage rate per unit;
      (6)   the total charge customarily imposed by the warehouse operator for
three months' storage of the following bedroom furniture:
         1 double bed or 2 single beds
         1 bureau or dresser
         1 chair
         1 night table
      (7)   whether the warehouse operator imposes charges for warehouse labor
in, padding, papering, storage preparation, or sanitizing and, if so, the
amount of the charges;
      (8)   the warehouse operator's transportation charges to the warehouse;
      (9)   the warehouse operator's charge for containers;
      (10)   the warehouse operator's charge for packing;
      (11)   any other charges that will be imposed by the warehouse operator.
   (b)   It is a deceptive practice for a storage warehouse operator to fail
to:
      (1)   give a consumer a printed copy of the oral disclosures prior to
picking up the goods for storage;
      (2)   retain a copy of the disclosures signed by the consumer
acknowledging receipt thereof.
   (c)   It is a deceptive practice for a storage warehouse operator to
represent any service as legally mandatory when it is optional (e.g.
sanitizing).
(Amended City Record 7/26/2018, eff. 8/25/2018)
§ 2-323 Written Estimate.
   (a)   It is a deceptive practice for a storage warehouse operator to accept,
or offer to accept, household goods for storage without issuing the consumer a
written estimate, based upon an actual physical inspection, before any goods
are removed to storage, except that if a customer requests that the warehouse
operator accept household goods for storage without receiving a written
estimate the warehouse operator, before receiving any goods:
      (1)   shall have the consumer sign a statement waiving his/her right to a
written estimate and giving the reasons therefor;
      (2)   shall orally communicate to the consumer the information required
by 6 RCNY §
2-322;
      (3)   shall, within 5 business days after arrival of the consumer's goods
at the warehouse, send the consumer a statement based upon an examination of
the goods being stored, containing the following information:
         (i)   the monthly charge for storage of the goods (including any
minimum number of months' storage charge);
         (ii)   if applicable, the charge for packing, padding, papering,
containers, warehouse labor in, transportation to the warehouse, storage
preparation or sanitizing;
         (iii)   any other charges that will be imposed by the storage
warehouse operator;
         (iv)   any limitation on legal liability for the negligent loss or
damage to the goods.
   (b)   It is an unconscionable practice for a storage warehouse operator to
directly or indirectly discourage a consumer from receiving a written estimate
based upon an actual physical inspection.
§ 2-324 Inventory.
It is a deceptive practice for a storage warehouse operator to accept household
goods for storage without providing the consumer, at the time the household
goods are picked up, with an inventory of the goods being stored.
§ 2-325 Cancellation.
It is a deceptive practice for a warehouse operator to impose any charge upon a
consumer who cancels a storage agreement before 3 p.m. on the day preceding the
scheduled storage of the goods.
§ 2-326 Bill for Services.
It is a deceptive practice for a storage warehouse operator to:
   (a)   fail to deliver a written bill within 5 business days after arrival of
the consumer's goods at the warehouse and at least bi-monthly thereafter for
any goods and services for which the storage warehouse operator imposes a
charge;
   (b)   collect or attempt to collect, without written consent from the
consumer, any charge(s) not listed on the written estimate or the statement
provided pursuant to 6 RCNY §
2-323 where a written estimate has not been provided, except in accordance with
6 RCNY §
2-326(d);
   (c)   consistently underestimate the total charges listed in 6 RCNY §
2-321 "Written estimate"
   (d)   increase the rate charged a consumer for monthly storage unless the
consumer has been notified at least 45 days prior to the effective date of the
rate increase.
§ 2-327 Relocation of Household Goods.
   (a)   It is a deceptive practice for a storage warehouse operator or his
authorized agent to move a consumer's goods from one location to another
without informing the consumer of the reason for the move and the street
address and borough of the new location. Such notice must be given at least 30
days prior to the move unless there is an emergency necessitating immediate
removal of the goods to another location. In that event, notice shall be made
as soon as practicable.
   (b)   It is a deceptive practice for the storage warehouse operator to
charge or attempt to charge the consumer any additional amount for
transportation of the consumer's goods which has not been requested by the
consumer, unless the storage warehouse shall have first given the consumer 45
days written notice of the amount of such charge prior to the date of such
transportation.
   (c)   In the event that a storage warehouse operator has transported a
consumer's goods after being placed in storage from one location to another,
where such transportation has not been requested by the consumer, any
transportation charges for redelivery of the property from storage shall be
determined as if the goods were being delivered out of the first location in
which they were placed in storage.
§ 2-328 Advertisements.
   (a)   It is a deceptive practice for a storage warehouse operator to:
      (1)   solicit storage of household goods in a name other than the name in
which it is licensed by the Department of Consumer Affairs;
      (2)   fail to include its Department of Consumer Affairs license number
in its advertisements soliciting storage of household goods;
      (3)   fail to include in display advertisements soliciting storage of
household goods the name and address of each storage warehouse it operates in
New York City where household goods are stored.
   (b)   It is a deceptive practice for any person who is not a licensed
warehouse operator to advertise, represent in any manner, or claim to operate a
storage warehouse.
§ 2-329 Insurance.
It is a deceptive practice for the storage warehouse operator to:
   (a)   fail to provide without cost to the consumer legal liability coverage
for loss or damage to the consumer's property caused by negligence, as defined
in the UCC § 7-204. This coverage is to be provided at the minimum value of
$0.30 per pound per item up to $2,000;
   (b)   fail to inform a consumer that (s)he may purchase through the storage
warehouse operator additional coverage to cover specific items or all of the
household goods at additional cost.
§ 2-330 Storage Contract.
It is an unconscionable practice for a storage warehouse operator to accept a
consumer's household goods for storage without entering into a written storage
contract with the consumer.
§ 2-331 Access to Goods.
It is an unconscionable practice for a storage warehouse operator to refuse a
consumer access to his/her stored household goods to retrieve needed medication
or documents which are necessary to enable the consumer to apply for social
welfare benefits or employment; or to charge a consumer more than the scheduled
rate for access, which shall be based upon the hourly warehouse labor charge or
rate.
§ 2-332 General Release.
It is an unconscionable practice for a storage warehouse operator to relinquish
possession of a consumer's stored goods upon the condition that the consumer
sign a general release or any other document of similar import, in which the
consumer releases the warehouse operator from legal liability for negligent
loss or damage to the household goods stored as a condition for regular
delivery by the warehouse operator of the goods in the ordinary course of
business. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a warehouse operator from
securing a general release or other document of similar import where a
consumer's personal property in storage has been removed from storage for the
purposes of conducting a public sale of such personal property pursuant to the
provisions of § 7-210 of the New York Uniform Commercial Code.
§ 2-333 Sale of Consumer's Goods.
It is an unconscionable practice for a storage warehouse operator or his
authorized agent to sell a consumer's stored goods in satisfaction of alleged
charges owed by the consumer unless the consumer shall first be afforded notice
and the opportunity for arbitration before the New York Better Business Bureau
on the issues of:
   (a)   nonpayment of the alleged charges owing; and
   (b)   the amount of such alleged charges. This provision does not affect any
other legal right that a consumer may have prior to sale of his/her stored
goods.
§ 2-334 Agents.
   (a)   It is a deceptive practice for any person, firm or corporation to act
as an agent for a licensed storage warehouse operator unless:
      (1)   his/her principal is a licensed storage warehouse operator who has
complied with all the requirements of Local Law 1 of the Laws of 1979 and these
regulations; and
      (2)   the consumer is informed that an agent in his/her capacity as agent
prior to rendering any service in connection with a household goods storage
transaction; and
      (3)   all documents furnished to consumers by such agent shall bear the
name of the principal for which the agent is functioning, indicating that the
agent is in fact an agent of said principal; and
      (4)   there is on file with the Commissioner an agency agreement,
executed by both the licensed warehouse operator, as principal, and a
Department of Transportation (D.O.T.) certificated mover, as agent, which shall
contain the following information:
         (i)   the name in which the principal is licensed, and his license
number;
         (ii)   the name of the agent and his D.O.T. license number;
         (iii)   an undertaking by the principal that he will guarantee full
compliance by the agent with Local Law 1 of the Laws of 1979 and any and all
regulations promulgated thereunder;
         (iv)   the principal place of business and home addresses and
telephone numbers of the principal and agent;
         (v)   an undertaking by the principal that he will be responsible for
the filing of an amended agency agreement in the event that any of the
information required to be contained in the original agreement should become
inaccurate.
   (b)   A licensed warehouse operator who permits an agent to act on his
behalf in providing any storage service shall be fully liable for any and all
of the actions of such agent.
   (c)   It is a deceptive trade practice for any licensed warehouse operator
to enter into an agency arrangement with a person, firm or corporation where
there is any common ownership between the agent and the licensed warehouse
operator.
Subchapter CC: Electronic Stores
§ 2-340 Audio Equipment.
The meaning of the term "audio equipment" specified in § 20-484(d) of the New
York City Administrative Code includes devices such as telephones, cellular
telephones, beepers or pagers.
§ 2-341 Disclosures Pertaining to Gray Market Merchandise.
   (a)   As used in this section, "gray market merchandise" means any brand-
name electronic goods, as defined in § 20-484 of Subchapter 29 of Chapter 2,
Title 20 of the administrative code of the city of New York, which is normally
accompanied by an express written warranty valid in the United States of
America which is imported into the United States through channels other than
the manufacturer's authorized United States distributor for sale to the public
and which, by reason of this manner of distribution, may not be accompanied by
the manufacturer's express written warranty valid in the United States. The
term "gray market merchandise" shall be limited to products purchased by a
consumer for use primarily for personal, family or household purposes.
   (b)   Every electronic store which offers for sale gray market merchandise
shall conspicuously post on a tag or sign that is attached to such merchandise
or the external surface of its package that is visible at the point of display
of such merchandise that such displayed item is gray market merchandise and
that, as applicable, such product is or may:
      (1)   not be accompanied by the manufacturer's express written warranty
valid in the United States; or
      (2)   not be accompanied by instructions in English; or
      (3)   not be eligible for a rebate offered by the manufacturer, or
      (4)   not be compatible with United States electrical currents or
broadcast frequencies.
   (c)   Every electronic store which offers for sale gray market merchandise
shall include the disclosures required by subdivision b of this section for any
gray market merchandise offered for sale in any written advertisement relating
to such merchandise. Such disclosures shall be made in type of conspicuous
size.
   (d)   It shall be an affirmative defense as to the disclosure required in
paragraph 1 of subdivision b of this section that the consumer is provided with
a written warranty which offers equal or greater protection than the
manufacturer's warranty through a warrantor demonstrated to be a financially
responsible retailer, distributor, importer or other third person capable of
fulfilling warranty obligations.
§ 2-342 Display of Total Selling Price. [Repealed]
Subchapter EE: Towing Vehicles
§ 2-361 Definitions.
Whenever used in these regulations, the following terms shall be deemed to mean
and include:
   Commissioner. "Commissioner" shall mean the Commissioner of the Department
of Consumer Affairs of the City of New York.
   Department. "Department" shall mean the Department of Consumer Affairs of
the City of New York.
   Disabled vehicle. "Disabled vehicle" shall mean any vehicle for which towing
is necessary because of a vehicular accident or for which towing is necessary
because of the vehicle's inability to proceed under its own motive power due to
reasons other than vehicular accident.
   Evidence vehicle. "Evidence vehicle" shall mean any vehicle which is
suspected of having been used as a means of committing a crime or employed in
aid or furtherance of a crime or held, used or sold in violation of law or
which may be required to be held or produced as evidence in a criminal
investigation or proceeding.
   Licensee. "Licensee" shall mean a person (a natural person, corporation,
association or partnership) licensed under the provisions of the Administrative
Code of the City of New York to operate, engage in, conduct or cause the
operation of a business engaged in towing with or without charge or payment
therefor.
   Person in charge of a vehicle. "Person in charge of a vehicle" shall mean
the operator or owner of a vehicle or any person designated by the owner to
contract for the towing or repairing of such vehicle.
   Tow truck. "Tow truck" shall mean a vehicle that is equipped with a crane,
winch, tow bar, push plate, or other device designed to pull or push a vehicle
or to raise a vehicle or the front or rear end thereof.
   Towing. "Towing" shall mean the driving or other operation of a tow truck,
or the offering to transport a vehicle by means of a tow truck. An employee of
a repair shop registered pursuant to article twelve-A of the vehicle and
traffic law that is not subject to the licensing requirements of this
subchapter shall not be deemed to be engaged in "towing" when such employee
test-drives a tow truck that has been repaired or is to be repaired by such
repair shop if (1) such tow truck is not owned or operated by such repair shop,
(2) such tow truck is not transporting another vehicle, and (3) such test-drive
takes place within a one mile radius of such repair shop's premises.
   Vehicle. A motor vehicle as defined in § 125 of the New York State vehicle
and traffic law, a tractor as defined in § 151-a of such law or a trailer as
defined in § 156 of such law.
§ 2-362 Applications for a License to Engage in Towing.
   (a)   Every applicant for any license required under this subchapter or for
any renewal thereof shall appear at the Department and have his or her
fingerprints taken, recorded, filed with and made part of such application.
This requirement applies to: the individual owner if the applicant is a sole
proprietorship; the general partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and
the officers, directors and stockholders owning more than ten percent of the
outstanding stock of the corporation if the applicant is a corporation. This
requirement shall not apply to any individual whose fingerprints are or have
been taken in connection with any other license application or renewal thereof
under this subchapter. A processing fee, as required by the New York State
Division of Criminal Justice Services or New York City Police Department shall
be paid at time of application.
   (b)   Every such applicant shall submit with his or her application one (1)
recent, clear photograph of him or herself which shall be 1 1/2 inches square
or oval. The name of the applicant shall be legibly printed on the back of each
photograph. This requirement applies to every individual required to be
fingerprinted by these regulations.
   (c)   Every such applicant must submit to the Commissioner a bond in the sum
of five thousand dollars payable to the City of New York. The bond shall be
either a cash bond or a bond executed by a duly authorized surety company. The
bond shall be conditioned upon:
      (1)   Payments to the City of New York of any fine, penalty or other
obligation imposed by the Department of Consumer Affairs for non-compliance
with any law(s), rule(s) or regulation(s) governing the conduct of those
licensed to engage in the business of towing within 30 days of its imposition
or,
      (2)   Payment of any final judgment recovered by any person who received
towing services from a licensee hereunder and was damaged thereby.
   (d)   Every such applicant shall furnish a copy of a Certificate of
Insurance as proof that every tow truck to be used by such applicant under this
license is insured under a liability insurance policy as follows: Not less than
two hundred thousand dollars for injury or death of any one person resulting
from any one accident; not less than five hundred thousand dollars for injury
or death from any one accident; and not less than fifty thousand dollars for
injury to or destruction of property of one or more persons resulting from any
one accident. The licensee shall notify the Commissioner of any modification,
amendment, cancellation or substitution of any such insurance policy within 10
days of receipt by the licensee of notice to the licensee of any such
modification, amendment, cancellation or substitutions. Notice to the
Commissioner shall be made by regular mail to the License Issuance Division of
the Department.
   (e)   Every such applicant shall produce proof of Workers' Compensation
Insurance Coverage consisting of a copy of a Certificate of Insurance from the
carrier setting forth the carrier's full name and address; the full name and
address of the insured; the policy or binder number; locations and operations
covered and the period covered. If coverage is cancelled or lapses, notice
thereof shall be given immediately to the Department. Every licensee shall
furnish proof of continued coverage whenever required to do so by the
Department. Every licensee shall at all times during the term of the license
have and maintain Workers' Compensation Insurance Coverage. This requirement
shall not apply to those applicants who are not required by law to maintain
this coverage or who have been specially exempted from a requirement to
maintain such coverage. Any applicant who has been specially exempted must
produce proof of exemption from the Workers' Compensation Board.
   (f)   If the applicant conducts business under a trade name or if the
applicant is a partnership, the application for a license must be accompanied
by a copy of the trade name or partnership certificate duly certified by the
clerk of the county in whose office said certificate was filed. If the
applicant is a corporation, a copy of the filing receipt or certificate of
incorporation filed with and stamped by the New York State Secretary of State
must be submitted, along with a Certificate of Assumed Name or filing receipt,
if an assumed name is used.
   (g)   Every such applicant shall not have a record of conviction for a crime
which in the judgment of the Commissioner has a direct relationship to such
person's fitness or ability to perform any of the activities for which a
license to engage in the business of towing is required. Consideration may be
given to the circumstances of the underlying arrest, age when arrested, time
elapsed since the occurrence of the act which led to the arrest and conviction
and the subsequent conduct of the applicant. This requirement applies to the
individual owner if the applicant is a sole proprietorship; the general
partners, if the applicant is a partnership and the officers, directors and
stockholders owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock of the
corporation if the applicant is a corporation.
   (h)   Every such applicant with business or storage premises in New York
City must submit a current certified Certificate of Occupancy or a letter of
permissible use from the Department of Buildings indicating that its business
or storage premises are in compliance with the zoning resolution and the
Building Code of the City of New York.
   (i)   Every such applicant must show either direct ownership or direct lease
or sublease of the business or storage premises, whether located within the
City of New York or not.
   (j)   [Reserved.]
   (k)   Every such applicant must submit proof of a valid New York State
registration for each tow truck for which a Department license plate is sought.
   (l)   Any applicant who repairs vehicles shall submit proof of a valid New
York State Department of Motor Vehicles registration to operate a repair shop.
   (m)   1) The biennial fee for a license to engage in the business of towing
shall be $600.00. All licenses to engage in the business of towing issued
pursuant to this subchapter shall expire on April thirtieth in even numbered
years, unless sooner suspended or revoked. In addition, there shall be a
biennial fee of $600.00 for each tow truck in excess of one and a $50 fee for
inspecting each tow truck for which the applicant seeks a Department license
plate.
      (2)   When an applicant or licensee fails to present a tow truck for a
scheduled inspection, the Department will deem the tow truck to have failed
inspection.
      (3)   There shall be a $50 fee for re-inspecting any tow truck that has
failed an inspection.
      (4)   Upon payment of the license fee and the tow truck inspection fee or
fees and compliance with all other applicable requirements of the Department,
the Commissioner will issue to the applicant a license to engage in the
business of towing vehicles together with one Department license plate for each
tow truck covered by such license.
   (n)   Each license plate will be assigned to a specific tow truck as
outlined on the Plate Assignment Roster. A licensee shall have the license
plate affixed in the manner specified below, and have the license plate number
painted or otherwise securely affixed in the manner specified below.
      (1)   Securely affix by means other than a magnet, the license plate to
the rear driver's side, adjacent to or directly above the wheel well of the
assigned truck.
      (2)   Paint, or otherwise securely affix the license plate number, by
means other than a magnet, on the rear driver's side of the truck above the DCA
tow truck plate. The license plate number must also be painted or otherwise
securely affixed by means other than a magnet on the rear passenger's side of
the truck, in approximately the same position as it is located on the rear
driver's side. All numerals painted or otherwise securely affixed to indicate
the license plate number must be at least 12 inches high for clear visibility,
provided, however, that in the case of a flatbed vehicle, the numerals painted
or otherwise securely affixed to indicate the license plate number must be at
least 6 inches in height.
      (3)   A licensee who has been approved to participate in the DARP, ROTOW
or EVIDENCE VEHICLE programs will be identified as a participant in such
program(s) on the Tow Truck Identification Card issued pursuant to subdivision
(p) of this section. Any participant who at any time fails to meet the
application requirements for the DARP, ROTOW or EVIDENCE VEHICLE programs will
be subject to immediately removal from such programs.
      (4)   Below is an example (not drawn to scale) of a properly displayed
tow truck plate and license plate number. The plate and license plate number
are securely affixed to the truck by means other than a magnet. The
Department's current complaint telephone number, the tow truck company's name,
address and telephone number, and, for any vehicle assigned to DARP, the legal
rate for towing for DARP tows, specifically identified as "Rates for accident
tows," must also be clearly painted on or be permanently adhered as a decal by
heat treatment to the tow truck, in letters at least 1 1/2 inches high, as
illustrated on the next page.
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/1e024518ebfb3921ec38bc2ecfa58f65299ca12d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-146.jpg] 
         1.   Company Name, Address, Telephone
         2.   Current DCA Complaint Phone Number
         3.   Rates for Accident Towing and Storage
         4.   Plate Number 12 inches high
         5.   DCA plate.
         Numbers 1, 2, & 3 must be painted on letters, one and a half inch
high.
   (o)   Where such applicant is required to pay the New York City commercial
motor vehicle tax for one or more tow trucks pursuant to Chapter 8 of Title 11
of the Administrative Code, the applicant shall furnish proof of payment of
such tax for each tow truck for which a license is sought. Such proof shall
consist of a validated New York City Department of finance Motor Vehicle Tax
Receipt issued pursuant to such chapter.
   (p)   Each licensed tow truck shall carry an identification card issued by
the Department which shall contain the tow truck's Department license plate
number, the tow truck's New York State Department of Motor Vehicles' license
plate number, the vehicle identification number assigned to that particular tow
truck, the tow truck company's name, the tow truck company's license number and
a code letter designating that the tow truck is approved for use in the DARP,
ROTOW or EVIDENCE VEHICLE program.
(Amended City Record 1/28/2019, eff. 2/27/2019)
§ 2-363 Obligations of Those Licensed to Engage in the Business of Towing.
   (a)   The Department license plate shall at all times be affixed to a
visible and conspicuous part of each tow truck covered by the license, as
determined by the Commissioner. However, in no instance shall this plate be
affixed to the hood of the tow truck.
   (b)   Each licensee shall notify the Department of any change in its
ownership if it is a sole proprietorship, of any change in its general partners
if it is a partnership, and of any change in its directors, officers or holders
of more than ten percent of its stock if it is a corporation. The license to
engage in the business of towing shall become immediately void unless prior
written approval of the Department has been obtained
      (1)   with respect to a corporation, where any person or organization
becomes the beneficial owner of more than ten percent of the stock of a
corporate licensee, if such person or organization was not previously one whose
fingerprints were required to be taken under 6 RCNY §
2-362(a);
      (2)   with respect to a partnership, where there is any change in the
general partners; and
      (3)   with respect to a sole proprietorship, where there is any change in
ownership.
   (c)   Upon the dissolution, suspension, discontinuance, whether voluntary or
involuntary, or sale as a going concern of the business of a licensee, it shall
be the duty of such licensee to surrender to the Department its license
together with all Department license plates issued thereunder.
   (d)   Each corporate licensee must disclose to the Department the identity
of each person who holds in the aggregate, either directly or indirectly,
through a nominee or any other person holding stock for the use or benefit of
such person, more than 10 percent of the outstanding stock of such corporate
licensee.
   (e)   Licensee's duty to keep records.
      (1)   Each licensee shall record all calls for towing and record all
occasions where towing service was rendered. The licensee shall do this by
maintaining in chronological order all authorizations to tow and all towing
invoices, for a period of three years.
      (2)   A separate log book shall be maintained for the Stolen and
Abandoned Rotation Tow Program, the Directed Accident Response Program and the
Evidence Vehicle Program, in accordance with the regulations established for
these programs.
      (3)   All required records shall be readily available at the licensee's
premises for inspection by the Police Department and the Department of Consumer
Affairs during normal business hours.
   (f)   Any licensee holding a license to engage in the business of towing who
acquires a tow truck subsequent to the date such license was issued shall
submit an application to the Department to obtain a Department license plate to
affix to said truck. The licensee must furnish proof of insurance and proof of
vehicle registration.
   (g)   Periodic inspections will be made of tow trucks by duly authorized
employees of the Department. The inspectors shall check for a valid New York
State Department of Motor Vehicle inspection sticker and all other necessary
documentation required under the vehicle and traffic law. In addition, the
truck must be visibly roadworthy.
   (h)   Licensees may be held responsible for any act or omission of any of
their employees which results in the licensee's failure to comply with such
regulations as are applicable.
   (i)   Licensees must promptly and in no event later than five business days,
report the loss of any Department license plate or license document to the
Department as well as the loss or change of the vehicle registration.
   (j)   (1)   Each licensee must notify the Department of any conviction for a
crime or the entry of a guilty or nolo contendere plea by:
         (i)   any licensed tow truck operator employed by the licensee; or
         (ii)   any person required to be fingerprinted under this subchapter
in connection with the licensee's application for a license or renewal thereof.
      (2)   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a licensee had notice
of such conviction for a crime or entry of a guilty or nolo contendere plea by
any licensed tow operator in its employ or by any person required to be
fingerprinted under this subchapter in connection with the licensee's
application for a license or renewal thereof.
   (k)   Licensees must not permit the Department license plate to be used on
any vehicle other than the one for which it is issued, without the prior
written approval from the Department.
   (l)   Licensees must not store vehicles on a public thoroughfare, unless
licensees are directed to do so by the person in charge of the vehicle or a
police officer and such placement of such vehicle is not in violation of any
other law.
   (m)   Licensees shall take reasonable care to prevent damage to or loss of a
customer's vehicle or personal property contained therein.
   (n)   Licensees must notify the Department in writing at the time of their
application of the names, addresses and Department license numbers of each tow
truck operator who is employed by such licensee. If additional tow truck
operators are employed by such licensee after the date of such application, the
licensee must notify the Department in writing immediately of the names,
addresses and Department license numbers of such additional tow truck
operators. The Department shall immediately notify the licensee in writing if
any tow truck operator employed and registered with the Department by such
licensee lacks a current, valid tow truck operator's license or if such
operator's license has been suspended or revoked.
   (o)   No vehicle towed by a licensee to the licensee's premises address
shall be left by the licensee on the street in front of, or adjacent to, the
licensee's business premises (which include the licensee's storage facilities
and auxiliary storage facilities).
§ 2-364 Applications for a Tow Truck Operator's License.
   (a)   Every applicant for a tow truck operator's license must be at least 18
years of age and must submit acceptable proof of age in the form of a birth
certificate or a driver's license.
   (b)   Every such applicant must possess a valid New York State class A, B,
CDL C or Non-CDL C license, all of which shall also have an endorsement
required by law for operating a tow truck, or an equivalent license from
another state of which he or she is a resident, provided, however that such
person provides the Commissioner with an abstract of his or her driving record
from such state. Applicants with out-of-state driver's licenses must present
proof satisfactory to the Commissioner that such licenses are current and valid
at the time of the filing of the application.
   (c)   Every such applicant must submit with his or her application two (2)
recent, clear photographs of himself or herself which shall be 1 1/2 inches
square or oval. The name of the applicant shall be legibly printed on the back
of each photograph.
   (d)   An applicant shall not have a record of conviction for a crime which
in the judgment of the Commissioner has a direct relationship to such person's
fitness or ability to perform any of the activities for which a tow truck
operator's license is required. Consideration may be given to the circumstances
of the underlying arrest, age when arrested, time elapsed since the occurrence
of the act which led to the arrest and conviction and the subsequent conduct of
the applicant.
   (e)   The Commissioner may reject an application or move to suspend or
revoke the license of an operator whose driving record in the judgment of the
Commissioner, adversely affects his or her ability to perform the activities
for which a license is required.
   (f)   Every applicant for an operator's license or for any renewal thereof
shall appear at the Department and have his or her fingerprints taken,
recorded, filed with and made part of such application. This requirement shall
not apply to any individual whose fingerprints are or have been taken in
connection with any other license application or renewal thereof under this
subchapter. A processing fee, as required by the New York State Division of
Criminal Justice Services or the New York City Police Department shall be paid
at the time of application.
§ 2-365 Obligations of Those Licensed to Operate a Tow Truck.
   (a)   Every operator must have in his or her possession, while operating a
tow truck for the purpose of towing, his or her tow truck operator's license.
   (b)   Every operator must, promptly, and in no event later than 10 days, in
writing, report a change of residence address to the Department.
   (c)   Every operator must, promptly, and in no event later than 10 days, in
person, report the loss of his or her tow truck operator's license to the
Department.
   (d)   Every operator must surrender his or her tow truck operator's license
to the Department when his or her driver's license has been suspended or
revoked.
   (e)   Every operator must promptly and in no event later than 5 days, notify
the Department if he or she is convicted of a crime or enters a guilty or nolo
contendere plea in any jurisdiction.
   (f)   Operators shall not permit any other person to use his or her tow
truck operator's license.
   (g)   Operators shall not operate any tow truck for the purpose of towing
for which a Department license plate has not been issued.
   (h)   Operators shall not charge a fee for any towing service in connection
with the towing of a vehicle, except as provided by the applicable laws, rules
and regulations.
   (i)   Operators shall continuously maintain a valid New York State class A,
B, CDL C or non-CDL C license with the endorsement required by law for
operating a tow truck, or a current and valid equivalent license from another
state of which he or she is a resident.
§ 2-366 Responsibility to Provide Towing Services.
   (a)   No person licensed under this subchapter shall refuse, without
justifiable grounds, to render towing services in whole or in part to a person
in charge of a disabled vehicle (other than a vehicle that has a maximum gross
vehicle weight of less than 15,000 pounds that is involved in a vehicular
accident) who has requested towing to a destination within the city and who is
able and willing to pay the towing charges in legal tender, by a credit card in
accordance with generally accepted business practices, by a first party
insurance check or in any other form acceptable to the licensee. For purposes
of this subdivision, "justifiable grounds" shall include but not be limited to
(1) the licensee does not have available the tow truck or other equipment
necessary to tow the vehicle, (2) the absence of an authorization by the
commissioner of transportation which is required to lawfully remove a vehicle
from a specific location, and (3) an authorization by the commissioner of
transportation to only provide such towing services as may be specified by such
commissioner to remove a vehicle from a specific location.
   (b)   Licensees are required to tow a disabled vehicle (other than a vehicle
that has a maximum gross vehicle weight of less than 15,000 pounds that is
involved in a vehicular accident) with reasonable promptness to a location
within the city as designated by the person in charge or owner of the vehicle.
Factors that will be considered in the ability to be reasonably prompt are
availability of the tow truck and other necessary equipment, weather, distance,
and traffic conditions.
   (c)   Licensees are not required to carry any of the occupants of the
disabled vehicle in the tow truck. In addition, they shall not, in any
instance, charge a fee for any passengers that they do transport.
   (d)   All tow truck operators must issue a clearly written itemized receipt
for towing services for which they have been paid. This receipt must state the
amount of charges, for what services charges were made, the location from which
the vehicle was towed and the location to which the vehicle was towed, the
method of payment and the date services were rendered. This receipt must also
state the schedule of rates, if applicable, and the license number, the
telephone number and the premises address of the company licensed to engage in
the business of towing.
§ 2-367 Authorization to Tow.
   (a)   No tow truck operator shall tow a vehicle for which towing is
necessary because of a vehicular accident without
      (1)   an authorization signed by the person in charge of the vehicle, or
      (2)   an authorization signed by a police officer who authorized the
towing of such vehicle and where applicable, authorized the storage of such
vehicle.
   (b)   The Authorization to Tow form for an accident vehicle towed pursuant
to the Directed Accident Response Program shall be a printed form with such
captions and blank spaces as are appropriate to insert the information to be
furnished concerning the towing of a vehicle. Unless specifically provided
otherwise, the printed text shall be in no less than 10 point type in a color
that is sharply set off from the background color of the document. The
transaction-specific information entered on the form shall be legibly hand
printed on the original page with ink in a color that is sharply set off from
the background color of the document. The original and all duplicate pages of
each authorization form shall contain the following information and include the
following statements worded substantially as specified, and in the order
listed, below:
      (1)   the caption "AUTHORIZATION TO TOW" which shall be at the top of the
document in 12 point, bold face type.
      (2)   the business name, address and telephone number of the tow truck
company, as well as the company's Department of Consumer Affairs' license
number to engage in the business of towing,
      (3)   the name, address, and telephone number of the person in charge of
the vehicle or the owner of the vehicle, or the name and badge number of the
police officer who authorized the tow and/or the storage of the vehicle.
      (4)   the date and time the vehicle is towed, the make and model of the
vehicle being towed, as well as the year it was manufactured and the State
vehicle license plate number.
      (5)   the tow truck operator's name, and his or her Department license
number and the tow truck's New York State license plate number, and the
Department license plate number assigned to such truck.
      (6)   the location, identified by address or the names of the nearest
intersecting streets, where the vehicle was towed from and where it is towed
to.
      (7)   the total distance of the tow, as shown by the starting and ending
mileage, to the nearest whole mile, on the odometer of the towing vehicle.
      (8)   an itemized accounting of the fees and charges that are or will be
due for the towing and storage of the vehicle as authorized by law or rule.
Amounts charged for the following shall be separately listed and described, and
fees and charges imposed at different rates shall be listed separately:
         (i)   the fee for towing a vehicle registered at a weight of ten
thousand pounds or less shall not exceed $125 and for a vehicle registered at a
weight of more than ten thousand pounds shall not exceed $140;
         (ii)   the fee for mileage, if applicable, for the distance traveled
at a rate not exceeding $4.00 per mile or part thereof;
         (iii)   storage charges for each calendar day of storage at a rate not
exceeding $25 per day for the first three days of storage and $27 per day for
the fourth calendar day and each calendar day thereafter;
         (iv)   all tolls required to be paid while towing the vehicle;
         (v)   applicable sales tax for transactions in New York City;
         (vi)   a description of any other applicable fees or charges required
to be paid as specifically authorized by law or rule.
      (9)   a statement in 12 point, bold face type specifying that: I DIRECT
THAT THE VEHICLE BE TOWED TO THE FOLLOWING LOCATION: (with sufficient space
left thereafter to enable the person in charge of the vehicle to write in the
location where the vehicle is to be towed). The following statement shall be
printed immediately below such statement: Unless you have directed otherwise
above, your vehicle will be towed to: (insert the address of the approved
storage facility where the vehicle will be towed).
      (10)   The following statement shall be printed in 12-point, bold face
type immediately above the space reserved for the signature:
NOTICE TO THE CONSUMER
YOU ARE SIGNING AN AUTHORIZATION FOR TOWING AND, WHERE APPLICABLE, FOR THE
STORAGE OF THIS VEHICLE. THIS IS NOT AN AUTHORIZATION TO REPAIR. YOU HAVE THE
RIGHT TO HAVE THE VEHICLE REPAIRED AT THE FACILITY OF YOUR CHOICE.
ALL THE RATES TO BE CHARGED MUST BE COMPLETED BEFORE YOU SIGN. THE ACTUAL
CHARGES DUE MAY BE FILLED IN AT THE COMPLETION OF THE TOW.
YOU HAVE THE RIGHT TO HAVE YOUR VEHICLE TOWED TO A LAWFUL LOCATION OF YOUR
CHOICE WITHIN NEW YORK CITY.
DO NOT SIGN AN AUTHORIZATION FORM WITH ANY BLANK SPACES FOR INFORMATION TO BE
COMPLETED BEFORE THE VEHICLE IS TOWED. YOU ARE ENTITLED TO A COPY OF THE FORM
UPON SIGNING IT.
      (11)   The statement "I authorize the towing and, where applicable, the
storage of the above vehicle to the location as specified above," shall be
printed in 12-point, bold face type immediately after the above notice, with a
space reserved for the signature and statement as shown below:
X ______________________________________
Signature of Owner or Person in Charge
      (12)   The statement and information shall be printed immediately below
the signature line: "If you have any complaint concerning the charges for
towing or about towing services, notify:
Department of Consumer Affairs Consumer Services Division
(Insert the Department's current address)
(Insert the Department's current telephone number for complaints) 
      (13)   The statement "PLEASE SEE CONSUMER'S BILL OF RIGHTS ON THE BACK OF
THIS AUTHORIZATION FORM" shall be printed at the bottom of the page.
   (c)   The person paying any charges authorized by this or any other section
of the law or rules shall be entitled to a copy of the Authorization to Tow
form from the tow truck operator at no additional charge.
   (d)   No tow truck operator shall tow a vehicle for which towing is
necessary because of a vehicular accident where the authorization of the
commissioner of Transportation or the Police Commissioner is required as
provided in § 20-520 of the Administrative Code of the City of New York except
pursuant to the Authorization to Tow form that tow truck operators towing such
vehicles are required to use pursuant to such authorization; provided, however,
that if such authorization does not require such tow truck operators to use an
authorization to tow form, such operators shall use an Authorization to Tow
form approved by the Commissioner.
§ 2-367.1 Consumer Bill of Rights Regarding Towing of Accident Vehicles and
Repair Shops.
   (a)   Every owner or person in charge of an accident vehicle subject to the
Directed Accident Response Program shall be provided a document entitled
"Consumer Bill of Rights Regarding Towing of Accident Vehicles and Repair
Shops" before such person signs the Authorization to Tow form as provided in 6
RCNY §
2-367. If the towing of an accident vehicle is authorized by a police officer
as provided in 6 RCNY §
2-367, the "Consumer Bill of Rights Regarding Towing of Accident Vehicles and
Repair Shops" shall be provided to the owner or person in charge of the vehicle
before such vehicle is towed from the accident scene, such as when that person
discusses the disposition of the vehicle with such towing company; provided,
however, that if the owner or other person in charge of such vehicle is injured
and is to be removed to a hospital, such bill of rights shall be furnished by
the towing company at the time such owner or other person in charge of such
vehicle first appears at the premises of such towing company.
   (b)   The "Consumer Bill of Rights Regarding Towing of Accident Vehicles and
Repair Shops" shall have printed on it at the top of the page in capital, block
face letters and in 14 point bold face type the caption CONSUMER BILL OF RIGHTS
REGARDING TOWING OF ACCIDENT VEHICLES AND REPAIR SHOPS followed by statements
in the sequence listed below in 10 point type in a color that sharply sets the
text off from the background color of the document except that text included
below in capital letters shall be in 10 point bold face type:
"NOTICE OF RIGHTS AND OPTIONS WHEN YOUR ACCIDENT VEHICLE IS TOWED."
Information about the towing of the vehicle.
"Your accident vehicle must be towed by the towing company that has been
directed to do so by the Police Department."
YOU HAVE A RIGHT TO DIRECT THE TOWING COMPANY TO TOW THE VEHICLE TO ANY
LOCATION WITHIN THE BOUNDARIES OF NEW YORK CITY, provided the vehicle can be
legally left in the location you select. You must indicate on the Tow
Authorization form where you want the vehicle towed. If you do not designate a
location, the towing company is required to tow the vehicle to its authorized
storage facility.
You or any person you select, including your insurance agent or adjuster, must
be provided, at no extra charge, with reasonable access to view the accident
vehicle during normal business hours at the towing company's storage
facilities, but any insurance agent or insurance adjuster for a third party may
have access only upon furnishing written confirmation they are representing
such third party having a claim or defense arising from an accident involving
such vehicle.
The Authorization to Tow form you sign ONLY AUTHORIZES the towing company to
tow your vehicle and to store it at the storage facility of the towing company
until you arrange to remove the vehicle. The towing company CANNOT use the
towing authorization as an authorization to initiate repairs on the vehicle.
UNLESS YOU HAVE SEPARATELY AUTHORIZED THE TOWING COMPANY'S REPAIR SHOP TO MAKE
REPAIRS, YOU ARE NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR THE COST OF REPAIRS MADE BY SUCH REPAIR
SHOP.
The rates charged for towing and storage cannot exceed those listed below for
vehicles weighing 10,000 pounds or less:
 
Tow to towing company's storage facilities (including mileage)           $125
Tow to location other than towing company's storage facilities           $125
(excluding mileage)
Charge per mile if towed to location other than towing company's storage $4.00
facilities
Storage charge for each calendar day for the first three days of         $25
storage*
Storage charge for each calendar day for the fourth day of storage or    $27
thereafter*
Road tolls actually paid                                                 $_____
Sales tax rate currently in effect                                       $_____
* Rate does not apply to a vehicle with commercial plate and maximum gross
vehicle weight of at least 6,000 pounds.
You have a right to pay towing and storage fees in cash or by at least two
major credit cards identified by a decal on the tow truck, but a tow company is
not obligated to take a check.
You may redeem your vehicle during a towing company's normal business hours.
Information about Repair of Vehicle 
You are entitled to have the vehicle repaired by the repair shop of your
choice. Within 30 minutes after the payment of all lawful charges (see above),
the towing company must make the vehicle available to you or anyone you
designate. A towing company may charge a fee of up to $25 for positioning your
vehicle so it can be towed away by the tow truck of another company that is
using a tow truck capable of towing three or more vehicles simultaneously.
No insurance company can require you to have the vehicle repaired by a specific
repair shop.
You are entitled to request that your insurer recommend a repair shop. If you
choose to have your vehicle repaired by a repair shop recommended by your
insurer, your insurer becomes responsible for the adequacy of the repairs made
by that repair shop.
§ 2-368 Rates and Charges.
   (a)   Charges for the towing of disabled passenger vehicles from an arterial
roadway by an arterial tow permittee authorized by the commissioner of
transportation or the police commissioner shall be $125 for the first ten miles
or fraction thereof, $4 for each additional mile or fraction thereof, and all
tolls required to be paid while towing the vehicle.
   (b)   Charges for the storage of vehicles following a towing of a disabled
passenger vehicle from an arterial roadway by an arterial tow permittee shall
not exceed $25 for each twenty-four hours or fraction thereof for the first
three days of storage and $27 for the fourth day of storage and each day
thereafter.
   (c)   Charges for the towing of vehicles shall not exceed $100 plus all
tolls required to be paid while towing the vehicle; provided, however, that
where a motor vehicle has been booted by a person licensed, pursuant to
Subchapter 32 of Chapter 2 of Title 20 of the New York City Administrative Code
in a private lot as defined in Paragraph 3 of Subdivision b of Section 20-531
of such subchapter and such vehicle is subsequently towed, no additional charge
may be imposed for the towing of such vehicle. The rates in this subdivision
shall not apply to the towing of motor vehicles pursuant to a contract which
was in existence prior to the need for the towing of such vehicles, provided
that such motor vehicles are either owned or leased by the person who entered
into such contract.
   (d)   Charges for the storage of vehicles shall not exceed $25 for each
twenty-four hours or fraction thereof for the first three days of storage and
$27 dollars for the fourth day of storage and each day thereafter. The rates in
this subdivision shall not apply to the storage of motor vehicles pursuant to a
contract which was in existence prior to the need for storage of such vehicles,
provided that such motor vehicles are either owned or leased by the person who
entered into such contract.
   (e)   Towing and storage rates for vehicles other than passenger vehicles
are provided for by 34 RCNY §
4-07(i).
   (f)   (1)   Where unusual preparation is required before a vehicle can be
towed, additional charges may be imposed not to exceed $12.00 per tow truck for
each 1/4 hour or part thereof, provided, however, that no such charge may be
imposed or collected if an accident vehicle is towed pursuant to the Directed
Accident Response Program. Unusual preparation includes winching or righting a
vehicle or any other preparation necessary to put the vehicle in a position
where it can be hooked or raised to the tow truck.
      (2)   Notwithstanding paragraph one of this subdivision, a towing company
which has towed a vehicle to its storage facilities may charge an additional
amount not to exceed $25 for the positioning of such vehicle for removal from
such storage facilities by the tow truck of another towing company that is
capable of towing three or more vehicles simultaneously. Such other towing
company must be licensed or otherwise exempt from the licensing provisions of
Subchapter 31 of Chapter 2 of Title 20 of the New York City Administrative
Code, or must be based outside of New York City and thereby not be required to
be licensed pursuant to such provisions of the New York City Administrative
Code.
(Amended City Record 1/28/2019, eff. 2/27/2019)
§ 2-368.1 Display of Major Credit Card Decals on Tow Trucks Used in a City
Towing Program and Notification of Changes in Acceptance of Major Credit Cards.
   (a)   For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
      (1)   "City towing program" shall mean the directed accident response
program established pursuant to § 20-518 of the Administrative Code of the City
of New York, the rotation tow program established pursuant to § 20-519 of such
Code, the removal of disabled vehicles on highways pursuant to authorization by
the department of transportation or the police department, and any program
whereby a city agency, pursuant to law, rule or agreement, directs a towing
business to tow a vehicle without the prior consent of such vehicle's owner for
any reason other than the towing of a vehicle in satisfaction of a judgment for
an outstanding debt to the city.
      (2)   "Major credit card" shall mean MasterCard, Visa, American Express
or Discover.
   (b)   A towing business that participates in any city towing program shall
have permanently affixed to each tow truck used to tow vehicles in such city
tow program decals identifying the major credit cards accepted as payment for
towing under such program in accordance with §20-520.1 of the Administrative
Code of the City of New York. Each such decal shall be no less than three and
three-sixteenth inches wide by two inches high, and shall be securely affixed
by means other than a magnet immediately above or below the space where the
legal rates for towing and storage are painted on the tow truck or immediately
below the legal rates for towing and storage are painted on the tow truck or
immediately below the place where such tow truck company's name, address and
telephone number are painted on the door of the tow truck in accordance with 6
RCNY §
2-362(n)(4). If such major credit cards are not accepted by such towing
business as payment for towing performed outside the scope of such city towing
program, such towing business shall also paint immediately below such decals on
each tow truck used to tow vehicles in such city towing program in letters at
least one and one-half inches high the words "THESE CARDS ACCEPTED ONLY FOR
TOWING UNDER FOLLOWING CITY TOWING PROGRAM" followed by a listing of each
applicable program. If such limitation is not so disclosed on a tow truck used
by a towing business in any city towing program, such towing business shall
accept the major credit cards it has identified by such decals as payment for
any services performed by such towing business.
   (c)   No later than ten days before a change in the major credit cards
accepted for payment by a towing company participating in any city towing
program becomes effective, such towing business shall notify the Department in
writing of any such change, and shall certify to the Department in a sworn
statement that the credit card decals required to be affixed pursuant to
subdivision b of this section have been modified to reflect such change.
§ 2-369 Authorization to Repair.
No person licensed to engage in the business of towing, through any employee or
agent, may obtain at the scene of an accident the signature of any person
authorizing the repair of a vehicle disabled in the accident or at a hospital,
if such person requires hospitalization, until at least twenty-four hours after
the accident. Any such written authorization so obtained shall be voidable at
the option of the owner or of the person in charge of the vehicle.
   (a)   An "Authorization to Repair" shall not be signed at the scene of an
accident. It can be signed only at:
      (1)   The place to which the vehicle is towed; or
      (2)   The home of or place designated by the person in charge of a
disabled vehicle; or
      (3)   The hospital, if such person requires hospitalization. In such
case, the authorization shall not be presented to the injured party for
signature at the hospital until at least twenty-four hours after the accident.
   (b)   Any "Authorization to Repair" which is not properly completed shall be
voidable at the option of the owner or the person in charge of a disabled
vehicle. It shall be the responsibility of the tow truck operator to make
certain that the person signing the "Authorization to Repair" writes in his or
her own handwriting the location where the form is signed. No blank
"Authorization to Repair" forms shall be carried on a tow truck or on the
person of a tow truck operator while on a tow truck.
   (c)   The authorization to repair form shall require the following
information:
      (1)   The tow truck company's name, address and business telephone
number.
      (2)   The name, signature, address, and telephone number of the person in
charge of the disabled vehicle.
      (3)   The make, type and year of manufacture of the disabled vehicle.
      (4)   The New York State Department of Motor Vehicle registration number
of the disabled vehicle.
      (5)   The date and time the authorization is signed.
      (6)   The operator's name and license number.
      (7)   A notice to the owner or person in charge of the damaged vehicle to
read as follows:
         NOTICE: TO OWNER OR PERSON IN CHARGE OF DAMAGED VEHICLES: PLEASE READ
ALL PRINTED MATTER BEFORE SIGNING. ALL COMPLAINTS AS TO QUALITY OF REPAIRS MUST
BE MADE TO THE NEW YORK STATE DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES. NO TOWING COMPANY
OR INSURANCE COMPANY MAY REQUIRE THAT REPAIRS BE MADE TO A MOTOR VEHICLE IN A
PARTICULAR PLACE OR REPAIR SHOP. YOU HAVE THE RIGHT TO HAVE YOUR MOTOR VEHICLE
REPAIRED IN THE SHOP OF YOUR CHOICE.
      (8)   A statement of the following:
         You cannot be required to sign this "AUTHORIZATION TO REPAIR" at the
scene of an accident. In any case, where the tow truck operator knows that the
person in charge of a vehicle is injured and is to be removed to a hospital, it
shall be unlawful to enter into an agreement authorizing repairs with such
injured person, until the expiration of a period of at least twenty-four hours
from the time of the accident, unless the injured person is not admitted to or
has been discharged from the hospital before the expiration of such period.
Before signing your name to the bottom of this form, write in your own
handwriting in the space provided below your name and the address of the
premises at which this form is signed.
      (9)   Statement to appear on form along with a space provided for
signature: I AUTHORIZE THE REPAIR OF THE VEHICLE INDICATED ABOVE.
      (10)   Statement to appear on form: ALL OF THE ABOVE ENTRIES MUST BE MADE
AT THE TIME THE AUTHORIZATION TO REPAIR IS SIGNED.
§ 2-370 Arterial Towing.
No person shall cause or permit the removal of a disabled vehicle from an
arterial highway, parkway, and expressway, roadway tunnel, and bridge, except
by a licensed tow truck under authority issued by the Commissioner of the
Department of Transportation as specified in the Traffic Regulations, § 2-256
(j). Those who are issued arterial tow authority may charge the additional
service fees as specified in § 2-256(j)(2) of the Traffic Regulations.
Note: All other rules within these regulations, in addition to the above, are
applicable to permittees operating on arterial highways under permit from the
Department of Transportation.
§ 2-371 The Directed Accident Response Program (DARP).
   (a)   Applicants must be licensed to engage in the business of towing by the
New York City Department of Consumer Affairs. Applicants who apply to be in the
DARP program must be licensed to engage in the business of towing for a period
of not less than one year immediately prior to the date of their application.
The applicant's business premises, which include the applicant's storage
facilities and auxiliary storage facilities, must be located within the
geographic boundaries of New York City. In addition, all of the tow truck
operators employed by the licensee must be licensed as such by the Department
and comply with all applicable laws and rules.
   (b)   Any vehicle with a maximum gross vehicle weight of less than fifteen
thousand pounds which has been involved in a vehicular accident and which
cannot be safely driven under its own power must be removed from the accident
scene by the authorized DARP tower to the premises address on the responding
company's license or to a location designated by a person in charge of such
vehicle; provided, however, that such location is within the boundaries of the
City of New York and placement of such vehicle is not in violation of any other
law. A police officer may make the determination whether the vehicle may be
safely driven under its own power. No vehicle removed from the accident scene
to the DARP tower's premises address shall be left by a licensee on the street
in front of, or adjacent to, the licensee's business premises (which include
the licensee's storage facilities and auxiliary storage facilities).
   (c)   Applicants who apply to be in the DARP program must make application
to participate only in the zone in which their business premises is located.
Such premises shall be under the exclusive control of the applicant, shall not
be used by any other towing company and shall consist of a location that is
open to the public, where towing company personnel are employed, calls
requesting towing service are received and towers are dispatched, and where all
records required by Subchapter 31 of Chapter 2 of Title 20 of the New York City
Administrative Code are maintained. An applicant's approval to participate in
DARP is valid only for such applicant's business premises as identified in its
application that has been inspected and has qualified for participation in
DARP. Such approval to participate in DARP is revoked when the business
premises of such applicant is moved from the location that was identified in
the application unless such move has been approved as provided in subdivision
(aaa) of this section.
   (d)   Applications for the DARP program will be accepted by the Department
on an ongoing basis. Upon approval, new participants will initially be placed
at the bottom of the rotation list for the zone for which they have been
accepted.
   (e)   In the event that a sufficient number of qualified, licensed companies
do not make application for participation in a particular zone, the
Commissioner may modify the proposed zones and assign qualified companies to
such zones.
   (f)   Applicants for DARP must be willing and able to provide towing
services, in the zone(s) for which they have applied to participate, seven days
a week on a twenty-four hour a day basis.
   (g)   Applicants for DARP must immediately respond to a rotation call. To be
eligible to participate in a particular zone, an applicant must be able to
provide a tow truck at the disabled vehicle's location within thirty minutes
after notification by the tow truck notification operator. If no DARP
participant is available in the zone where the disabled vehicle is located the
tow truck notification operator may call a DARP participant in a geographically
adjacent zone.
   (h)   [Reserved.]
   (i)   [Reserved.]
   (j)   [Reserved.]
   (k)   Applicants must have a minimum of two (2) tow trucks for each zone for
which they apply to participate, at least one of which must be a flat-bed tow
truck suitable for removing accident vehicles.
   (l)   Applicants must own or possess and have at their immediate disposal
equipment to tow vehicles with damaged or missing wheels.
   (m)   Applicants must own, lease, or sublease business premises, which
include either indoor, or lighted and fenced outdoor, storage facilities. The
storage facilities must have a locked gate and be suitable for the storage of
vehicles. The minimum footage requirements for storage of DARP vehicles is
1,200 square feet per licensed tow truck over and above any storage
requirements for the Rotation Tow Program. Applicants who apply to be in the
DARP program on or after December 6, 1994 must demonstrate that the towing
company owns, leases or subleases its business premises by providing the
Department with a deed if the applicant owns such premises or by providing the
Department with the actual lease or sublease agreement if the applicant leases
or subleases such premises. Common or shared business premises, including
storage facilities and auxiliary storage facilities, with another towing
company is not permitted.
   (n)   Applicants must separate the storage facilities that they share with
another company other than a towing company by a physical separation, such as a
fence. Upon approval by the Department, applicants may use auxiliary storage
facilities to satisfy the minimum footage requirements of subdivision (m) of
this section. For those applicants who apply to be in the DARP program on or
after December 6, 1994, any such auxiliary storage facilities shall be within
2,640 feet of the applicant's premises address. At the request of the owner of
the disabled vehicle, his or her agent or an authorized insurance company
representative, a vehicle being stored at the applicant's auxiliary storage
facilities shall be immediately produced at the applicant's premises address
and no fee other than fee authorized by 6 RCNY §
2-368 may be imposed for such production of such vehicle at the applicant's
premises address.
   (o)   Participants shall take reasonable care to prevent damage to or loss
of a customer's vehicle or personal property contained therein.
   (p)   Participants shall not be required to tow motor vehicles with a
maximum gross vehicle weight of at least fifteen thousand pounds.
   (q)   Participants may withdraw from the DARP program thirty days after they
have notified the Department, in writing, by regular mail, of their intention
to end their participation.
   (r)   Participants shall pay a biennial fee of $300.
   (s)   [Reserved.]
   (t)   Participants must abide by all lawful instructions, directions and
requests of the police official in charge of the accident.
   (u)   Participants must record in a bound record book, or in an electronic
format as prescribed in subparagraphs ii or iii of paragraph 3 of subdivision b
of 6 RCNY §
2-378, all calls for service, all occasions when towing service was rendered
and the reason for refusal of any call to which they were unable to respond. If
the participant elects to use a bound record book, the inside cover of the book
kept for this purpose shall contain the DARP towing company's business name,
premises address, towing zone number(s) and the dates the book covers. Each
double page shall be consecutively numbered and must contain the following
information:
      Date and time Police Department tow truck notification
      operator call was received
      Name of person who accepted call
      Disposition: Accepted/refused
      Reason for refusal
      Location vehicle towed from
      Time tow was completed
      Location vehicle towed to
      Tow fees/Storage fees
      Total charges
      Fees paid by credit card: Y/N
      Redemption date
      Vehicle disposition
   (v)   Participants must be open for redemption of vehicles towed in the DARP
program during the hours of 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., Monday through Friday. In
addition, they must be opened for redemption from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. on either
Saturday or Sunday, as such participant has informed the Department in writing,
provided, however, that if such participant fails to so notify the Department,
the participant shall be deemed to have elected to be open for redemption from
9 a.m. to 4 p.m. on both Saturday and Sunday. In all instances, participants
shall make vehicles immediately available for redemption to the owner of the
disabled vehicle, his or her agent, or an authorized insurance company
representative. The participant may be closed for redemption on New York City
public holidays.
   (w)   No participant shall release a vehicle that has been involved in a
vehicular accident and which cannot be safely driven under its own power to
another towing company unless that towing company is licensed or otherwise
exempt from the licensing provisions of Subchapter 31 of Chapter 2 of Title 20
of the New York City Administrative Code, or that towing company is based
outside of New York City and thereby is not required to be licensed pursuant to
such provisions of the New York City Administrative Code.
   (x)   Participants shall not release vehicles towed in the DARP program
unless the person redeeming the vehicle presents sufficient proof that he or
she is the owner of the vehicle or is the owner's agent. Sufficient proof of
ownership includes the vehicle's New York State Department of Motor Vehicles'
registration receipt (or equivalent out-of-state vehicle registration) or
certificate of title. If the vehicle is being redeemed by an insurance company
as agent for the owner, the insurance company shall present a notarized
"receipt for release form" on the insurance company's letterhead signed by a
representative of the insurance company. Upon presentation of sufficient proof
of ownership and payment of the authorized charges, the disabled vehicle shall
be immediately released. Payment of the authorized charges may be made in legal
tender, by a major credit card for which a decal is required to be affixed to a
tow truck as provided in 6 RCNY §
2-368.1, by a first party insurance check or in any other form acceptable to
the licensee. At any time when a participant is required to be open for
redemption pursuant to subdivision (v) of this section, any vehicle owner shall
be permitted to inspect his or her vehicle and remove items of personal
property contained therein if it can be dismantled and removed from the vehicle
without the use of any tool, and any agent shall be permitted to inspect such
vehicle, whether or not the payment for towing and storage has been made. No
charge shall be assessed to the vehicle owner or the vehicle owner's agent for
such inspection. The participant shall be given a receipt for any property
removed from a vehicle while it is in the custody of the participant.
   (y)   After due notice and opportunity to be heard, the Commissioner may
disqualify any towing company participating in the DARP program from continued
participation in such program for violation of any of the provisions of § 20-
518 of the New York City Administrative Code or any rule promulgated thereunder
or upon the occurrence of any one or more of the conditions set forth in
Subchapter 31 of Chapter 2 of Title 20 of the New York City Administrative Code
which constitute grounds for suspension or revocation of any license issued
under such subchapter. The Commissioner, for good cause, may, prior to giving
notice and an opportunity to be heard, temporarily suspend a towing company
from participation in the DARP program for up to ten days. Notice of such
suspension shall be served on the towing company. The Commissioner shall
provide the towing company with the opportunity for a hearing within ten days
after the notification of suspension, after which the Commissioner shall
forthwith make a determination as to whether such suspension should continue
and the length of such suspension, and in addition may impose any penalty or
sanction authorized by Subchapter 31 of Chapter 2 of Title 20 of the New York
City Administrative Code.
   (z)   The DARP tower must affirmatively disclose that a customer has the
right to have his or her vehicle repaired at the facility of the DARP tower or
at any other facility of the customer's choice. Such disclosure shall include,
but not be limited to, the posting of a sign in a conspicuous place in the
repair shop stating that: NO TOWING COMPANY OR INSURANCE COMPANY MAY REQUIRE
THAT REPAIRS BE MADE TO A MOTOR VEHICLE IN A PARTICULAR PLACE OR REPAIR SHOP.
YOU HAVE A RIGHT TO HAVE YOUR MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIRED IN THE SHOP OF YOUR
CHOICE.
   (aa)   Unless otherwise provided by law or by rule, the term "applicant"
shall include (1) persons who are applying to participate in the DARP; and (2)
DARP participants who are currently applying for renewal of their license to
engage in the business of towing.
   (bb)   A participant who is to relocate his or her business premises from
the location which has been approved by the Department for participation in
DARP shall remain in such program only if:
      (1)   Such participant first notifies the Department in writing of the
address of its new business premises and the effective date of such relocation.
Such written notification shall be made no later than 15 days before the
effective date of such relocation;
      (2)   The Department, upon receiving timely relocation notification,
determines that the new location qualifies the participant to continue in the
DARP and furnishes such participant a contingent approval to relocate its
premises subject to such conditions as are specified therein; and
      (3)   The participant provides a sworn statement and such other proof as
the Department may require that such participant has fully and completely
complied with each condition specified in such contingent approval that relates
to DARP requirements that can be fulfilled only after such business premises
are relocated, such as, but not limited to, the required lettering on tow
trucks, the place where the DARP log book is to be kept, and the place where
calls to the business are answered. Failure to provide such a sworn statement,
and such other proof as the Department requires, not later than 15 days after
the effective date of such relocation shall void such contingent approval to
relocate, and the participant shall be immediately removed from the DARP.
§ 2-371.1 Special Accident Response Districts (SARD). [Repealed]
§ 2-372 The Rotation Tow Program (ROTOW).
   (a)   Applicants must be licensed to engage in the business of towing by the
New York City Department of Consumer Affairs. Applicants who apply to be in the
ROTOW program on or after March 1, 1993 must be licensed to engage in the
business of towing for a period of not less than one year immediately prior to
the date of their application. In addition, all tow truck operators employed by
the licensee must be licensed as such by the Department and comply with all
applicable laws and rules.
   (b)   Applicants can only make application to participate in one primary
zone and one geographic adjacent zone. The applicant's business premises must
be located within the primary zone. Such premises shall be under the exclusive
control of the applicant, shall not be used by any other towing company and
shall consist of a location that is open to the public, where towing company
personnel are employed, calls requesting towing service are received and towers
are dispatched, and where all records required by Subchapter 31 of Chapter 2 of
Title 20 of the New York City Administrative Code are maintained.
   (c)   Applications for the ROTOW program will be accepted by the Department
on an ongoing basis. Upon approval, new participants will initially be placed
at the bottom of the rotation list for the zone for which they have been
accepted.
   (d)   In the event that a sufficient number of qualified, licensed companies
do not make application for participation in a particular zone, the
Commissioner may modify the proposed zones and assign qualified companies to
such zones.
   (e)   Applicants for ROTOW must be willing and able to provide towing
services, in the primary and adjacent zone for which they have applied to
participate, minimally on a five-day, twenty-four-hour a day basis. Applicants
who will be available to respond to ROTOW calls for fewer than seven days a
week shall notify the Department in writing and shall specify in such written
notification which days of the week they shall be available. Furthermore, any
change in the days of availability shall be submitted to the Department in
writing at least thirty days prior to the effective date thereof. If no written
notification is received regarding availability for fewer than seven days per
week, applicants shall be deemed to have elected to accept ROTOW calls seven
days a week.
   (f)   Applicants for ROTOW must immediately respond to a rotation call they
accept. To be eligible to participate in a particular zone, an applicant must
be able to provide a tow truck at the vehicle's location within thirty minutes
after notification by the Police Department. If no ROTOW participant is
available in the zone where the vehicle is located, the Police Department may
call a ROTOW participant in the adjacent zone.
   (g)   Applicants must have a minimum of two (2) tow trucks for the zone for
which they have applied to participate.
   (h)   Applicants must own or possess and have at their immediate disposal
equipment to tow vehicles with damaged or missing wheels.
   (i)   Applicants must own, lease or sublease premises, which provide either
indoor, or lighted and fenced outdoor, storage facilities. The storage
facilities must have a locked gate and be suitable for the storage of vehicles.
Applicants who apply to be in the ROTOW program on or after December 6, 1994
must demonstrate that the towing company owns, leases or subleases its business
premises by providing the Department with a deed if the applicant owns such
premises or by providing the Department with the actual lease or sublease
agreement if the applicant leases or subleases such premises. The minimum
footage requirements for storage of ROTOW vehicles is 1,600 square feet over
and above any storage requirements for the Directed Accident Response Program.
All vehicles towed pursuant to ROTOW must, at all times, be secured at the
premises address of the responding company, or at its auxiliary storage
facilities if such facilities have been approved by the Commissioner for
storage of DARP vehicles pursuant to 6 RCNY §
2-371(n). At the request of the owner of a disabled vehicle, his or her agent
or an authorized insurance company representative, a vehicle being stored at
the applicant's auxiliary storage facilities shall be immediately produced at
the applicant's premises address and no fee other than a fee authorized by 6
RCNY §
2-368 may be imposed for such production of such vehicle at the applicants
premises address. Common or shared business premises with another towing
company, including storage facilities and auxiliary storage facilities they
share with another company other than a towing company by a physical
separation, such as a fence. No participant shall release a vehicle to another
towing company unless that towing company is licensed or otherwise exempt from
the licensing provisions of Subchapter 31 of Chapter 2 of Title 20 of the New
York City Administrative Code, or that towing company is based outside of New
York City and thereby is not required to be licensed pursuant to such
provisions of the New York City Administrative Code.
   (j)   Participants may withdraw from the ROTOW program thirty days after
they have notified the Department, in writing, by regular mail, of their
intention to end their participation.
   (k)   [Reserved.]
   (l)   Any participant who has failed to respond within 30 minutes to a call
on three or more occasions within any 180 consecutive days may be suspended
and/or removed from participation in the ROTOW program. Repeated refusal to
accept rotational calls will also be a basis for suspension and/or removal from
participation in the ROTOW program.
   (m)   Participants must abide by the Police Department's written orders,
which establish the operating procedures for this program.
   (n)   Participants must abide by all lawful instructions, directions and
requests of the police official in charge of the scene, incident, or location
to which it or its representatives respond.
   (o)   Participants must record in a bound record book, or in an electronic
format as prescribed in subparagraphs ii or iii of paragraph 3 of subdivision c
of 6 RCNY §
2-378, all calls for service, all occasions when towing service was rendered
and the reason for refusal of any call to which they were unable to respond. If
the participant elects to use a bound record book, the inside cover of the book
kept for this purpose shall contain the ROTOW towing company's business name,
premises address, towing zone number(s) and the dates the book covers. Each
double page shall be consecutively numbered and must contain the following
information:
      Date and time Police Department call was received
      Caller: rank, name
      Precinct voucher number
      Precinct
      Name of person who accepted call
      Disposition: Accepted/refused
      Reason for refusal
      Location vehicle towed from
      Time tow was completed
      Storage location vehicle towed to
      Tow fees/Storage fees
      Total charges Fees paid by credit card: Y/N
      Redemption date Vehicle disposition
   (p)   Participants must be open for redemption of vehicles towed in the
ROTOW program during the hours of 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., Monday through Friday. In
addition, they must be open for redemption from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. on either
Saturday or Sunday, as such participant has informed the Department in writing.
In all instances, participants shall make vehicles immediately available for
redemption to the owner of the disabled vehicle, his or her agent, or an
authorized insurance company representative. The participant may be closed for
redemption on New York City public holidays.
   (q)   Participants shall not release vehicles towed in the ROTOW program
unless the person redeeming the vehicle presents sufficient proof that he or
she is the owner of the vehicle or is the owner's agent. Sufficient proof of
ownership includes the vehicle's New York State Department of Motor Vehicles
registration receipt (or equivalent out-of-state registration) or certificate
of title. If the vehicle is being redeemed by an insurance company as agent for
the owner, the insurance company shall present a notarized "receipt for release
form" on the insurance company's letterhead signed by a representative of the
insurance company. Upon presentation of sufficient proof of ownership and
payment of the authorized charges, the disabled vehicle must be immediately
released. Payment of authorized charges may be made in legal tender, by a
credit card in accordance with generally accepted business practices, by a
first party insurance check or in any other form acceptable to the licensee. At
any time when a participant is required to be open for redemption pursuant to
subdivision (p) of this section, any vehicle owner or agent shall be permitted
to inspect his or her vehicle and remove items of personal property contained
therein whether or not the payment for towing and storage has been made. No
charge shall be assessed to the vehicle owner or the vehicle owner's agent for
such inspection. The participant shall be given a receipt for any property
removed from a vehicle while it is in the custody of the participant.
   (r)   Participants who transfer an unclaimed vehicle into the custody of the
Police Department Property Clerk shall be entitled to charge the Police
Department amounts not in excess of those listed in § 20-519(c) of the
Administrative Code of the City of New York.
   (s)   During the period commencing on the eighth day after the vehicle is
removed to such storage facilities and ending on the thirtieth day after such
removal, vehicles that have not been claimed must be transferred by the ROTOW
participants into the custody of the Police Department Property Clerk. A ROTOW
participant may continue to store at such ROTOW participant's storage
facilities a vehicle that has been claimed by an owner or other person and
shall be entitled to charge for such continued storage and storage rates ROTOW
participants are entitled to charge owners or other persons claiming such
vehicles pursuant to § 20-519(c)(1) of the New York City Administrative Code
where such owner or such other person has claimed such vehicle before the end
of the thirtieth day after such vehicle was towed and has entered into an
agreement with such ROTOW participant for continued storage of such vehicle. An
agreement for continued storage of a vehicle by a ROTOW participant may include
provision for storage of such vehicle beyond the end of the thirtieth day after
such vehicle was towed by such ROTOW participant.
   (t)   The following schedule of rates shall apply for vehicles towed under
the Rotation Towing Program:
      (1)   Rates paid to towing company by owners or other persons claiming a
vehicle:
         (i)   $125.00 flat rate towing fee for the towing of a vehicle
registered at a weight of ten thousand pounds or less; $140.00 for the towing
of a vehicle registered at a weight of more than ten thousand pounds.
         (ii)   $25.00 per/day storage for first three days.
         (iii)   $27.00 storage thereafter up to the maximum of thirty days.
      (2)   An additional charge of $50.00 may be charged for unusual
recoveries requiring two tow trucks. Written authorization of the investigating
police officer is required in the "Remarks" section of the invoice to
substantiate the need for a second tow truck in unusual recovery circumstances.
      (3)   The special rate for this program shall be prominently posted
within the participant's premises on a sign no less than 14 inches by 20 inches
in size.
      (4)   Rates paid to towing company by the Police Department:
         (i)   $60 flat rate transfer fee for the unclaimed vehicles towed to
the property clerk's facilities, plus tolls, when applicable.
         (ii)   $5.00 per/day storage for the first three days.
         (iii)   $8.00 per/day storage thereafter up to the maximum ten days.
   (u)   After due notice and opportunity to be heard, the Commissioner may
disqualify any towing company participating in the ROTOW program from continued
participation in such program for violation of any of the provisions of § 20-
519 of the New York City Administrative Code or any rule promulgated thereunder
or upon the occurrence of any one or more of the conditions set forth in
Subchapter 31 of Chapter 2 of Title 20 of the New York City Administrative Code
which constitute grounds for suspension or revocation of any license issued
under such subchapter; provided, however, that the Commissioner, for good
cause, may, prior to giving notice and an opportunity to be heard, temporarily
suspend a towing company from participation in the ROTOW program for up to ten
days. Notice of such suspension shall be served on the towing company. The
Commissioner shall provide the towing company with the opportunity for a
hearing within ten days after the notification of suspension, after which the
Commissioner shall forthwith make a determination as to whether such suspension
should continue and the length of such suspension, and in addition may impose
any penalty or sanction authorized by Subchapter 31 of Chapter 2 of Title 20 of
the New York City Administrative Code.
   (v)   Participants shall take reasonable care to prevent damage to or loss
of a customer's vehicle or personal property continued therein.
   (w)   Unless otherwise provided by law or by rule, the term "applicant"
shall include (1) persons who are applying to participate in the ROTOW program;
and (2) ROTOW participants who are currently applying for renewal of their
license to engage in the towing business.
   (x)   A participant who is to relocate his or her business premises from the
location which has been approved by the Department for participation in the
ROTOW program shall remain in the ROTOW program only if:
      (1)   Such participant first notifies the Department in writing of the
address of its new business premises and of the effective date of such
relocation. Such written notification shall be made not less than 15 days
before the effective date of such relocation;
      (2)   The Department, upon receiving timely relocation notification,
determines that the new location qualifies the participant to continue in the
ROTOW program and furnishes such participant a contingent approval to relocate
its premises subject to such conditions as are specified therein; and
      (3)   The participant provides a sworn statement and such other proof as
the Department may require that such participant has fully and completely
complied with each condition specified in such contingent approval that relates
to ROTOW program requirements that can be fulfilled only after such business
premises are relocated, such as, but not limited to, the required lettering on
tow trucks, the place where the ROTOW log book is to be kept, and the place
where calls to the business are answered. Failure to provide such a sworn
statement, and such other proof as the Department requires, not later than 15
days after the effective date of such relocation shall void such contingent
approval to relocate, and the participant shall be immediately removed from the
ROTOW program.
§ 2-373 Evidence Vehicle Program (Evidence Vehicle).
   (a)   Applicants must be licensed to engage in the business of towing by the
New York City Department of Consumer Affairs. Applicants who apply to be in the
Evidence Vehicle program on or after March 1, 1993 must be licensed to engage
in the business of towing for a period of not less than one year immediately
prior to the date of their application. In addition, all of the tow truck
operators employed by the licensee must be licensed as such by the Department
and comply with all applicable laws and rules.
   (b)   Applicants can only make application to participate in one primary
zone and one geographic adjacent zone. The applicant's business premises must
be located within the primary zone. Such premises shall be under the exclusive
control of the applicant, shall not be used by any other towing company and
shall consist of a location that is open to the public, where towing company
personnel are employed, calls requesting towing service are received and towers
are dispatched, and where all records required by Subchapter 31 of Chapter 2 of
Title 20 of the New York City Administrative Code are maintained.
   (c)   Applications for the Evidence Vehicle program will be accepted by the
Department on an ongoing basis. Upon approval, new participants will initially
be placed at the bottom of the rotation list for the zone for which they have
been accepted.
   (d)   In the event that a sufficient number of qualified, licensed companies
do not make application for participation in a particular zone, the
Commissioner may modify the proposed zones and assign qualified companies to
such zones.
   (e)   Applicants for Evidence Vehicle must be willing and able to provide
towing services, in the primary and adjacent zone for which they have applied
to participate, minimally on a five day, twenty-four hour a day basis.
   (f)   Applicants for Evidence Vehicle must immediately respond to a rotation
call they accept. To be eligible to participate in a particular zone, an
applicant must be able to provide a tow truck at the vehicle's location within
thirty minutes after notification by the Police Department. If no Evidence
Vehicle participant is available in the zone where the vehicle is located, the
Police Department may call an Evidence Vehicle participant in the adjacent
zone.
   (g)   Applicants must have a minimum of two (2) tow trucks for the zone for
which they have applied to participate.
   (h)   Applicants must own or possess and have at their immediate disposal
equipment to tow vehicles with damaged or missing wheels.
   (i)   Participants may withdraw from the Evidence Vehicle program thirty
days after they have notified the Department, in writing, by regular mail, of
their intention to end their participation.
   (j)   [Reserved.]
   (k)   Repeated failure by a participant to meet the thirty minute
requirement may be a basis for suspension or removal from participation in the
Evidence Vehicle Program. Repeated unjustifiable refusal to accept rotational
calls will also be a basis for suspension or removal from participation in the
Evidence Vehicle Program.
   (l)   Participants must abide by the Police Department's written orders,
which establish the operating procedures for this program.
   (m)   Participants must abide by all lawful instructions, directions and
requests of the police official in charge of the scene, incident, or location
to which it or its representatives respond.
   (n)   Participants must record in a bound record book all calls for service,
all occasions when towing service was rendered and the reason for refusal of
any call to which they were unable to respond. The inside cover of the book
kept for this purpose shall contain the Evidence Vehicle towing company's
business name, premises address, towing zone number(s) and the dates the book
covers. Each double page shall be consecutively numbered and must contain the
following information:
      Date and time Police Department call was received
      Caller: rank, name
      Precinct voucher number
      Precinct
      Name of person who accepted call
      Disposition: Accepted/refused
      Reason for refusal
      Location vehicle towed from
      Storage location vehicle towed to
      Time tow was completed
      Total Charges
   (o)   The following schedule of rates shall apply for vehicles towed under
the Evidence Vehicle Towing Program:
      $60.00 flat rate transfer fee for vehicles towed to the Police Department
facility, plus tolls, when applicable.
      An additional charge of $60.00 may be charged for unusual recoveries
requiring two tow trucks. Written authorization of the investigating police
officer is required in the "Remarks" section of the invoice to substantiate the
need for a second tow truck in unusual recovery circumstances.
   (p)   After due notice and opportunity to be heard, the Commissioner may
disqualify any towing company participating in the Evidence Vehicle program
from continued participation in such program for violation of any of the
provisions of § 20-519 of the New York City Administrative Code or any rule
promulgated thereunder or upon the occurrence of any one or more of the
conditions set forth in Subchapter 31 of Chapter 2 of Title 20 of the New York
City Administrative Code which constitute grounds for suspension or revocation
of any license issued under such subchapter; provided, however, that the
Commissioner, for good cause, may, prior to giving notice and an opportunity to
be heard, temporarily suspend a towing company from participation in the
Evidence Vehicle program for up to ten days. Notice of such suspension shall be
served on the towing company. The Commissioner shall provide the towing company
with the opportunity for a hearing within ten days after the notification of
suspension, after which the Commissioner shall forthwith make a determination
as to whether such suspension should continue and the length of such
suspension, and in addition may impose any penalty or sanction authorized by
Subchapter 31 of Chapter 2 of Title 20 of the New York City Administrative
Code.
   (q)   Participants shall take reasonable care to prevent damage to or loss
of a customer's vehicle or personal property contained therein.
§ 2-374 Primary and Adjacent Zones.
   (a)   DARP applicants who apply to be in the DARP program on or after
December 6, 1994 must make application to participate only in the zone in which
their business premises is located.
   (b)   ROTOW and EVIDENCE VEHICLE applicants may apply for one Primary Zone
and one Adjacent Zone. The Primary Zone must be the zone in which the business
premises is located; the Adjacent Zone can be any zone which shares a border
with the Primary Zone. Zones which are adjacent except for a body of water will
be considered adjacent for purposes of the ROTOW and EVIDENCE VEHICLE programs.
   (c)   If enrolled in both the ROTOW and EVIDENCE VEHICLE programs, the
Primary Zones must be identical, and the Adjacent Zones must be identical.
§ 2-375 Tow Truck Industry Trust Fund.
   (a)   The Tow Truck Industry Trust Fund (hereinafter, "The Fund") is
established to provide for the payment of outstanding awards to aggrieved
consumers and fines owed to the Department. The Fund shall be administered by
the Comptroller of the City of New York pursuant to Section 93(j) of the
Charter.
   (b)   Participation in the Fund.
      (1)   Those licensed to engage in the business of towing may elect to
participate in the Fund in lieu of furnishing a bond or its cash equivalent as
required by § 20-499 of Chapter 2 of Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the
City of New York.
      (2)   Any tow truck company license applicant who elects to participate
in the Fund must submit to the Department a check in the amount of two hundred
dollars, made payable to the New York City Department of Consumer Affairs,
prior to the issuance of the license to engage in the business of towing and
prior to the expiration or cancellation date of the licensee's bond.
      (3)   The Commissioner may, from time to time, amend this regulation to
require such additional contributions by participants in the Fund as the
Commissioner determines to be necessary to maintain an amount in the Fund which
is adequate to fulfill its purposes and to counteract depletion of the fund
resulting from payments out of the Fund pursuant to subdivision (c) hereof.
      (4)   Fund participants may discontinue their participation in the Fund
at any time by filing a bond pursuant to the Tow Truck Law Bond Requirement. No
participant will be entitled to a refund of any monies contributed to the Fund
unless the Fund is dissolved by the Commissioner. All such refunds will be
disbursed in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Commissioner and in
effect at the time of such dissolution.
      (5)   Participation in the Fund does not relieve a licensee of any
obligation to pay awards and/or fines imposed by the Department or judgments
and/or arbitration awards rendered against a licensee by a court of competent
jurisdiction. In the event that a company's license is revoked, surrendered or
the company fails to renew its license, and the Fund is invaded to pay an
award, fine or judgment that was rendered against such company pursuant to the
provisions herein, no license shall be issued or reinstated to such company
owner or to any tow truck company in which such company owner is an officer,
shareholder, partner or principal, unless the amount(s) paid out of the Fund on
behalf of such company is reimbursed by such company in full.
      (6)   In the event that a tow truck company's license is revoked,
surrendered or the company fails to renew its license and the Fund invaded to
pay an award, fine or judgment that was rendered against such company pursuant
to the provisions herein, the Commissioner or his or her designee shall have
discretion to exclude such company owner or any tow truck company in which such
company owner is a principal, from future participation in the Fund. The
Commissioner or his or her designee may, in his or her discretion, require such
tow truck company to comply with the Tow Truck Law Bond requirement.
   (c)   Invasion of the Fund.
      (1)   The Commissioner may require that disbursements be made from the
Fund to pay outstanding awards to consumers and Departmental fines when:
         (i)   The Department has conducted an administrative hearing that
results in a finding that tow truck company is in violation of a law, ordinance
or regulation enforced by the Department; or a court of competent jurisdiction
has rendered a judgment or an arbitration award against the company for damages
suffered by a consumer arising out of towing services; and
         (ii)   The company has been ordered by the Department to pay an award
to a consumer, a Departmental fine and/or to satisfy a judgment or arbitration
award; and
         (iii)   The company has failed to pay such award to a consumer, a
Departmental fine and/or satisfy a judgment or arbitration award, within 30
days of the date of the Department's order; and
         (iv)   The Department has revoked the company's or the company has
surrendered or failed to renew said license after the Department's order.
      (2)   Disbursements will not be made from the Fund to pay an award, fine
or judgment that is rendered against: a licensee who has furnished a bond,
pursuant to the Tow Truck Law Bond Requirement; or Tow Truck Company who was
never licensed by the Department or a participant in the Fund.
      (3)   Disbursements from the Fund will be made at the discretion of the
Commissioner or his or her designee, provided, however, that invasion of the
Fund shall be limited to no more than ten thousand dollars for all awards,
fines and judgments arising out of a single tow service.
      (4)   The Commissioner or his or her designee may order that partial
payment of awards, fines or judgments be made from the Fund.
      (5)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed to limit the rights and
remedies of any party, including the Department, to pursue a cause of action
against a tow truck company who is a participant in the Fund.
      (6)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed to create a right of
any person to a portion of any of the Fund, except in the case of an award duly
made by the Commissioner pursuant to the provisions herein.
      (7)   Nothing contained herein shall be construed to provide for the
payment of awards or judgments tendered against Fund participants in personal
injury actions.
   (d)   Accounting. The Commissioner shall, by January 31 of each year, cause
an accounting to be made of all the Fund's activities during the preceding
calendar year.
§ 2-376 Application for License Exemption Certificates.
   (a)   Every applicant who claims an exemption from the licensing
requirements of § 20-496, Subchapter 31, Chapter 2, Title 20 of the
Administrative Code shall file an application for such exemption with the
department, and shall submit proof satisfactory to the department in accordance
with this section that the applicant is exempt pursuant to § 20-524 of such
subchapter.
   (b)   Every applicant who claims an exemption pursuant to § 20-524 shall
submit proof of such exemption, which shall consist of one or more of the
following:
      (1)   An original New York State Department of Motor Vehicle registration
authorizing such applicant to operate as a vehicle dismantler, salvage pool,
mobile car crusher, or itinerant vehicle collector pursuant to § 415-a of the
vehicle and traffic law, and a copy of the New York State Department of Motor
Vehicle registration issued to such vehicle dismantler, salvage pool, mobile
car crusher, or itinerant vehicle collector for each tow truck owned or
operated by such vehicle dismantler, salvage pool, mobile car crusher, or
itinerant vehicle collector;
      (2)   An original license under article six-C of the general business law
certified by the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles authorizing such
applicant to operate as a scrap processor, or an original certification by the
Department of Motor Vehicles authorizing such applicant to operate as a scrap
collector who complies with all the licensing or permitting requirements
applicable to such business, and a copy of the New York State Department of
Motor Vehicles, registration issued to such scrap processor or scrap collector
for each tow truck owned or operated by such scrap processor or scrap
collector;
      (3)   An original franchise agreement to operate as a franchised public
transportation operator, and a copy of the New York State Department of Motor
Vehicle registration issued to such operator for each tow truck owned or
operated by such operator;
      (4)   Proof of the appropriate operating authority required by applicable
law for a common carrier of passengers by motor vehicle, a common carrier of
property by motor vehicle, a contract carrier of passengers by motor vehicle,
or a contract carrier of property by motor vehicle, and a copy of the New York
State Department of Motor Vehicle registration issued to such common carrier
for each tow truck owned or operated by such common carrier;
      (5)   Proof satisfactory to the Commissioner that such applicant is an
approved public utility company or public utility corporation as such terms are
defined in subdivisions 23 and 24, respectively, of § 2 of the Public Service
Law, and a copy of the New York State Department of Motor Vehicle registration
issued to such company or corporation for each tow truck owner or operated by
such company or corporation;
      (6)   An original New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission license to
operate a vehicle licensed pursuant to Chapter 5, Title 19 of the
Administrative Code, and a copy of the New York State Department of Motor
Vehicle registration issued to such licensee for each tow truck owned and
operated by such licensee;
      (7)   Proof satisfactory to the Commissioner that such applicant is an
operator of one or more school buses as such term is defined in § 142 of the
vehicle and traffic law, and a copy of the New York State Department of Motor
Vehicle registration issued to such operator for each tow truck owned and
operated by such applicant; or
      (8)   A certificate of insurance issued to an applicant which is a motor
vehicle rental agency, a copy of a sample rental agreement used by such rental
agency and a copy of the New York State Department of Motor Vehicle
registration issued to such rental agency for each tow truck owned or operated
by such rental agency.
   (c)   Each applicant shall present the current registration card and
insurance card for each tow truck for which an exemption is sought. Where such
applicant is required to pay the New York City commercial motor vehicle tax for
one or more tow trucks pursuant to Chapter 8 of Title 11 of the Administrative
Code, the applicant shall furnish proof of payment of such tax for each tow
truck for which an exemption is sought. Such proof shall consist of a validated
New York City Department of Finance Motor Vehicle Tax Receipt issued pursuant
to such chapter.
   (d)   Each tow truck for which an exemption is sought must be registered
under the same name as the applicant applying for the exemption.
   (e)   An exemption certificate is not transferable. An exemption certificate
shall be deemed void upon
      (1)   any change of corporate or partnership ownership of the applicant
of the type described in §§ 20-110 or 20-111 of the Administrative Code unless
prior written approval of the commissioner has been obtained, or
      (2)   any change in the ownership of a tow truck for which an exemption
certificate has been issued.
   (f)   Any applicant who is issued one or more exemption certificates may not
also own or operate any tow truck licensed by the department for use in the
same business for which one or more exemption certificates were obtained.
   (g)   The biennial fee for each exempt tow truck shall be twenty-five
dollars ($25). All exemption certificates issued pursuant to this section shall
expire on December 31st in odd numbered years, unless such exemption is removed
or revoked.
   (h)   Upon payment of the fee prescribed in subdivision g of this section
and completion of the processing of the exemption application by the
department, the commissioner will issue an exemption certificate to the
applicant for each tow truck which is exempt under this section. Such
certificate shall be affixed to the passenger side front windshield of each
exempt tow truck, and may be affixed only by department personnel.
   (i)   After due notice and an opportunity for a hearing, any person who
holds an exemption certificate issued pursuant to § 20-524 of Subchapter 31 of
Chapter 2 of Title 20 of the New York City Administrative Code who is found not
to be in compliance with one or more of the conditions for granting such
exemption as set forth in § 20-524(a)91) of such code shall have all exemption
certificates issued to such person revoked.
§ 2-377 Duties Pertaining to the Nonconsensual Towing of Vehicles from Private
Property.
   (a)   Every applicant for a renewal of a license issued pursuant to § 20-496
of Chapter 2 of Title 20 of the New York City Administrative Code shall file
with the application:
      (1)   A list of properties from which the licensee has contracted to tow
vehicles. Such list shall include the address(es) from which the licensee has
contracted to tow vehicles, the address to which such vehicles are towed, and
the name, address and telephone number of the person(s) who contracted for the
towing from each listed address; or,
      (2)   An affidavit stating that the applicant does not tow vehicles from
private parking lots.
   (b)   Unless the licensee who has contracted to perform the towing has
previously provided to the Department, in writing, the information required by
subdivision (a)(1) of this section, within fifteen days of the execution of any
contract for the towing of vehicles from private property, the licensee shall
submit to the Department, in writing, the information specified in paragraph
(a)(1) and not previously provided to the Department in writing.
   (c)   Within fifteen days of the date of the termination of any of its
agreements to tow vehicles from private property, the licensee shall notify the
Department, in writing, that the agreement has terminated and the date of such
termination.
   (d)   A towing company shall not remove a vehicle from private property
without the consent of such vehicle's owner or operator unless signs are posted
on such property which are plainly visible and which contain the following
information:
      (1)   The words "Warning!" and "Private Parking Lot"
      (2)   The words "Vehicles Subject to Towing"
      (3)   The conditions under which vehicles are subject to towing,
including the hours and days when such towing may occur; and
      (4)   The name, address, telephone number, and DCA license number of the
towing company that is authorized to tow vehicles from the property. The
telephone number shall be within one of the telephone or cellular area codes
assigned to telephones within New York City.
      (5)   The fees that will be charged for towing and storage, which shall
not exceed the amounts specified in § 19-169.1(a) of the Administrative Code of
the City of New York; and
      (6)   The hours during which the owners or operators of vehicles towed
from such property may redeem towed vehicles, provided that such hours shall
include all times during which vehicles may be towed from such property and at
least 60 minutes after the latest time that vehicles are subject to towing from
such property each day.
   (e)   (1)   The signs required to be posted on private property pursuant to
subdivision (d) of this section shall read substantially as follows (with the
designated information to be inserted at the indicated spaces):
 
WARNING! (in red letters at least 5 inches high).
PRIVATE PARKING LOT (in letters at least 2.5 inches high).
(The following text shall be in letters at least 2 inches high.)
PARKING PERMITTED {'{'}insert if applicable{'}'}
FROM TO FOR (insert exact conditions under which parking is allowed*).
VEHICLES ARE SUBJECT TO TOWING {'{'}insert if applicable{'}'}
FROM TO (insert exact conditions under which vehicles are subject to towing**).
$ Fees: (insert applicable lawful fee for towing and storage).***
(The following text shall be at least 3/4 of an inch high.)
Towing performed by: (insert name of licensee).
(Insert licensee's business address.)
Consumer Affairs License Number: (insert licensee's license number)
Call: (insert business phone number to release vehicle) to be called to release
vehicle (or if applicable identify on site location where person can go to
request the release of the vehicle).
Redemption period: (insert applicable time during which vehicles may be
redeemed.)
DCA Complaint Number: (insert current telephone number).
 
* The statement that "Parking permitted for patrons of [X, Y, Z stores] only"
or a substantially similar statement that clearly identifies, by name, the
store(s) that customers must be patronizing shall be used to describe the
condition that parking is permitted only while at least one of the vehicle's
occupant is patronizing an identified store or business establishment that is
contiguous to such lot.
** A statement that "A vehicle is subject to towing if its occupants leave the
private parking lot and no such occupant is patronizing any of the specified
stores or business establishments for any reason or for any length of time" or
a substantially similar statement shall be used to describe the condition that
vehicles are subject to towing if all of its occupants leave the private
parking lot and specified stores or business establishments for any reason or
for any length of time.
*** The maximum amount to be paid to the towing company to release the towed
vehicle, which amount may not exceed the charges authorized in § 19-169.1(a) of
the New York City Administrative Code.
      (2)   The telephone number posted on the sign described in paragraph one
of this subdivision shall be the telephone number that a person can call to
request the redemption of the towed vehicle as provided in paragraph 6 of
subsection (e) of this section.
   (f)   The background color for the signs specified in subdivisions (d) and
(e) of this section shall be a color that is sharply distinct from both the red
color used for the word "warning" as required in such subdivisions and the
color of the text of such signs. The text of such signs shall be composed of
capital block letters. The text and the background color of such signs shall be
treated with a luminescent coating which shall make such text and such signs
clearly visible twenty-four hours a day.
   (g)   The signs containing the information specified in subdivisions (d) and
(e) of this section shall be placed in the following locations at or adjacent
to the private property from which vehicles are towed:
      (1)   At each entry for vehicles, positioned so that the information on
the sign is clearly and conspicuously visible to the driver as he or she drives
the vehicle onto such private property.
      (2)   Along the outside perimeter of such private property and spaced so
that signs are posted not more than 250 feet apart along the entire perimeter
line of the private property, except that if a side along the perimeter is less
than 250 feet from where a sign is required to be posted at an entrance or
pedestrian access point, no such additional sign is required to be posted on
such side. The top of each sign posted pursuant to this paragraph shall be not
more than 8 feet nor less than 6 feet above the ground. Each such sign shall be
positioned so that the required information is clearly and conspicuously
visible to a person viewing it from the private property where vehicles are
parked. The signs required to be posted pursuant to this paragraph are not
required to be posted along the perimeter of the property where signs are
posted pursuant to paragraph (3) of this subdivision and where pedestrian
access to such private property is limited to the locations where such signs
are posted.
      (3)   At each pedestrian exit from such private property to the adjacent
street or sidewalk and at each point of pedestrian access from such private
property to each store or business establishment that is contiguous to or near
such private property, except that if the distance between entrances to
adjacent stores or business establishments is 50 feet or less, such sign may be
posted midway between the two adjacent entrances. The top of each sign posted
pursuant to this paragraph shall be not more than 8 feet nor less than 6 feet
above the ground. Each such sign shall be faced so the required information is
clearly and conspicuously visible to anyone entering the store or business
establishment from such private property.
   (h)   No tow operator shall remove a vehicle from private property without
first obtaining written authorization from the owner of such property or the
owner's agent who has been designated in writing to authorize such towing. The
written authorization must be legible and shall include the date, time,
location, make, model, color, and license plate number of the vehicle to be
removed, and the name, title and signature of the person authorizing the
towing. The licensee shall provide the owner or operator of the towed vehicle a
copy of such authorization that also includes an itemized list of the fees that
may be collected for the towing and storage of a vehicle towed from the
property.
§ 2-378 Maintenance of Records in Electronic Format.
Every person or entity licensed to engage in towing must maintain records in an
electronic format concerning every tow performed under the authority of the
following: the Directed Accident Response Program ("DARP"), the Rotation Tow
Program ("ROTOW"), the Arterial Towing Program, and the authority to remove
vehicles improperly parked on private property provided by § 19-169.1 of the
Administrative Code, as provided in this section.
   (a)   General Recordkeeping.
      (1)   The licensee must create an electronic folder in which it will
maintain electronic copies of records for each tow. The licensee must label
each electronic folder with the date on which the tow was performed, and must
enter the date as "YYYYMMDD." The licensee must maintain the electronic folders
in chronological order.
      (2)   Each electronic folder must contain an electronic copy of each of
the following documents:
         (i)   a completed authorization to tow,
         (ii)   a receipt for the towing services, and
         (iii)   a copy of the credit card record of payment for the towing
services, if any.
   (b)   Records of Directed Accident Response Program (DARP) Tows.
      (1)   For towing service performed under DARP, the licensee must maintain
an electronic copy of the authorization required by 6 RCNY §
2-367(a), (b) or (d), which will constitute the authorization required by
paragraph 2 of subdivision a of this section.
      (2)   In addition to the records required by paragraph 2 of subdivision
a, the licensee must include in each electronic folder for a DARP tow a copy of
the documents required to be presented by 6 RCNY §
2-371(x) demonstrating that the person who redeems the vehicle is its owner or
the agent of the owner.
      (3)   The licensee must make an electronic record of the same information
that is required to be maintained in a bound record book by 6 RCNY §
2-371(u). The licensee must make the electronic record by one of the following
methods:
         (i)   making an electronic copy of the bound record book at least once
each week,
         (ii)   not later than one business day after the occurrence of the
event being recorded, entering the information in English on an electronic form
in a format provided by the Department as an Excel spreadsheet and accessible
at an Internet address provided by the Department, or
         (iii)   not later than one business day after the occurrence of the
event being recorded, entering the information in English on a spreadsheet,
local application or web-based system that (a) has all fields named, ordered
and in all respects identical to the fields in the Excel file provided by the
Department and (b) is in an Excel-readable format.
   (c)   Records of Rotation Tow Program (ROTOW) Tows.
      (1)   For towing service performed under ROTOW, the licensee must
maintain an electronic copy of the completed New York City Police Department
form PD 571-147, which will constitute the authorization required by paragraph
2 of subdivision a of this section.
      (2)   In addition to the records required by paragraph 2 of subdivision
a, the licensee must include in each electronic folder for a ROTOW tow a copy
of the documents required to be presented by 6 RCNY §
2-372(q) demonstrating that the person redeeming the vehicle is its owner or
the agent of the owner and a copy of any agreement signed by the owner of the
vehicle or other person pursuant to 6 RCNY §
2-372(s) authorizing continued storage of the vehicle.
      (3)   The licensee must make an electronic record of the same information
that is required to be maintained in a bound record book by 6 RCNY §
2-372(o). The licensee must make the electronic record by one of the following
methods:
         (i)   making an electronic copy of the bound record book at least once
each week,
         (ii)   not later than one business day after the occurrence of the
event being recorded, entering the information in English on an electronic form
in a format provided by the Department as an Excel spreadsheet and accessible
at an Internet address provided by the Department, or
         (iii)   not later than one business day after the occurrence of the
event being recorded, entering the information in English on a spreadsheet,
local application or web-based system that (a) has all fields named, ordered
and in all respects identical to the fields in the Excel file provided by the
Department and (b) is in an Excel-readable format.
   (d)   Records of Arterial Towing Program Tows.
      (1)   For towing service performed under the Arterial Towing Program, the
licensee must maintain an electronic copy of the completed authorization to tow
required by the New York City Police Department, which will constitute the
authorization required by paragraph 2 of subdivision a of this section.
      (2)   In addition to the records required by paragraph 2 of subdivision
a, the licensee must include in each electronic folder for an Arterial Towing
tow a copy of the documents provided to the licensee demonstrating that the
person redeeming the vehicle is its owner or the agent of the owner.
   (e)   Records of Tows to Remove Vehicles Improperly Parked on Private
Property.
      (1)   For tows that remove vehicles improperly parked on private
property, the licensee must maintain in each electronic folder an electronic
copy of the written authorization required by § 19-169.1(c) of the
Administrative Code of the City of New York and 6 RCNY §
2-377(h) from the owner of the property or the owner's agent who has been
designated in writing to authorize such towing. This authorization will
constitute the authorization required by paragraph 2 of subdivision a of this
section.
      (2)   In addition to the records required by paragraph 2 of subdivision
a, the licensee must include in each electronic folder for a tow from private
property an electronic copy of the trip record required by § 19-169.1(f) of the
Administrative Code and the signed receipt of the person paying removal and
storage charges issued pursuant to § 19-169.1(h) of the Administrative Code.
      (3)   A licensee that performs towing services from private property must
make an electronic copy of every contract between the licensee and the owner of
private property required by § 19-169.1(c) of the Code. The electronic copy
must be labeled with the address of the private property, the name of the owner
of the private property and the date of the contract.
   (f)   Roster of Drivers. On the first Friday of each month, a licensee that
performs DARP, ROTOW, Arterial Towing tows or tows to remove vehicles
improperly parked on private property must prepare a roster of persons
providing towing services for the licensee, including, but not limited to
employees and independent contractors, on that date. The roster information
must contain the name, address and Department license number of each driver and
must be entered in English on either (1) an electronic form in a format
provided by the Department as an Excel spreadsheet and accessible at an
Internet address provided by the Department or (2) a spreadsheet, local
application or web-based system that (i) has all fields named, ordered and in
all respects identical to the fields in the Excel file provided by the
Department and (ii) is in an Excel-readable format.
   (g)   Format and Preservation of Records.
      (1)   For purposes of this rule, an electronic record or copy means a
document that has been scanned or converted to a Portable Document Format
("PDF") or Tagged Image File Format ("TIFF") that legibly reproduces the
original document in all details, including any markings in the margins of the
paper document.
      (2)   If the original of any document contains an attachment, the
document must be scanned once with the attachment and once with the attachment
removed.
      (3)   Each electronic copy of a document concerning a tow must be labeled
electronically with (i) the licensee's DCA license number, (ii) the license
plate number and state of issuance of the vehicle towed, and (iii) the date of
the tow, which must be entered as "YYYYMMDD."
      (4)   Each electronic copy must be electronically labeled with the date
and time that the file was created.
      (5)   At least once each week, the licensee must save the electronic
records required by this section, with all electronic folder information
intact, to a CD-ROM, DVD-ROM or other write-once media or device, and
immediately make a second copy to a write-once media or device. The second copy
must be stored off-site. The licensee must maintain the second copy write-once
media or device in a manner designed to ensure its security and preservation,
including by keeping it in a location separate from the original image file.
Each such write-once media or device must be labeled with the licensee's name,
license number, the date range of the records stored on the media or device,
and the date it was created.
   (h)   Tampering Prohibited.
      (1)   A licensee must not tamper with the electronic records required by
this section after a PDF or TIFF image is made by modifying, amending,
deleting, rearranging or in any other way altering any such data or properties
including but not limited to using a meta data scrubber or similar device or
program.
      (2)   If a typographical error has occurred or if data contained in the
licensee's record maintained under paragraph 3 of subdivision b or paragraph 3
of subdivision c of this section were accidentally omitted from the electronic
data entry, the original record must not be deleted. A new record must be
created and be marked "Amended," and the corrected data must be identified by
entering it in italics.
   (i)   Implementation Affirmation. Within sixty (60) days of the effective
date of this section, a licensee must submit an affirmation to the Department
that it is maintaining electronic records in compliance with this section.
After the effective date of this section, no license will be issued until the
towing company files with the Department an affirmation that it will comply
with this section and no license will be renewed unless the licensee submits an
affirmation that it is complying with this section.
Subchapter FF: Booting of Motor Vehicles
§ 2-400 Definitions.
   (a)   Terms used in this subchapter shall have the meanings specified in §
19-169.2(a) and § 20-531(b) of the New York City Administrative Code.
   (b)   Whenever used in this subchapter, the term "licensee" shall mean a
person licensed pursuant to Subchapter 32 of Chapter 2 of Title 20 of the New
York City Administrative Code.
§ 2-401 Required Signs on Property.
   (a)   (1)   The signs required to be posted on private parking lots pursuant
to paragraph one of subdivision c of § 19-169.2 of the New York City
Administrative Code shall read substantially as follows (with the designated
information to be inserted at the indicated spaces):
 
WARNING! (in red letters at least five inches high).
PRIVATE PARKING LOT (in letters at least two and one half inches high).
(The following text shall be in letters at least two inches high.)
PARKING PERMITTED {'{'}insert if applicable FROM ___ TO ___ {'}'} FOR
(insert exact conditions under which parking is allowed*).
VEHICLES ARE SUBJECT TO BOOTING {'{'}insert if applicable
FROM ___ TO ___ {'}'} (insert exact conditions under which vehicles are subject
to booting**).
$ (insert applicable lawful fee) FEE TO UNBOOT VEHICLE.
(The following text shall be at least three-fourths of an inch high.)
Booting performed by: (insert name of licensee).
(Insert licensee's business address.)
Consumer Affairs License Number: (insert licensee's license number).
Call: (insert business phone number to unboot vehicle) to unboot vehicle (or {'
{'}if applicable identify on site location where person can go to request the
unbooting of the vehicle{'}'}).
DCA Complaint Number: (insert current telephone number).
 
* A statement that "Parking permitted for patrons only" or substantially
similar statement shall be used to describe the condition that parking is
permitted only while vehicle occupant is patronizing stores or business
establishments contiguous to or near such lot.
** A statement that "Vehicles are subject to booting if their occupants leave
the private parking lot or the stores or business establishments served by it
for any reason or for any length of time" or substantially similar statement
shall be used to describe the condition that vehicles are subject to booting if
occupants leave the private parking lot or stores or business establishments
contiguous to or near such lot for any reason or for any length of time.
      (2)   The business telephone number posted on the sign described in
paragraph one of this subdivision shall be the telephone number that a person
can call to request the release of the booted vehicle within 30 minutes from
the time the request is made. Such business telephone number shall be within
one of the telephone area codes assigned to telephones within the City of New
York.
   (b)   (1)   The signs required to be posted at the place where a private
street intersects a public street pursuant to subparagraph (i) of paragraph two
of subdivision c of § 19-169.2 of the New York City Administrative Code shall
read substantially as follows (with the designated information to be inserted
at the indicated spaces):
 
WARNING! (in red letters at least five inches high).
ENTERING PRIVATE STREET (in red letters or in such color as the following text
and at least two and one half inches high).
(The following text shall be in letters at least one inch high.)
PARKING PERMITTED {'{'}insert if applicable FROM ___ TO ___ {'}'} FOR
(insert exact conditions under which parking is allowed*).
VEHICLES ARE SUBJECT TO BOOTING {'{'}insert if applicable
FROM ___ TO ___ {'}'} (insert exact conditions under which vehicles are subject
to booting**).
$ (insert applicable fee) FEE TO UNBOOT VEHICLE.
(The following text shall be at least three-fourths of an inch high.)
Booting performed by: (insert name of licensee).
(Insert licensee's business address.)
Consumer Affairs License Number: (insert licensee's license number).
Call: (insert business phone number to unboot vehicle) to unboot vehicle (or {'
{'}if applicable identify on site location where person can go to request the
unbooting of the vehicle{'}'}).
DCA Complaint Number: (insert current telephone number).
 
* A statement that "Parking permitted only with written authorization" or
substantially similar statement shall be used to describe the condition that
persons must obtain written permission to park vehicles on such private street.
** A statement that "Vehicles are subject to booting if required written
private parking authorization is not displayed on dashboard" or substantially
similar statement shall be used to describe the condition that vehicles are
subject to booting if the required written authorization is not properly
displayed.
      (2)   The business telephone number posted on the sign described in
paragraph one of this subdivision shall be the telephone number that a person
can call to request the release of the booted vehicle within 30 minutes from
the time request is made. Such business telephone number shall be within one of
the telephone area codes assigned to telephones within the City of New York.
   (c)   The background color for the signs specified in subdivisions a and b
of this section shall be white, and the text for such signs shall be composed
of capital block letters in a color that is sharply distinct from the red color
used for the word "warning" as required in such subdivisions, from the red
color used for the words "entering private streets" as authorized by
subdivision b of this section and from the solid white background of such sign.
The text and the background color shall be treated with a luminescent coating
which shall make such text and such signs clearly visible twenty-four hours a
day.
   (d)   The signs containing the information specified in subdivision a of
this section shall be placed in the following locations at or adjacent to a
private parking lot where vehicles are booted:
      (1)   At each entry for vehicles from the street to such lot positioned
so that the information on the sign is clearly and conspicuously visible to the
driver as he or she drives the vehicle onto such lot.
      (2)   At the outside perimeter of the such lot and spaced so that signs
are posted not more than 100 feet apart at the perimeter line of the lot,
except that if a side along the perimeter is less than 100 feet, such sign may
be posted at the mid-point of such side. The top of each sign posted pursuant
to this paragraph shall be not more than 8 feet nor less than 6 feet above the
ground. Such sign shall be faced so that the required information is clearly
and conspicuously visible to a person from the lot where vehicles are parked.
The requirement for posting signs along the perimeter of a lot does not apply
to a lot side where signs are posted as required pursuant to paragraph 3 of
this subdivision and where pedestrian access to the lot is limited to the
locations where such signs are posted.
      (3)   At each pedestrian exit from such lot to the adjacent street or
sidewalk and at each point of pedestrian access from such lot to each store or
business establishment that is contiguous to or near such lot, except that if
the distance between entrances to adjacent stores or business establishments is
50 feet or less, such sign may be posted midway between the two adjacent
entrances. The top of each sign posted pursuant to this paragraph shall be not
more than 8 feet nor less than 6 feet above the ground. Such sign shall be
faced so the required information is clearly and conspicuously visible to
anyone entering the store or business establishment from such lot.
§ 2-402 Form and Content of Vehicle Window Sticker.
   (a)   The sticker required by subdivision e of § 19-169.2 of the New York
City Administrative Code shall include the following information in the order
listed below and shall be printed in at least 12 point bold face type unless
otherwise specified:
      (1)   The word "WARNING!" in capital letters in at least 14 point bold
face type followed by the statement that: "This vehicle was booted because it
was parked in violation of the rules that are posted on this property. Any
attempt to move this vehicle without removing the boot may seriously damage the
vehicle."
      (2)   A statement reading as follows "Vehicle was booted by: (Insert
licensee's name and business address). The business is licensed by the NYC
Department of Consumer Affairs, license number: (Insert lic. no.). The DCA
complaint number is: (Insert DCA phone number)."
      (3)   A statement reading as follows: "To request the release of vehicle,
call: (insert business phone number to call to obtain release of vehicle within
the time provided by law) ({'{'}or see licensee's representative on these
premises{'}'} (identify where representative can be found)."
      (4)   A statement reading as follows: "The vehicle must be released
within 30 minutes after you contact the booting company and upon payment of the
posted booting fee."
      (5)   A statement reading as follows: "Vehicle was booted on:" (legibly
print the time to the nearest minute and the date).
      (6)   A statement reading as follows: "The number of the booting receipt
you will get upon payment of the booting charge is: (insert number of
receipt)."
   (b)   The printed text of the information required by subdivision a of this
section shall be in a color that is sharply distinct from the solid background
color of the sticker. The printed text shall be treated with a florescent
coating which shall make the text clearly noticeable.
   (c)   The information to be filled out on such window sticker pursuant to
paragraphs five and six of subdivision a of this section at the time the
vehicle is booted shall be legibly written with indelible ink in a color that
contrasts sharply with the sticker's background color.
   (d)   Upon payment of the booting fee, the licensee shall remove the window
sticker at no extra charge.
§ 2-403 Acceptable Business Practices for Payment by Credit Cards.
   (a)   A licensee shall make arrangements to accept payment in person by
credit cards at least two of which shall be general purpose cards that are
issued by two separate issuers, each of whom is a member of a different
national credit card interchange system such as VISA or MasterCard.
   (b)   Every licensee shall make arrangements to enable such licensee or
other person authorized to accept payment to complete a credit card transaction
for accepting payment by credit card at the location of the booted vehicle.
Such licensee or other person authorized to accept payment shall include on a
charge account form only such information as is required to complete the credit
card transaction pursuant to the rules of the credit card interchange system to
which the card issuer belongs.
   (c)   A licensee or other person authorized to accept payment can only
refuse to accept payment by credit card if the transaction is not approved in
accordance with the approval procedures of the credit card interchange system
for the credit card offered by the owner or other person in charge of the
booted vehicle.
§ 2-404 Applications for License to Engage in Booting.
   (a)   Every applicant for a license required under Subchapter 32 of Chapter
2 of Title 20 of the New York City Administrative Code or for any renewal
thereof who is required to be fingerprinted as provided in § 20-532 of such
Code shall appear at the Department and have his or her fingerprints taken,
recorded, filed with and made part of such application. Any person required to
be fingerprinted pursuant to such section shall legibly print his or her name
in indelible ink on the back of the three passport-sized photographs submitted
to the Department with the license application.
   (b)   Where the applicant for a license to engage in booting or any renewal
thereof is a corporation, partnership, association, firm or other business,
such applicant shall list on his or her application for such license or such
renewal the names, addresses and telephone numbers of each officer, director,
principal, stockholder owning more than ten percent of the outstanding stock,
or of each partner.
   (c)   If an applicant for a license or any renewal thereof conducts business
under a trade name or the applicant is a partnership, the application for a
license or renewal thereof must be accompanied by a copy of the trade name or
partnership certificate duly certified by the clerk of the county in whose
office said certificate is filed. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of
the filing receipt or certificate of incorporation filed with and stamped by
the New York State Secretary of State must be submitted, along with a
Certificate of Assumed Name or the filing receipt therefor, if an assumed name
is used.
   (d)   An applicant for a license or a renewal thereof shall furnish in the
application the address where the licensee does business and maintains the
records it is required to keep and where the records shall be available for
inspection by Department personnel during normal business hours. A licensee
shall notify the Department of any prospective change of address at least 15
days prior thereto.
§ 2-405 Changes in Officers and Directors and Transfer of Corporate Stock of
Corporate Licensees.
The Commissioner shall be notified of a prospective change in the officers or
directors of a corporate licensee, or of any prospective transfer of the
capital stock of such corporation, at least 10 days before such change or
transfer is made.
§ 2-406 Display of License.
A licensee shall conspicuously post its license at the place of business
identified on the signs required by 6 RCNY §
2-401.
§ 2-407 Identification Badge.
   (a)   A licensee shall issue a laminated, tamper-proof identification badge
to each individual who is an employee of the licensee and who is authorized by
the licensee to engage in booting, and to each person who is authorized to
accept payment for releasing vehicles booted by such licensee or such
licensee's employees.
   (b)   Such identification badges shall be made from forms to be furnished by
the Department. There shall be affixed to such badge a current two and one-half
inch square or oval photograph of the individual to whom it is issued. The name
of such individual and a sequentially issued, non-duplicative identification
number shall be printed in capital letters in 24 point bold face type on such
form. The licensee's business name also shall be printed on such form in
capital letters and its license number shall be printed on such form in
numerals in at least 12 point bold face type.
   (c)   Such identification badge shall be displayed by the individual to whom
it is issued upon request.
   (d)   A licensee shall maintain an updated record of all identification
badges issued. The record shall be maintained in the chronological order that
the identification numbers for the badges have been assigned and shall include
the identification number, the name of the individual to whom it was issued,
the date on which the individual was first employed or authorized to accept
payment for the release of booted vehicles, the date the badge was issued, the
date on which the individual was last employed or authorized to accept payment
for the release of booted vehicles, and the date on which the badge was
returned by such individual.
§ 2-408 Licensee's Duty to Keep Records.
   (a)   A licensee shall maintain the following complete, accurate, and
legible records and receipts to substantiate that vehicles are booted in
compliance with the requirements of § 19-169.2 of the New York City
Administrative Code, the requirements of Subchapter 32, Chapter 2 of Title 20
of the New York City Administrative Code and the requirements of these rules.
Corrections in records or receipts shall be made only by drawing a single
straight line through the inaccurate entry and clearly printing the accurate
information directly above the inaccurate entry. A licensee shall not use any
other method of correction, including, but not limited to, erasing, opaquing,
obliterating or redacting.
   (b)   A licensee shall maintain a "time of first sighting log" for each
property where the parking rules provide for the booting of vehicles parked for
longer than a specified time period. Such a log shall be kept in the following
form and manner and contain the information indicated below:
      (1)   The log for each such property shall be identified on the first
page by the address of the property to which the entries pertain and the name
of the owner of the property and shall be kept chronologically in a permanently
bound, paginated volume with lined pages. The entries for each day shall start
on a new page which shall include the following notation on the line
immediately preceding the first entry: "Start of first sighting log entries for
(insert date)."
      (2)   The log shall note the exact time, accurate to the nearest minute,
when a vehicle was first observed on the property, the vehicle's license plate
number, and the exact time, accurate to the nearest minute, when the vehicle
was observed parked beyond the time period allowed according to the posted
parking rules. The initial entry about each such vehicle shall be made in the
log contemporaneously with the first sighting of the vehicle by the licensee or
his or her employee or agent.
      (3)   The following notation shall be written in the line immediately
after the last entry for each day: "End of entries for (insert date)."
      (4)   The log shall be maintained and be available for inspection on the
property to which the entries pertain at all times when vehicles parked on the
property are subject to booting; otherwise the log shall be kept and be
available for inspection subject to the provisions of § 20-534 of the New York
City Administrative Code.
   (d)   Each licensee shall issue to the owner or other person in charge of a
booted vehicle a receipt that contains the information required by the
following paragraphs in the form and manner described below and shall retain an
identical copy of each such receipt in its records:
      (1)   The booting receipt shall be a printed form that includes such
captions and blank spaces as are appropriate to insert the information to be
furnished concerning the booting of a vehicle. Unless specifically provided
otherwise, the printed text shall be in no less than 10-point type in a color
that is sharply set off from the background color of the document. The
information to be inserted on the form shall be legibly hand printed on the
original page with indelible ink that is sharply set off from the background
color of the document. The original and all duplicate pages of each receipt
form shall contain the following information and text in the order listed
below:
         (i)   the words "BOOTING RECEIPT" at the top of the page in 12-point
bold face type;
         (ii)   a receipt identification number, which shall be issued in
sequence, shall be non-duplicative and shall be imprinted on the original page
and all duplicate pages of each such receipt;
         (iii)   the name, business address, business telephone number and
license number of the licensee who booted or who authorized or directed an
employee to boot the vehicle;
         (iv)   the address of the property where the vehicle was booted and a
description of the location of the vehicle on such property;
         (v)   the vehicle license place number, the vehicle identification
number, the make and color of the vehicle;
         (vi)   the words "THE VEHICLE WAS BOOTED BECAUSE:" in 12-point bold
face type followed by a full and accurate description of the facts that
substantiate the failure to comply with the parking rules posted on the
property pursuant to 6 RCNY §
2-401; if the failure to comply involves parking longer than the time period
permitted pursuant to the posted parking rules, the description shall include
the exact time, accurate to the nearest minute, when the parked vehicle was
first observed and when it was observed to be parked beyond the posted,
specified time period;
         (vii)   the date and the exact time, accurate to the nearest minute,
when the vehicle was booted;
         (viii)   the amount of the charge for removing the boot, followed by
the Statement identifying the credit cards that may be used for payment;
         (ix)   the amount paid for the booting charge, the method of payment,
the date and the time, accurate to the nearest minute, when the booting charge
was paid and when the boot was removed from the vehicle;
         (x)   the name, identification badge number and initials of the
employee who attached and/or who removed the boot, and the name, identification
badge number and signature of the authorized individual who accepted payment
for the booting charge, unless and if such vehicle is booted and/or such
payment for the booting charge is accepted by the licensee himself or herself,
in which case such receipt shall indicate the licensee's personal name and
initials;
         (xi)   the words "IMPORTANT NOTICE TO OPERATOR OF BOOTED VEHICLE:
" followed by the statement set forth herein: "THE CHARGE FOR BOOTING AND/OR
TOWING THE VEHICLE CANNOT BE MORE THAN THE AMOUNT SHOWN ON THE SIGNS POSTED ON
THIS PROPERTY. A CAR CAN BE BOOTED AND A CHARGE IMPOSED ONLY IF THE VEHICLE WAS
PARKED IN VIOLATION OF THE POSTED PARKING RULES. A BOOTING LICENSEE MUST STATE
IN THIS NOTICE THE FACTS THAT SUBSTANTIATE HOW THE POSTED PARKING RULES WERE
VIOLATED. SEE THE BACK OF THIS FORM FOR MORE INFORMATION ABOUT YOUR RIGHTS."
         (xii)   the name of the owner or lessee of the property on which the
vehicle was booted and the address and telephone number where such owner can be
reached during normal business hours;
         (xiii)   the name and address of the Department, which is to be
identified as the licensing agency, and the telephone number where booting
complaints can be filed with the Department.
      (2)   The booting receipt to be furnished to the owner or person in
control of the vehicle also shall have printed thereon the following statement
in 10 point type in a color that sharply sets the text off from the background
color of the page:
         "NOTICE OF RIGHTS: "You are entitled to ask for a hearing before the
Department of Consumer Affairs if you dispute the justification you were given
or the amount you were charged for the booting of your vehicle, or for other
violations of law or the rules governing booting. "No release or waiver of any
kind purporting to limit or avoid liability for damages to a vehicle that has
been booted shall be valid. "If you dispute the accuracy of any claims made by
the licensee's employee or the person authorized to accept payment, or the
owner of the property on which your vehicle was booted, obtain as much
information or names of witnesses that can verify your claims."
      (3)   Each booting receipt shall consist of an original page and at least
one clearly legible duplicate page. All completed duplicate pages shall be
identical copies of the original page.
      (4)   The licensee or the employee who is authorized or directed to boot
a vehicle shall enter the number of the receipt to be provided upon release of
the vehicle on the window sticker attached to such vehicle.
   (e)   Each licensee shall maintain a daily "booting removal request" log
which shall be kept in the following form and manner and contain the
information indicated below:
      (1)   The log shall be a permanently bound, paginated volume with lined
pages, and entries thereto shall be made chronologically. Such entries shall be
made contemporaneously with the request made for the release of the vehicle.
The entries for each day shall start on a new page which shall include the
following notation on the line immediately preceding the first entry: "Start of
booting removal request log entries for: (insert date)."
      (2)   The entry for each request to remove a boot shall indicate the
exact time, accurate to the nearest minute, that a person called or appeared at
the office of the licensee or at a designated place on the property where the
vehicle was booted to request removal of the boot, the name of the person who
called or appeared to request removal, the name of the person who received such
request for removal, the booting receipt identification number, the location
where the vehicle was booted, the license plate number and the vehicle
identification number for the vehicle if and as it was furnished by the person
who called or appeared to request removal, and the exact time, accurate to the
nearest minute, when the licensee or his or her employee was dispatched to
remove the boot.
      (3)   The following notation shall be written in the line immediately
after the last entry for each day: "End of entries for (insert date)."
§ 2-409 Duty to Give Notice of Booting Fees and Sites Where Vehicles are
Booted.
   (a)   Every applicant for a license issued pursuant to Subchapter 32 of
Chapter 2 of Title 20 of the New York City Administrative Code or for a renewal
thereof shall file with such application or application for renewal:
      (1)   A schedule showing the fee charged for vehicles such applicant or
licensee boots on private streets as such fee is stated on the signs required
to be posted pursuant to subparagraph (i) of paragraph 2 of subdivision c of §
19-169.2 of the New York City Administrative Code; and
      (2)   A list of properties where such applicant or licensee engages in
the booting of vehicles. Such list shall include the address of the property
where such applicant or licensee boots vehicles and the name and address of the
owner of such property.
   (b)   A licensee shall notify the commissioner of any change in the
information required to be filed pursuant to subdivision a of this section
within 30 days of such change.
Subchapter GG: Pedicab Business and Pedicab Driver
§ 2-415 Definitions.
   Whenever used in this subchapter, the term:
   (a)   "Licensee" shall mean a person licensed pursuant to Subchapter 9 of
Chapter 2 of Title 20 of the New York City Administrative Code.
   (b)   "Applicant" shall mean any person applying for a pedicab business
license or a pedicab driver license or for a renewal thereof and, unless
otherwise provided by law or rule, the term shall include such person upon the
issuance of such license or renewal thereof to such applicant.
   (c)   "Pedicab identification" or "PID" shall mean any combination of three
or more letters and numbers that are permanently inscribed or stamped into the
bottom bracket shell, head tube, or other non-detachable metal component of a
pedicab frame and that uniquely identify the pedicab.
   (d)   "Accident" shall mean any event arising from the operation of a
pedicab that causes or caused human injury or damage to property.
   (e)   "Clear view of passengers" means that the object or sign that is the
subject of regulation is visible at all times to all seated passengers and is
not obstructed by the driver, the driver's clothing, or other parts of the
pedicab.
§ 2-416 Application Procedures for and Issuance of Initial Pedicab Business
Licenses and Pedicab Registration Plates.
   (a)   An applicant for a pedicab business license and for the initial
issuance of pedicab registration plates shall submit a completed application
for a pedicab business license, which shall include a list that identifies by
PID each of the pedicabs for which such applicant seeks registration. This
completed application must be submitted to the Department by the end of the
application period specified in § 20-251 of the New York City Administrative
Code.
   (b)   An applicant for a pedicab business license may present for inspection
only such pedicabs as are listed in, and identified on, the application as
specified in subdivision (a) of this section.
   (c)   A pedicab registration plate shall be issued for a pedicab to an
applicant for such plate and for a pedicab business license only upon:
      (1)   payment to the Department of the sixty dollar ($60) registration
fee for each additional pedicab registration plate to be issued in excess of
the one pedicab included in the annual pedicab business license fee up to the
maximum number authorized to be issued to each business licensee;
      (2)   submission of proof of the insurance coverage required pursuant to
§ 20-253 of the Administrative Code of the City of New York for each pedicab
for which a registration plate is to be issued;
      (3)   presentation for inspection at the time, date and location(s)
designated by the Department of the pedicabs that are included on the list that
identifies by PID each of the pedicabs for which such applicant seeks
registration;
      (4)   determination by the Department that a pedicab presented for
inspection passes such inspection; and
      (5)   determination by the Department that the applicant for the
registration plates qualifies for the issuance of the pedicab business license.
   (d)   a pedicab business license shall be issued only upon the Commissioner
determining that such applicant meets all the requirements of §§ 20-250, 20-252
and 20-253 of the Administrative Code of the City of New York and the
requirements of this subchapter.
   (e)   (1) Whenever a pedicab that is presented for inspection pursuant to
subdivision (c) of this section fails such inspection, such pedicab may be
presented for re-inspection no later than 30 days after the expiration date for
filing applications for pedicab registration plates and at such times, dates
and locations designated by the Department.
      (2)   The Department shall re-inspect a pedicab upon payment of the
fifty-five dollar ($55) re-inspection fee.
   (f)   An application for a pedicab registration plate shall be void if the
pedicab for which the application was made does not qualify to be issued a
registration plate within 30 days after the expiration date for filing
applications for pedicab registration plates.
   (g)   An application for a pedicab registration plate that is voided
pursuant to subdivision (f) of this section shall not subsequently be
reinstated.
§ 2-417 Proof of Insurance.
   An applicant for a pedicab business license or a renewal thereof shall
submit a certificate of insurance establishing that it maintains a policy of
liability insurance for the amounts specified in § 20-253 of the Administrative
Code of the City of New York issued by an insurer authorized in this state to
write such coverage, or procured by an excess line broker pursuant to section
2118 of the New York State Insurance Law.
§ 2-418 Termination of License Upon Change of Beneficial Ownership.
   (a)   A pedicab business license shall be voided upon any person or
organization becoming the beneficial owner of the licensed business entity if
such person or organization did not previously hold an interest, unless prior
written approval from the Commissioner is obtained to authorize such change.
   (b)   If the Department determines there is reason to conclude that a
license is void because a person or organization has become the beneficial
owner of the licensed business entity if such person or organization did not
previously hold an interest in the business entity to which the license was
issued, without receipt of the requisite authorization from the Commissioner,
the Department will provide written notice to the licensee. Within ten business
days of the date of such written notice, the licensee has the opportunity to be
heard by submitting to the Department a written response objecting to the
Department's determination and providing written documentation that there has
been no such change in the beneficial ownership in the business entity to which
the license was issued.
   (c)   If the licensee fails to submit such response and documentation within
such period, the Commissioner's determination that the license is void shall be
final.
   (d)   Upon receipt of the licensee's written objection and submission of the
documentation described above, the Commissioner shall make a determination
whether there has been a change in the beneficial ownership as specified in
subdivision (a) of this section in such business entity without having received
authorization from the Commissioner. The Commissioner's determination that the
license is void because of such change shall then be final.
   (e)   The voiding of a pedicab business license because of such change in
the beneficial ownership in the business entity holding such license shall be
effective as of the date of the unauthorized change in the beneficial ownership
in the business entity. Such voiding also invalidates all the pedicab
registration plates issued to such licensee, and such licensee shall, within
five business days of the voiding of the pedicab business license, surrender
each such plate to the Commissioner.
§ 2-419 Abandonment of Seized Pedicab.
   (a)   Any pedicab that is not claimed by its owner within fifteen business
days after the mailing of the decision of the adjudication by the Commissioner
of the violation underlying the seizure shall be deemed by the Department to be
abandoned.
   (b)   If the Commissioner determines that the abandoned pedicab is suitable
for operation, such pedicab shall be sold at public auction to the highest
bidder.
   (c)   If the Commissioner determines that the abandoned pedicab is not
suitable for operation, or if the abandoned pedicab is not sold at public
auction within fifteen business days after it is offered for sale, the
Commissioner shall sell the abandoned pedicab to a scrap metal processor.
   (d)   Any proceeds from the sale of an abandoned pedicab less any expenses
incurred by the Department shall be held by the Department without interest,
for the benefit of the owner of the abandoned pedicab, for a period of one
year. If such proceeds have not been claimed within such one year period, such
proceeds shall be paid into the general fund of the City.
§ 2-420 Notification of Accidents Relating to the Operation of Pedicabs.
   (a)   Every pedicab business licensee and pedicab driver shall submit to the
Department, on a form provided for such purpose by the Department, a written
report of every accident relating to a pedicab within twenty-four hours after
the occurrence of such accident. Such completed form shall be signed by the
pedicab business owner or his or her agent and by the pedicab driver involved
in the accident.
   (b)   Whenever any person sustains an injury requiring medical treatment or
dies in an accident related to a pedicab, the pedicab business owner to whom is
issued a pedicab business license shall immediately notify the Department by
telephone and by facsimile transmission to the telephone numbers prescribed by
the Department, and furnish such information as is sufficient to identify the
time and location of the accident and the nature of the injuries sustained by
any person.
§ 2-421 Voiding of Pedicab Registration Plates Upon the Voiding, Suspension or
Revocation of a Pedicab Business License.
   (a)   Whenever a pedicab business license is suspended or revoked, has been
voided as provided in Subchapter 9 of Chapter 2 of Title 20 of the
Administrative Code of the City of New York or is not renewed within the time
period provided for renewal, all pedicab registration plates issued to such
licensee shall be voided as of the date of the occurrence of such event unless
the Commissioner for good cause shown, within five days thereafter, issues a
written finding staying the voiding of such registration plates for a period
not to exceed thirty days thereafter, provided such licensee establishes to the
Commissioner's satisfaction that it will be able to comply with the
requirements that were the basis for the voiding of such pedicab registration
plates by the end of such stayed period.
   (b)   Whenever a pedicab registration is not renewed within fifty-nine days
after it has expired, such registration shall be void, and such registration
shall not be reinstated.
§ 2-422 Voiding of Pedicab Business License Upon Lapse of Insurance Policy.
   (a)   Upon a determination by the Department that a pedicab business license
is void as provided in subdivision e of § 20-253 of the Administrative Code of
the City of New York because the policy of insurance required by § 20-253 of
such Code has lapsed, the Department shall immediately provide a written notice
to the licensee of such determination.
   (b)   A licensee has up to fourteen days following the date of the written
notice of such determination to have an opportunity to be heard by submitting
to the Department a written objection to such determination with documentation
demonstrating that the licensee has in force the policy of insurance required
by § 20-253 of the Administrative Code.
   (c)   If the licensee fails to submit such response with the required
documentation within such period, the determination of the Department shall
become final, and the license shall be void as of the date the policy lapsed.
   (d)   Upon receipt of the written response from the licensee, the
Commissioner will make a final determination whether the policy of insurance
required pursuant to § 20-253 has lapsed.
§ 2-423 Replacement of a Registered Pedicab.
   A licensee may replace a pedicab that is issued a current registration plate
(such pedicab to be referred to in this section as the "current pedicab") with
another pedicab (such pedicab to be referred to in this section as the
"replacement pedicab") owned by such licensee only if:
   (a)   Such licensee notifies the Department in writing of the proposed
replacement, describes and substantiates the reason for the replacement, and
identifies the current pedicab by the registration plate number issued by the
Department and the PID listed with the Department for such pedicab and
describes the replacement pedicab and furnishes its PID.
   (b)   Such licensee presents:
      (1)   the replacement pedicab for inspection by the Department; and
      (2)   either presents the pedicab registration plate that was issued to
the current pedicab, provides proof that the current pedicab and its
registration plate have been destroyed or are otherwise physically impossible
to be made available, or presents the current pedicab and surrenders to the
Department the registration plate of the current pedicab.
   (c)   The replacement pedicab passes inspection and the Department affixes
to it a pedicab registration plate.
§ 2-424 Advertisements on Pedicabs.
   Advertisement(s) may be placed on any panel on a pedicab provided that no
advertisement shall be placed on the panel that displays the rates required to
be posted pursuant to § 20-254 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or on the signs required to be posted pursuant to § 20-260 of such Code,
that no portion of such advertisement shall be reflectorized, illuminated,
animated, or extend beyond the panel of the pedicab, and that the content of
such advertisement shall not violate any applicable provision of law.
§ 2-425 Required Signs on Pedicabs.
   (a)   Every pedicab shall have posted on the interior of the cab, where it
is clearly visible at all times to any seated passenger, a sign with letters
and numbers at least one-half (1/2) of an inch high, boldfaced type containing
the following information:
 
Licensee: (Insert name appearing on pedicab business license to which pedicab
is registered or the DBA name of such licensee).
Telephone Number: (Insert phone number of licensee).
Pedicab Registration Number: (Insert registration number of pedicab).
"If you have a complaint about this business, contact the NYC Department of
Consumer Affairs at:" (Insert Department's current complaint number and web
address).
   (b)   The letters and numbers on the sign displaying the dollar amount to be
charged per minute per ride shall be at least two (2) inches high, in boldfaced
type and such sign shall be clearly posted on both sides of the exterior of the
pedicab where it shall be visible to persons prior to entering such pedicab.
The sign must also state, in letters and numbers no less than one-half (1/2) of
an inch high, in boldfaced type, that:
      (i)   no additional fees may be charged; and
      (ii)   drivers must give passengers a Pedicab Information Card. The sign
must be laminated or protected by a clear plastic sheeting or other suitable
material so that the text will not be destroyed, soiled, distorted or rendered
illegible by water, snow or other weather conditions.
   (c)   A required sign to be attached to the rear of the pedicab bicycle seat
must:
      (i)   hang freely from the rear of the bicycle seat in clear view of
passengers;
      (ii)   be laminated or protected by a clear plastic sheeting or other
suitable materials so that the text will not be destroyed, soiled, distorted or
rendered illegible by water, snow or other weather condition; and
      (iii)   state clearly in letters and numbers at least one (1) inch high
the dollar amount to be charged per minute per ride.
§ 2-426 Expiration Date for Pedicab Registration Plates.
   Registration plates for pedicabs shall expire annually on November 1.
§ 2-426a Registration Plate Application Pool.
   (a)   Each year, within 90 days after the November 1 expiration date of
pedicab registration plates, the Commissioner will determine the number of
pedicab registration plates that have been issued to licensees. If the number
is fewer than 840, the Commissioner will publish in the City Record a notice
requesting applications for pedicab registration plates to fill vacancies up to
the legal limit of 850.
   (b)   Applications will not be accepted from any licensees that have already
been assigned the legal limit of 30 registration plates.
   (c)   An application will not be accepted unless the applicant:
      (1)   completes an application in a form approved by the Commissioner,
and
      (2)   submits the completed application no later than 5:00 p.m. on the
20th business day following the publication of the notice in the City Record.
   (d)   Only one application for a pedicab registration plate will be accepted
from each applicant.
   (e)   The Commissioner will use the following procedures to assign available
pedicab registration plates to applicants in the registration plate application
pool:
      (1)   The Commissioner will assign a priority number to each accepted
application using a computer generated random number selection program.
      (2)   If the number of accepted applications exceeds the number of
available registration plates, the Commissioner will offer to issue a
registration plate to applicants in the order of the priority numbers assigned
to the accepted applications.
      (3)   If the number of accepted applications equals the number of
available registration plates, the Commissioner will offer to issue a
registration plate to each applicant.
      (4)   If the number of accepted applications is fewer than the number of
available registration plates, the Commissioner will offer one registration
plate to each applicant and then offer each remaining plate in the order of the
priority numbers assigned until all available registration plates have been
offered.
      (5)   The Commissioner will issue the registration plate that has been
offered when the applicant demonstrates that the pedicab complies with all
registration requirements in this subchapter within 45 days of when the offer
was made.
      (6)   The Commissioner's offer will become void if the applicant fails to
comply with all registration requirements in this subchapter within 45 days
after the offer has been made. If this circumstance arises, the Commissioner
will offer such registration plate to the applicant with the next priority
number.
      (7)   The Commissioner will remove from the registration plate
application pool any applicant who fails to comply with all registration
requirements in this subchapter within 45 days after the offer has been made.
§ 2-427 Obligation of Pedicab Driver to Give Notice of Change of Status of
Driver's License.
   Every pedicab driver shall notify the Department in writing whenever the
motor vehicle driver's license that qualified the driver to be issued a pedicab
driver license is no longer valid for any reason, including, but not limited
to, that it was suspended or revoked by the issuing jurisdiction, it expired
and was not renewed, there is a change in the issuing jurisdiction, or there is
a change in the name of the person to whom the license is issued. A pedicab
driver shall give such notice within five business days after the driver knows
or should know of such change in the status of the motor vehicle driver's
license that qualified the driver to be issued a pedicab driver license, and
shall within such time present to the Department a currently valid motor
vehicle driver license.
§ 2-428 Records.
   (a)   A pedicab business licensee shall maintain complete, accurate and
legible records that include:
      (1)   a list identifying each pedicab such licensee operates, with the
PID and registration plate number issued to such pedicab;
      (2)   the name, pedicab driver license number issued to each pedicab
driver authorized to operate each pedicab used by such licensee, whether such
driver operates the pedicab as an employee, a lessee or in any other manner;
      (3)   a copy of the terms under which pedicab drivers are authorized to
operate each pedicab;
      (4)   a daily log of the operation of each pedicab showing the time it
leaves and is returned to the licensee's premises, and the name of the pedicab
driver who is authorized to operate the pedicab during the period it is logged
out to such driver; and
      (5)   a copy of the record of every summons, complaint, or notice of
violation of any law or regulation issued to a pedicab driver operating a
pedicab registered to the licensee and the disposition thereof that is
submitted to the pedicab business licensee pursuant to subdivision i of § 20-
259 of the Administrative Code of the City of New York;
      (6)   a copy of the policies, procedures and instructional materials used
for training drivers about their obligation to follow all provisions of state
and local law governing the operation of a bicycle, including training
regarding the obligation of a driver to provide to the pedicab business
licensee authorizing the use of its pedicab a copy of any summons, complaint or
notice of any law or regulation received by such driver while operating a
pedicab registered to such pedicab business, and the basis for assessing the
satisfactory completion of the required training;
      (7)   a log listing the names, pedicab driver licenses, the dates and
time when they received the training required by § 20-259(h) of the
Administrative Code of the City of New York, and whether each pedicab driver
satisfactorily completed the training.
   (b)   A pedicab business licensee shall retain the records it is required to
maintain for not less than three years.
§ 2-429 Pedicab Information Card.
   (a)   A pedicab driver must download and use the Pedicab Information Card
published by the Department on its website. A pedicab driver must not change or
delete any text in the Pedicab Information Card and must provide all
information required by the Department.
   (b)   The Department's Pedicab Information Card must be printed in black ink
or toner on white paper. The typeface must be no less than 12 point.
   (c)   The size of the Pedicab Information Card must be no less than five and
one-half (5 1/2) inches by eight (8) inches in height and width.
   (d)   A pedicab driver must not issue Pedicab Information Cards by
electronic mail, SMS (texting), or other electronic means.
   (e)   A pedicab driver must ensure that each Pedicab Information Card
provided to a paying passenger is complete, accurate, and legible.
   (f)   When offering to transport passengers for hire, a pedicab driver
operating a pedicab must keep in the pedicab sufficient quantities of the
Department's Pedicab Information Card to be able to provide one to each
passenger. Failure to produce copies of the Department's Pedicab Information
Card upon request by Department inspectors or law enforcement officers will be
deemed a violation of this subdivision.
§ 2-430 Approved Timer.
   A pedicab driver must use a timer that has been inspected and sealed by the
Department. The Department will apply the specifications, tolerances, and
regulations set forth in the most current version of Handbook 44 and the
amendments thereto and Special Publication 960-12 of the National Institute of
Standards and Technology when inspecting a timer presented for sealing. A
driver may not use a timing device, such as a cell phone or other personal
digital assistant, which uses a digital application or a mechanism that a
pedicab driver can replace or modify after sealing.
Subchapter HH: Car Washes
§ 2-431 Insurance.
   (a)   Liability insurance. 
      (1)   Every licensee must secure and maintain throughout the term of the
license commercial general liability ("CGL") insurance which must:
         (i)   be issued by a company that may lawfully issue the CGL policy
and which has an A.M. Best rating of at least A-/VII or a Standard & Poor's
rating of at least A;
         (ii)   insure both the licensee and the City of New York and protect
the City of New York from any claims for injury (including death) or property
damage that may arise from, or allegedly arises from, the construction,
operation or use of the car wash;
         (iii)   provide coverage of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000)
per occurrence and two million dollars ($2,000,000) aggregate;
         (iv)   provide coverage at least as broad as that provided in the most
recently issued edition of Insurance Services Office ("ISO") Form CG 0001 and
be "occurrence" based instead of "claims made"; and
         (v)   name the City of New York as an additional insured with coverage
at least as broad as the most recent edition of ISO Forms CG 20 12 or CG 20 26.
      (2)   Each applicant shall submit proof of CGL insurance by submission of
the endorsement(s) naming the City as an additional insured and either:
         (i)   a certificate of insurance in a form satisfactory to the
Department that satisfies the requirements of this rule, identifies the
insurance company that issued such insurance policy, the policy number, limit
(s) of insurance, and expiration date and is accompanied by a sworn statement
in a form prescribed by the Department from a licensed insurance broker or
agent certifying that the certificate of insurance is accurate in all material
respects; or
         (ii)   an original or true copy of the CGL policy as certified by an
authorized representative of the issuing insurance carrier.
   (b)   Workers' compensation insurance. 
      (1)   Every licensee shall maintain workers' compensation insurance as
required by law.
      (2)   Each applicant shall submit proof of the insurance on one of the
following forms:
         (i)   C-105.2 - Certificate of Workers' Compensation Insurance;
         (ii)   U-26.3 - State Insurance Fund Certificate of Workers'
Compensation Insurance;
         (iii)   equivalent or successor forms used by the New York State
Workers' Compensation Board; or
         (iv)   other proof of insurance in a form acceptable to the
Department.
      (3)   This requirement shall not apply to applicants that are not
required by law to maintain this coverage.
         (i)   Any applicant that is not required by law to maintain this
coverage shall submit to the Department proof from the New York State Workers'
Compensation Board on Form CE-200 – Certificate of Attestation of Exemption.
   (c)   Disability benefits insurance. 
      (1)   Every licensee shall secure and maintain disability benefits
insurance.
      (2)   Each applicant shall submit proof of the insurance on one of the
following forms:
         (i)   DB-120.1 - Certificate of Insurance Coverage under the NYS
Disability Benefits Law;
         (ii)   equivalent or successor forms used by the New York State
Workers' Compensation Board; or
         (iii)   other proof of insurance in a form acceptable to the
Department.
      (3)   This requirement shall not apply to applicants that are not
required by law to maintain this coverage.
         (i)   Any applicant that is not required by law to maintain this
coverage shall submit to the Department proof from the New York State Workers'
Compensation Board on Form CE-200 – Certificate of Attestation of Exemption.
   (d)   Unemployment insurance. 
      (1)   Each applicant shall provide proof of registration with the New
York State Department of Labor for unemployment insurance. Such documentation
shall constitute a "certificate of unemployment insurance" under § 20-541(d)(4)
of the Administrative Code.
   (e)   If any insurance required by this rule expires, is cancelled or
otherwise terminates without being simultaneously replaced with new or renewed
insurance satisfying the requirements of this rule, the licensee shall
immediately notify the Department of such fact. Such notification may be made
on behalf of the licensee by its insurance company, agent or broker.
   (f)   Every licensee shall furnish proof of continued coverage and a copy of
any required policy upon request by the Department or by the New York City Law
Department.
   (g)   Failure to maintain any insurance required by this subdivision at all
times shall be considered grounds for the suspension or revocation of a license
issued pursuant to Subchapter 33 of Chapter 2 of Title 20 of the Administrative
Code.
(Added City Record 9/26/2016, eff. 10/26/2016; amended City Record 1/28/2020,
eff. 2/27/2020)
§ 2-432 Surety Bonds.
   (a)   An applicant for the issuance or renewal of a license must furnish a
bond consistent with the requirements set forth in § 20-542 of the
Administrative Code.
   (b)   An applicant seeking to furnish a bond in the sum of thirty thousand
dollars must:
      (1)   submit a collective bargaining agreement to the Department and
certify that such agreement satisfies the requirements set forth in § 20-542(b)
(1) of the Administrative Code; or
      (2)   submit an active monitoring agreement to the Department and
identify the provisions in the monitoring agreement that satisfy the
requirements set forth in § 20-542(b)(2) of the Administrative Code.
   (c)   If a collective bargaining agreement submitted pursuant to paragraph 1
of subdivision b of this section is modified or amended, expires or otherwise
terminates during the term of the license, the licensee must:
      (1)   submit a current collective bargaining agreement to the Department
and certify that such agreement satisfies the requirements set forth in § 20-
542(b)(1) of the Administrative Code within 15 days of such modification,
amendment, expiration or termination; or
      (2)   furnish a bond in the sum of one hundred fifty thousand dollars
consistent with the requirements set forth in § 20-542 of the Administrative
Code.
   (d)   If an active monitoring agreement submitted pursuant to paragraph 2 of
subdivision b of this section is modified or amended, expires or otherwise
terminates during the term of the license, the licensee must:
      (1)   submit a current active monitoring agreement to the Department and
identify the provisions in the monitoring agreement that satisfy the
requirements set forth in § 20-542(b)(2) of the Administrative Code within 10
days of such modification, amendment, expiration or termination; or
      (2)   furnish a bond in the sum of one hundred fifty thousand dollars
consistent with the requirements set forth in § 20-542 of the Administrative
Code.
   (e)   Every licensee shall maintain the surety bond in the amount required
by § 20-542 of the Administrative Code throughout the term of the license.
   (f)   Licensees shall immediately notify the Department in the event of the
termination of, or other material change in, the surety bond required by § 20-
542 of the Administrative Code.
   (g)   Licensees shall furnish a surety bond to the Department upon request
of the Department.
   (h)   Failure to maintain a surety bond as required by § 20-542 of the
Administrative Code shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of a
license issued pursuant to § 20-541 of the Administrative Code.
(Added City Record 9/26/2016, eff. 10/26/2016)
§ 2-433 Damage Complaint Records.
   (a)   Chronological complaint log. Each licensee must maintain a
chronological log in an electronic format documenting complaints of damage to
vehicles. The log must contain the following information where applicable:
      (1)   Date of complaint;
      (2)   Date licensee received complaint;
      (3)   Name, address, phone number and email address of individual or
entity making the complaint;
      (4)   Make and model number of vehicle;
      (5)   Date licensee washed vehicle;
      (6)   Description of complaint;
      (7)   Whether individual or entity making complaint provided photos or
other documents;
      (8)   Resolution of complaint, including amount of compensation and
method of payment;
      (9)   Name and address of insurance company or third party involved in
resolution, if any, and claim number;
      (10)   Date of resolution;
      (11)   Employee or manager who handled the complaint;
      (12)   License plate number of vehicle(s) used to provide Mobile Car Wash
Services that are the subject of the complaint; and
      (13)   Name of operator of vehicle used to provide Mobile Car Wash
Services that are the subject of the complaint.
   (b)   Photographs and other documents. The licensee must maintain copies of
all documents, relating to the complaint, including photographs, provided by
the individual or entity making the complaint, third parties or the licensee.
   (c)   Method of electronic recordkeeping. The licensee must make an
electronic record of the log by one of the following methods:
      (1)   Within twenty-four hours after the complaint is received, entering
the information in English on an electronic Excel spreadsheet provided by the
Department and made accessible at an Internet address provided by the
Department, or
      (2)   Within twenty-four hours after the complaint is received, entering
the information in English on a spreadsheet, local application or web-based
system that:
         (i)   has all fields named, ordered and in all respects identical to
the fields in the Excel file provided by the Department and;
         (ii)   is in an Excel-readable format.
      (3)   If the complaint is not resolved the same day as it is received,
the resolution information required by paragraph (8) of subdivision (a) must be
entered within twenty-four hours after the complaint is resolved.
   (d)   Format, preservation and production of records. 
      (1)   Electronic records must be maintained in a manner designed to
ensure their security and preservation, including by creation of back-up
copies.
      (2)   Upon request by the Department, a licensee must produce electronic
records to the Department in the format in which the licensee maintains the
electronic files.
      (3)   Upon request by the Department, a licensee must produce all
documents and photographs required to be maintained to the Department.
      (4)   The licensee shall produce the electronic records, documents and
photographs to the Department with its renewal application.
(Added City Record 9/26/2016, eff. 10/26/2016; amended City Record 1/28/2020,
eff. 2/27/2020)
§ 2-434 Additional Provisions Regarding Mobile Car Washes.
   (a)   Definitions. 
      Mobile Car Wash Services. The term "Mobile Car Wash Services" means any
car washing services that are performed at a place other than the fixed
business address of the car wash.
      Mobile Car Wash. The term "Mobile Car Wash" means any individual, group
of individuals, or business that provides Mobile Car Wash Services.
   (b)   License required. Each Mobile Car Wash is required to be licensed.
   (c)   Additional application requirements for Mobile Car Washes. 
      (1)   In addition to the information and documentation required by § 20-
541(d) of the Administrative Code, Mobile Car Wash applicants for a license
required by this section must submit the following:
         (i)   The make, model, and license plate number of each vehicle used
by the applicant for Mobile Car Wash Services;
         (ii)   Certification that all such vehicles are in compliance with all
applicable laws and rules; and
         (iii)   Certification that all operators of such vehicles are legally
allowed to operate them.
      (2)   An application for the renewal of a license granted pursuant to
this section must include up-to-date information regarding the make, model, and
license plate number of each vehicle used by the applicant for Mobile Car Wash
Services.
   (d)   Display of license. Licensees must conspicuously display the license
or a copy of the license in every vehicle used to provide Mobile Car Wash
Services while such services are being provided. The license or copy of the
license must be easily visible from the outside of the vehicle through either
its back window or front windshield.
(Added City Record 1/28/2020, eff. 2/27/2020)
§ 2-435 Application of this Subchapter.
Unless otherwise specified, the requirements of this subchapter apply with
equal force to mobile car washes and car washes operating in a fixed location.
(Added City Record 1/28/2020, eff. 2/27/2020)
Subchapter II: Ticket Sellers
§ 2-441 Records.
   (a)   Transactions log. Each licensee must maintain a log in a form
prescribed by the Department documenting every instance the licensee received a
ticket or set of tickets for vending. The log must contain the following
information, which must be entered legibly and in English:
      (1)   the date the licensee received the ticket or set of tickets for
vending;
      (2)   the name, address, and ticket seller license number, if any, of the
individual and company that provided the ticket or set of tickets;
      (3)   the place of entertainment, mode of transportation, or guided tour
for which the ticket or set of tickets was intended to be vended;
      (4)   the price that the licensee paid for the ticket or set of tickets,
if any; and
      (5)   if the licensee sold the ticket or set of tickets:
         (i)   whether the ticket or set of tickets were sold to a consumer or
another ticket seller;
         (ii)   if the ticket or set of tickets were sold to a ticket seller,
the recipient's name, address, and ticket seller license number;
         (iii)   the price the consumer or ticket seller paid for the ticket or
set of tickets; and
         (iv)   the location of the sale (e.g., nearest block face, place of
entertainment, plaza, or pedestrian plaza).
   (b)   Receipts. Each licensee must retain a copy of every receipt it
provides to a consumer, pursuant to 6 RCNY §
5-32.
   (c)   Preservation and production of records. Each licensee must retain all
records required by this section for three years and must produce such records
to the Department upon the Department's request.
(Added City Record 2/27/2018, eff. 3/29/2018)
§ 2-442 Required Disclosure for Trips or Tours Involving the Statue of Liberty
or Ellis Island.
Sellers of trips or tours involving the Statue of Liberty or Ellis Island that
do not land at Liberty Island or Ellis Island may not possess or vend a ticket
for such trip or tour unless the ticket contains the following disclosure,
printed so as to be legible to the consumer in bold type of a size at least
one-half as high and one-half as broad as the largest print on the ticket:
"This trip or tour does not land at Liberty Island or Ellis Island." If a trip
or tour lands at Liberty Island but not Ellis Island, the required disclosure
must read: "This trip or tour does not land at Ellis Island." If a trip or tour
lands at Ellis Island but not Liberty Island, the required disclosure must
read: "This trip or tour does not land at Liberty Island." This subdivision
does not apply if the trip or tour lands at both Liberty Island and Ellis
Island.
(Added City Record 10/25/2019, eff. 11/24/2019)
§ 2-443 Restrictions on Ticket Sellers.
   (a)   A ticket seller must not represent or imply that a trip or tour
includes a destination, perk, advantage, or benefit that the trip or tour does
not actually include.
   (b)   A ticket seller must not represent or imply that payment is required
for any trip or tour that may otherwise be obtained for free, including, but
not limited to, the Staten Island Ferry.
(Added City Record 10/25/2019, eff. 11/24/2019)
Subchapter JJ: Electronic Cigarette Retail Dealers
§ 2-451 Definitions.
Whenever used in this subchapter:
   (a)   "Electronic Cigarette Retail Dealer" means an "Electronic Cigarette
Retail Dealer" as that term is defined in § 20-560 of the Administrative Code.
(Added City Record 1/11/2019, eff. 2/10/2019)
§ 2-452 Application Process for Available Licenses within Community Districts.
   (a)   On the first business day in April and the first business day in
October of each year, the Department will publish the following information for
each community district in the City: (i) the community district cap; (ii) the
number of current Electronic Cigarette Retail Dealer licenses; and (iii) the
number of available Electronic Cigarette Retail Dealer licenses.
   (b)   (1)   For each community district where Electronic Cigarette Retail
Dealer licenses are available as of the first business day of April in a given
year, the Department will accept requests to apply for an Electronic Cigarette
Retail Dealer license from the first business day in May until 5:00 p.m. on the
last business day in May of such year.
      (2)   For each community district where Electronic Cigarette Retail
Dealer licenses are available as of the first business day of October in a
given year, the Department will accept requests to apply for an Electronic
Cigarette Retail Dealer license from the first business day in November until
5:00 p.m. on the last business day in November of such year.
      (3)   The Department will reject any duplicate requests to apply.
   (c)   At the close of each request period, in each community district where
Electronic Cigarette Retail Dealer licenses are available, the Department will
randomly select from among the requesters businesses that may apply for an
Electronic Cigarette Retail Dealer license and invite such businesses to apply
for such license. The number of businesses selected shall be equal to the
number of licenses available in that community district. An invitation to apply
is only valid for the business randomly selected by the Department and may not
be transferred to another business.
   (d)   Once notified by the Department, selected businesses will have 65 days
from the date of notification to submit a complete application for an
Electronic Cigarette Retail Dealer license. If a complete application is not
received by the Department within 65 days, or the application is otherwise
denied, the opportunity to apply will be forfeited, and the Department will
offer the opportunity to apply to another business in the same community
district that is randomly selected from the pool of requesters, and that
business will have 65 days to submit a complete application.
   (e)   When the Department has issued all available licenses within each
community district, the application process will be closed, and the remaining
request pool will be voided. A request from any given request period will not
be valid in a subsequent request period.
   (f)   Any license issued that causes the number of licenses in a community
district to exceed the community district's retail dealer cap will be
considered to be issued in error and voided.
   (g)   Any license issued as a result of deceptive or misleading application
materials will be considered to be issued in error and voided.
(Added City Record 1/11/2019, eff. 2/10/2019; amended City Record 1/20/2023,
eff. 2/19/2023)
§ 2-453 Licensing of Electronic Cigarette Retail Dealers at Residential
Locations.
   (a)   An Electronic Cigarette Retail Dealer license will not be issued for
use at any residential location, including any location considered a dwelling
unit as that term is defined in the Housing Maintenance Code, Title 27, § 27-
2004 of the New York City Administrative Code.
(Added City Record 5/19/2022, eff. 6/18/2022)
Subchapter KK: Third-Party Food Delivery Services
§ 2-461 License Application Requirements.
   (a)   Third-party food delivery service licenses expire on August 31st in
odd numbered years.
   (b)   An application for a third-party food delivery service license must
include the Department's basic license application, the third-party food
delivery service license application supplement, and any other documents and
information requested by the Department.
   (c)   Pursuant to § 20-113 of the Administrative Code, a separate third-
party food delivery service license is required for each trade name that a
person uses to conduct the business of a third-party food delivery service. A
third-party food delivery service license applicant must submit a separate
license application for each trade name it will use to conduct the business of
a third-party food delivery service.
   (d)   A licensee or applicant must notify the Department in writing of any
change to the list of websites, mobile applications, third-party food delivery
platforms, uniform resource locators, or operating systems provided in the
licensee's or applicant's basic license application or third-party food
delivery service license application supplement within 10 days of the change.
   (e)   “Offers or arranges”, as used in the definition of “third-party food
delivery service” in § 20-563 of the Administrative Code, includes, but is not
limited to, the operation of a consumer-facing online or mobile platform or
service on which the consumer can order food and beverages without leaving such
platform or service, including when such platform or service uses an
application programming interface with any food service establishment, where
such online or mobile platform or service excludes any food service
establishment from participation in such consumer-facing online or mobile
platform or service unless such food service establishment pays a fee of any
kind for any type of services.
(Added City Record 1/19/2022, eff. 2/18/2022; amended City Record 3/27/2024,
eff. 4/26/2024)
§ 2-462 Records.
   (a)   (1)   Pursuant to subdivision (a)(4) of § 20-563.8 of the
Administrative Code, every third-party food delivery service must maintain
records sufficient to document the full ownership of such third-party food
delivery service. Such records must be maintained in an electronic format for a
period of at least 3 years.
      (2)   Every third-party food delivery service must maintain records
sufficient to demonstrate compliance with the requirements set forth in
subdivision (b) of § 20-563.2 of the Administrative Code. Such records must be
maintained in an electronic format for a period of at least 3 years.
      (3)   Every third-party food delivery service must maintain records
sufficient to document all customer requests not to share the customer's data
with a food service establishment pursuant to subdivision (b) of § 20-563.7 of
the Administrative Code. Such records must be maintained in an electronic
format for a period of at least 3 years.
   (b)   (1)   A request or subpoena for information or records from the
Department must be served on a third-party food delivery service in writing in
person, via mail, or via email. A third-party delivery service must respond to
a written request or subpoena for information or records from the Department by
providing to the Department true, accurate, and contemporaneously made
electronic records or information within 30 days of the date that the request
is received and in the formats and layouts prescribed by the Department in such
request or subpoena.
      (2)   A deadline of more than 30 days may be agreed to on consent by the
Department and the third-party food delivery service.
      (3)   The Department may issue a summons to a third-party food delivery
service who fails to provide true and accurate electronic records or
information by the deadline provided in the written request or subpoena or the
deadline agreed to by the parties, provided that the monetary penalties
authorized by § 20-563.10 of the Administrative Code for a violation of § 20-
563.8 of the Administrative Code shall not apply while such written request or
subpoena is the subject of a pending proceeding.
   (c)   A third-party delivery service's failure to maintain, retain, or
produce a record that is required by law or rule to be maintained that is
relevant to a material fact alleged by the Department in a summons, petition,
or other notice of hearing creates a reasonable inference that such fact is
true.
(Added City Record 1/19/2022, eff. 2/18/2022)
§ 2-463 Gratuities for Food Delivery Workers
The disclosure required by subdivision (b) of § 20-563.2 of the Administrative
Code must be made:
   (a)   directly adjacent to the gratuity solicitation; or
   (b)   accessible via a link placed directly adjacent to the gratuity
solicitation if such link is labeled with plain language to describe its
contents.
(Added City Record 1/19/2022, eff. 2/18/2022)
§ 2-464 Telephone Number Listings.
A listing or link for a third-party telephone number permitted by subdivision
(a) of § 20-563.5 of the Administrative Code and the disclosures required by
such subdivision for a third-party telephone number must appear directly
adjacent to the direct telephone number for the food service establishment.
(Added City Record 1/19/2022, eff. 2/18/2022)
§ 2-465 Sharing Customer Data.
   (a)   To comply with subdivision (b) of § 20-563.7 of the Administrative
Code, every third-party food delivery service must, for every prospective
order, provide the following disclosure in a clear and conspicuous manner: "To
process orders, (name of third-party food delivery service) collects customer
data, which includes your name, telephone number, email address, delivery
address, and what you ordered from the restaurant. As required by New York City
law, if the restaurant requests it, (name of third-party food delivery service)
will share your customer data concerning this order with the restaurant unless
you opt out of sharing your data."
   (b)   A hyperlink, fillable form, or other means for a customer to opt out
of sharing data must be made available directly adjacent to the disclosure
required by this section.
   (c)   Every third-party food delivery service must provide for what is
required by this section prior to the customer completing a prospective order
and on the same page of its website, mobile application, or other platform
where the customer is completing such prospective order.
(Added City Record 1/19/2022, eff. 2/18/2022)
Subchapter LL: Construction Labor Providers
§ 2-471 License Application Requirements.
   (a)   Construction labor provider licenses expire on July 31st in even
numbered years beginning in 2024.
   (b)   An applicant for a construction labor provider license must complete
and submit the Department's basic license application, a construction labor
provider license application supplement, the self-certification required by §
20-564.1(c)(2), and any other documents and information requested by the
Department in connection with the processing of the application.
   (c)   Pursuant to section 2 of Local Law 150 of 2021, an applicant who is
engaged in business activities as a construction labor provider on December 11,
2021 must provide, in addition to all other application requirements, the
information required by § 20-564.1(c)(3) of the Administrative Code for the
period of time from December 11, 2021 to the date the initial application is
submitted.
   (d)   If a construction labor provider licensee's license lapses for any
reason, the construction labor provider must provide, as part of its next
license application, in addition to all other application requirements, the
information required by § 20-564.1(c)(3) of the Administrative Code for the
preceding license term and any subsequent period of time during which the
construction labor provider was unlicensed prior to submitting such license
application.
(Added City Record 6/10/2022, eff. 7/10/2022)
§ 2-472 Notices.
   (a)   To comply with § 20-564.2(a) of the Administrative Code, construction
labor providers must provide to covered construction workers as defined in §
20-564 of the Administrative Code, at the time of hiring, a notice of rights,
as made available on the Department's website, in English and in the language
identified by each such worker as their primary language, provided that if a
model of a translated notice of rights is unavailable on the Department's
website in the language identified by such worker as their primary language,
the construction labor provider must give such worker a notice of rights in
their primary language within 72 hours of hiring such worker, but no later than
12 hours before sending such worker on a construction job in New York City.
   (b)   To comply with § 20-564.2(b) of the Administrative Code, construction
labor providers must complete and provide to applicants for employment as
covered construction workers as defined in § 20-564 of the Administrative Code,
before such worker is asked to agree to work for such provider, a written
certification notice, as available on the Department's website, in English and
in the language identified by each applicant as their primary language,
provided that if a model of a translated certification notice is unavailable on
the Department's website in the language identified by such applicant as their
primary language, the construction labor provider must give such applicant a
certification notice in their primary language within 72 hours of learning that
such applicant's primary language is a language other than English, but no
later than 12 hours before hiring such applicant.
   (c)   To comply with § 20-564.2(c) of the Administrative Code, construction
labor providers must complete and provide to covered construction workers as
defined in § 20-564 of the Administrative Code, at the time prescribed by § 20-
564.2, a written notice of assignment, as made available on the Department's
website, in English and in the language identified by such worker as their
primary language, provided that if a model of a translated notice of assignment
is unavailable on the Department's website in the language identified by such
worker as their primary language, the construction labor provider must give
such worker a notice of assignment in their primary language within 72 hours of
learning that such worker's primary language is a language other than English.
   (d)   Construction labor providers must make available to covered
construction workers as defined in § 20-564 of the Administrative Code or
applicants of employment as such workers, hired before the provider obtained a
construction labor provider license from the Department, the notice of rights
or certification notice, as made available on the Department's website, in
English and in the language identified by each as their primary language within
72 hours of obtaining a construction labor provider license from the
Department.
   (e)   To comply with § 20-564.3(a) of the Administrative Code, construction
labor providers must obtain statements signed by each covered construction
worker as defined in § 20-564 of the Administrative Code and each applicant for
employment as such a worker, in the language identified as their primary
language, before dispatching such worker to a worksite in New York City, or
hiring such applicant, or as otherwise applicable, indicating that such worker
or applicant received, read and understood the notices provided to them
pursuant to § 20-564.2 of the Administrative Code and subdivisions (a) through
(d) of this section.
(Added City Record 6/10/2022, eff. 7/10/2022)
§ 2-473 Records.
   (a)   (1)   A request or subpoena for information or records from the
Department must be served on a construction labor provider in writing in
person, via mail, or via email. A construction labor provider must respond to a
written request or subpoena for information or records from the Department by
providing to the Department true, accurate, and contemporaneously made
electronic records or information within 20 days of the date that the request
is received and in the formats and layouts prescribed by the Department in such
request or subpoena.
      (2)   Notwithstanding paragraph 1 of this subdivision, a deadline of more
than 20 days to respond to a request or subpoena for information or records may
be agreed to on consent by the Department and the construction labor provider.
      (3)   The Department may issue a summons to a construction labor provider
that fails to provide true and accurate electronic records or information by
the deadline provided in the written request or subpoena or the deadline agreed
to by the parties, provided that the monetary penalties authorized by § 20-104
of the Administrative Code for a violation of § 20-564.3 of the Administrative
Code shall not apply while such written request or subpoena is the subject of a
pending proceeding.
   (b)   In addition to all other records encompassed by § 20-564.3 of the
Administrative Code, the following records are subject to a request or subpoena
described in paragraph 1 of subdivision a of this section:
      (1)   Records identifying the corporate structure, ownership and the
names of each principal and officer.
      (2)   Records identifying the total number of covered construction
workers employed on worksites in New York City.
      (3)   Records identifying each third-party client and address of each New
York City worksite where covered construction workers were dispatched by the
construction labor provider.
      (4)   The signed statements by each covered construction worker,
indicating that the covered construction worker received, read and understood
the notices required to be provided to them.
      (5)   Records identifying the written acknowledgments from third-party
clients that they received the notice of rights and notices of assignment.
   (c)   A construction labor provider's failure to maintain, retain, or
produce a record that is required by law or rule to be maintained and that is
relevant to a material fact alleged by the Department in a summons, petition,
or other notice of hearing creates a reasonable inference that such fact is
true.
(Added City Record 6/10/2022, eff. 7/10/2022)
Subchapter MM: Hotels
§ 2-481 License Application Requirements.
   (a)   A hotel license expires on September 30th of even numbered years.
   (b)   An application for a hotel license must include the Department’s basic
license application, the hotel license application supplement, and any other
documents or information the Department requires. Such other documents may
include documents that demonstrate compliance with the requirements of
Administrative Code Title 20, Chapter 2, Subchapter 38. Where an applicant
provides a collective bargaining agreement that demonstrates compliance with
the requirements of Administrative Code Title 20, Chapter 2, Subchapter 38, the
Department will not request additional documents demonstrating compliance with
Administrative Code Title 20, Chapter 2, Subchapter 38.
   (c)   A hotel operator must obtain a separate license for each premises
where it operates a hotel in the City of New York, notwithstanding common
ownership or operation of multiple hotels. The hotel license issued by the
Department shall include the address of the licensed hotel.
   (d)   A hotel operator that has submitted a collective bargaining agreement
that demonstrates compliance with the requirements of Administrative Code Title
20, Chapter 2, Subchapter 38 as part of its hotel license application does not
need to resubmit such agreement at license renewal for the duration of the
agreement or ten years from the date the hotel operator submitted such license
application, whichever is longer, provided that the hotel operator must notify
the Department if such agreement is modified to remove the provisions that
demonstrate such compliance.
(Added City Record 5/2/2025, eff. 5/2/2025)
§ 2-482 Records.
   (a)   A hotel operator shall maintain the following records in an electronic
format for a period of at least three years:
      (1)   Any agreement between such hotel operator and an owner of a hotel
in the City of New York regarding day-to-day operations of such hotel,
including employment of natural persons who work at such hotel;
      (2)   Records demonstrating compliance with the requirements of
Administrative Code § 20-565.4, which may include, but are not limited to: (a)
work schedules and related employee attendance records for front desk and
security guard employees, (b) room status reports (records showing each guest
room and whether it is vacant, stayover, or a checkout), daily room assignment
reports (documents showing which room attendant is assigned to each room), room
attendant work schedules, and room attendant attendance records, and (c) logs
of room cleaning schedules and statuses;
      (3)   Records demonstrating compliance with the requirements of
Administrative Code § 20-565.5, which may include, but are not limited to: (a)
any documents showing that core employees are employed directly (e.g., payroll
records), and (b) copies of human trafficking recognition training materials
and proof of employees’ completion of human trafficking recognition trainings;
      (4)   Records demonstrating compliance with the requirements of
Administrative Code § 20-565.6, which may include, but are not limited to:
invoices, receipts, or other proofs of purchase, upkeep and distribution of
panic buttons;
      (5)   Records demonstrating compliance with the requirements of
Administrative Code § 20-851, which may include, but are not limited to,
notices about hotel service disruptions and proof that such notices were sent
to guests and third-party vendors.
   (b)   All records required by this section shall be made available to the
Department electronically upon request, consistent with applicable law and in
accordance with rules promulgated hereunder and with appropriate notice.
   (c)   A hotel operator’s failure to maintain, retain, or produce a record
that is required to be maintained under this section that is relevant to a
material fact alleged by the Department in a summons, petition, or other notice
of hearing creates a presumption that such fact is true.
(Added City Record 5/2/2025, eff. 5/2/2025)
§ 2-483 Transfer of License; Change in Ownership or Partnership.
   (a)   A successor hotel operator must notify the Department that it has
taken over operation of a hotel from a licensed predecessor operator in
accordance with Administrative Code § 20-565.2(c) no more than 10 days after
assuming operation of such hotel, and before the expiration of the
predecessor’s hotel license. Failure to provide such notice shall render the
hotel license void.
   (b)   A successor hotel operator must complete the Department’s basic
license application and the hotel license application supplement, and provide
any other documents and information requested by the Department. Where a
successor hotel operator provides a collective bargaining agreement that
demonstrates compliance with the requirements of Administrative Code Title 20,
Chapter 2, Subchapter 38, the Department will not request additional documents
for such application to demonstrate compliance with Administrative Code Title
20, Chapter 2, Subchapter 38.
   (c)   A hotel licensee must notify the Department of a change in its own
corporate ownership or partnership in accordance with Administrative Code §§
20-110 and 20-111.
(Added City Record 5/2/2025, eff. 5/2/2025)
Chapter 3: Weights and Measures
Subchapter A: Definitions and Labeling Requirements
§ 3-01 Definitions.
Container. "A container", as used in these regulations, shall include any
carton, box, crate, barrel, half-barrel, hamper, keg, drum, jar, jug, crock,
bottle, bag, basket, pail, can, wrapper, parcel or package.
§ 3-02 Prominence and Placement.
All information required by these rules and regulations to appear on a
container shall be prominent, definite and plain and shall be conspicuous as to
size and style of letters and numbers and as to color of letters and numbers in
contrast to color of background. The declaration of identity, if required, and
the net quantity statement shall appear on the principal display panel. The
name and address of the manufacturer, packer or distributor shall appear either
on the principal display panel or on any other appropriate panel. Any required
information that is either in hand lettering or hand script shall be entirely
clear and equal to printing in legibility.
§ 3-03 Declaration of Identity.
Any commodity sold or offered for sale in a container shall bear on the outside
or top thereof a definite, plain and conspicuous declaration of the identity of
the commodity unless the same can easily be identified through the container.
Such identification shall positively identify the commodity by its common or
usual name, description, generic term or the like.
§ 3-04 Declaration of Quantity.
Any commodity sold or offered for sale in a container shall bear on the outside
or top thereof a definite, plain and conspicuous declaration of the net
quantity of the contents in terms of weight, measure or count except where
otherwise provided by law.
§ 3-05 Declaration of Responsibility.
Any commodity sold or offered for sale in a container shall bear on the outside
or top thereof a definite, plain and conspicuous declaration of the name and
place of business of the manufacturer, packer or distributor.
§ 3-06 Correct Marking in Units of Weight or Measure.
   (a)   Prescribed units. A declaration of quantity shall be expressed in
terms of the largest whole unit of weight or measure (for example, 1 quart
liquid shall be expressed as "1 quart liquid" and not as "2 pints liquid" or
"32 fluid ounces"). However, when this results in a whole number and a
fraction, the fraction may be expressed in its equivalent in the next smaller
whole unit (for example, 1 3/4 quarts liquid may be expressed as "1 quart 1 1/
2 pints liquid" or "1 quart 1 pint 8 fluid ounces," but not as "1 quart 24
fluid ounces" 1 1/4 pounds may be expressed as "1 pound 4 ounces").
   (b)   When the commodity is liquid, the markings shall be in terms of liquid
measure: when the commodity is solid, semi-solid, viscous, or a mixture of
solid and liquid, the markings shall be in terms of weight, (except where
otherwise provided by the Commissioner), provided that if the commodity is
packaged in an aerosol container, the declaration shall be in terms of net
weight (including the propellant).
   (c)   Where packaged food or food products are sold or offered for sale with
quantity representations in decimals, an adequate equivalent weight chart shall
be posted at or near the items so sold or offered for sale.
   (d)   When a food product is packaged in a liquid preservative or is
enclosed along with a packing substance, the net quantity of such food product
shall be expressed in terms of the drained net weight of the food product when
removed from the container, exclusive of the liquid preservative or the packing
substance.
§ 3-07 Qualifying Words Prohibited.
When commodities are sold or offered for sale by weight, measure or numerical
count, and the containers are so marked, no qualifying word or phrase or clause
shall be used. Statements such as "Minimum weight," "Not less than," "Average,"
"When packed," or similar qualifying phrases are prohibited nor shall any unit
of weight, measure or count be qualified by any term (such as "Jumbo," "Giant,"
"Full" or the like) that tends to exaggerate the amount of commodity.
§ 3-08 Units with Two or More Meanings.
When any unit of weight or measure having two or more distinct meanings is
employed in a declaration of quantity, the declaration shall identify the
particular meaning of the term as it is employed in the declaration. For
example, distinction shall be made between "avoirdupois" and "fluid" ounces and
between "liquid" and "dry" quarts and pints. However, such distinction may be
omitted when, by association of terms (as in "1 pound 4 ounces" or "1 pint 8
fluid ounces"), the proper meaning is obvious.
§ 3-09 Count to be Supplemented.
A declaration of quantity in terms of count shall be supplemented by a
declaration of the weight, measure or size of the individual units of the
commodity or of the total weight or measure of the commodity, unless a
declaration of count alone is fully informative to the consumer.
§ 3-10 Weight or Measure to be Supplemented.
A declaration of quantity in terms of weight or measure shall be supplemented
by a declaration of the count or size of the individual units of the commodity,
unless a declaration of weight or measure alone is fully informative to the
consumer.
§ 3-11 Metric System.
A declaration of weight or measure in United States customary units may be
supplemented by a declaration in units of the metric system.
§ 3-12 Language.
All information required by these rules and regulations to appear on a
container shall appear thereon in the English language. A translation in any
language other than English of such information may supplement the
representations on the container to provide fuller consumer information.
Subchapter B: Weights and Measures in General
§ 3-21 Display of Price by Quantity Required.
Any commodity sold, exposed for sale or offered for sale at retail, shall be
plainly marked by stamp, tag, label, or sign at the point of display as
follows:
   (a)   Any commodity, whether edible or inedible, sold by weight, standard
measure, or numerical count, shall be marked so as to display its total selling
price.
   (b)   The following commodities, however packaged or contained when offered
for retail sale, shall indicate the appropriate price per measure as well as
the total selling price: (1) meat and fish
      (2)   bread
      (3)   cereals
      (4)   cooking oils
      (5)   carbonated soft drinks and beer
      (6)   napkins, facial tissue and toilet tissue
   (c)   The appropriate price per measure shall be defined as:
      (1)   the price per pound for non-liquid items measured by weight
      (2)   the price per quart for liquids
      (3)   the price per fifty units for non-liquid products sold by numerical
count.
§ 3-22 Specifications, Tolerances and Regulations Relating to Weights and
Measures.
The specifications, tolerances and regulations, as specified in Handbook #44
and amendments thereto as recommended by the National Bureau of Standards,
shall apply to all weights, measures and weighing and measuring devices now or
hereafter in the city of New York, or now or hereafter offered for sale, hire
or award, sold or used in the city of New York.
§ 3-23 Use of Weighing and Measuring Devices.
No person, firm, or corporation shall, in buying or selling any commodity by
weight or measure, use or have in his possession any weight, measure, measuring
device, meter, meter systems, scales, patent balances, steel yards or other
instruments which shall not conform to the standards prescribed by law, nor
shall any person, firm or corporation use, in the weighing or measuring of any
commodity, any scale, balance, measure, measuring device, meter, platform scale
or other instrument which shall be out of order or incorrect, or is not in
balance.
§ 3-24 Use of Scales or Measuring Devices in Stores and Markets in the City of
New York.
   (a)   A hanging scale shall be suspended from a stationary support, so that
the face or dial of the scale is in full view of the public.
   (b)   A hanging spring scale shall be so suspended that the top or inside of
the plate, scoop or pan shall be in clear view of the public, no higher than 5
feet 6 inches and no lower than 4 feet 6 inches from the ground or floor.
   (c)   When the buyer and seller are on opposite sides of the counter, all
scales, or other weighing or measuring devices used in the premises shall be so
placed that they are between the buyer and seller and the dials or faces of
such devices shall be in full view of the buyer.
   (d)   Counter spring scales, counter patent or counter computing scales
shall be so placed or positioned that the dials or weight indicators shall be
no more than 5 feet 6 inches and no less than 4 feet 6 inches from the ground
or floor.
   (e)   No commodity, article, or thing shall be set, placed or displayed
within 10 inches of all extremities of the scale, weighing or measuring device,
and no part of any scale, weighing or measuring device used to weigh or measure
any commodity shall be obstructed from the full and complete view of the
public.
   (f)   (1) Wherever food or food products are packaged or wrapped for sale by
a retailer in advance of being sold, offered for sale or exposed for sale or
wherever meat, poultry or fish in containers are sold, offered for sale or
exposed for sale, an accurate computing scale of adequate capacity shall be
placed so as to be easily available to customers. This computing scale shall
not be placed more than 30 feet from the pre-packaged display counter.
      (2)   A prominent and conspicuous sign or poster, legibly imprinted as
below, shall be posted on or above the customer scale:
         FOR CUSTOMER USE REWEIGH YOUR PURCHASES HERE
      (3)   In any case where the scale is more than 30 feet from the point
where any such goods are displayed or offered for sale, a prominent and
conspicuous sign or signs shall be posted within 30 feet of such point of
display or offer in the following form:
         REWEIGH YOUR PURCHASES AT THE CUSTOMER SCALE LOCATED AT ____________
      (4)   "Customer Scales" shall be color-striped in red in such a manner as
to permit them to be readily located. The stripes shall be no less than one
half inch nor more than two inches in width.
      (5)   The actual location of the "customer scale" must be accessible to
the consumer.
      (6)   The requirements as to correctness, accuracy, location and other
restrictions relating to weighing and measuring devices shall also apply to
those devices described as "for customer use."
      (7)   A scale designated "for customer use" shall be maintained for the
sole use of customers.
   (g)   (1)   Where these prepackaged items are marked in decimals, an
adequate equivalency chart shall be posted at the reweighing scale or measuring
device in full view of the public.
      (2)   All "customer" computing scales required by subdivision (f) above
must provide information for a price per pound capacity at least equal to two
dollars per pound or to one half the highest price per pound actually charged
for products covered by said subdivision (f), whichever is higher. In those
cases where the information included on the scale does not meet this
requirement, a supplemental cover or chart must be provided to supply this
information.
      (3)   Equivalency weight charts and covers or charts shall be imprinted
with letters and numerals that are easily readable.
§ 3-25 Inspection Certificates.
All owners or users of weighing or measuring devices shall retain, for one
year, the inspection certificate issued to them by the Inspector of the Bureau
of Weights and Measures as evidence that these devices have been tested and
sealed in accordance with law.
§ 3-26 Oscillation of Weighing Devices.
No person selling or offering for sale a commodity by net weight shall quote or
state the net weight or the total selling price of such commodity being sold or
offered for sale unless the weight indicator of the weighing device on which it
is being weighed is at rest.
§ 3-27 Fees for Testing Weighing and Measuring Devices.
Fees for the testing and measuring of weights and measures and weighing and
measuring devices shall be paid to the department within ten days of the
billing date.
§ 3-28 Inspection Fees for Testing and Sealing Weighing and Measuring Devices.
 
 Fees 
                                                                                Fees 
(a)   Scales.
   (1)   33 lb. or lower capacity                                          $20.00
   (2)   Over 33 lbs., up to and including 661 lbs                         $40.00
   (3)   Over 661 lbs., up to and including 3,307 lbs.                     $100.00
   (4)   Over 3,307 lbs., up to and including 15,432 lbs.                  $140.00
   (5)   Over 15,432 lbs., up to and including 50,705 lbs.                 $160.00
   (6)   Over 50,706 lbs.                                                  $200.00
   (7)   Tank, barch and crane scales                                      $400.00
(b)   Weights – field. 
   (1)   Up to and including 11 lbs., 5 weights or fewer                   $8.00
   (2)   Up to and including 11 lbs., 6 weights or more                    $16.00
   (3)   Over 11 lbs., 5 weights or fewer                                  $20.00
   (4)   Over 11 lbs., 6 weights or more                                   $24.00
(c)   Linear field measures (yard stick).
   (1)   Up to 39 in., 5 units or fewer                                    $4.00
   (2)   Up to 39 in., 6 units or more                                     $12.00
   (3)   Measuregraph                                                      $24.00
   (4)   Wire and cordage                                                  $50.00
(d)   Liquid measures and devices.
   (1)   Liquid measures, 5 gallons or less                                $8.00
   (2)   Liquid pump (hand operated) 5 gallons or less                     $20.00
(e)   Petroleum dispensing and measuring devices.
   (1)   Single dispensing devices                                         $20.00
   (2)   Dual dispensing devices                                           $40.00
   (3)   Blend dispensing devices                                          $40.00
   (4)   Grease and oil devices                                            $8.00
(f)   Vehicles. 
   (1)   Meter systems, 79 gallons per minute or less                      $100.00
   (2)   Meter systems, over 79 gallons per minute                         $150.00
   (3)   Marker check and seal compartments                                $40.00
      (i)   Up to and including 600 gallon capacity                     $100.00
      (ii)   600 gallon up to and including 1,500 gallon capacity       $200.00
      (iii)   Over 1,500 gallon capacity                                $280.00
(g)   Stationary petroleum metering systems.
   (1)   Up to 106 gallons per minute                                      $100.00
   (2)   Over 106 gallons per minute, up to and including 528 gallons per m$150.00
   (3)   Over 528 gallons per minute, up to and including 1057 gallons per $150.00
minute
   (4)   Over 1057 gallons per minute                                      $150.00
(h)   Laboratory fees – testing and calibration. 
   (1)   Weights
      (i)   5 lbs. or less                                              $6.00
      (ii)   Over 5 lbs., up to and inducing 25 lbs.                    $10.00
      (iii)   Over 25 lbs., up to and including 50 lbs.                 $10.00
      (iv)   Over 50 lbs., up to and including 500 lbs.                 $12.00
      (v)   Over 500 lbs.                                               $35.00
      (vi)   Weight kits up to and including 32 lbs. (not exceeding 26 p$70.00
      (vii)   Weight kits up to and including 12 lbs. (not exceeding 16 $40.00)
   (2)   Liquid test measure                                               $15.00
   (3)   Precision glassware                                               $15.00
   (4)   Provors
      (i)   Up to and including 106 gallons                             $70.00
      (ii)   Over 106 gallons up to and including 350 gallons           $100.00
      (iii)   Over 350 gallons                                          $150.00
   (5)   Linear measures (steel tapes)
      (i)   Up to and including 50 feet                                 $30.00
      (ii)   50 feet or more                                            $40.00
(i)   Timing devices                                                          $10.00
 
§ 3-29 Installation of Weighing and Measuring Devices.
Every commercial establishment using a weighing or measuring device, weight or
measure to determine the quantity of a product sold, offered for sale,
purchased or offered for purchase, or to determine a service charge based on
weight or measure of any kind shall submit in writing to the department a
notice of the installation of any additional new, used, rebuilt or repaired
weighing or measuring device or the substitution of a new, used or rebuilt
weighing or measuring device subsequent to the last inspection, testing and
sealing of the devices on the premises. Such notice shall be submitted within
three days of such installation.
Subchapter C: Food Products
§ 3-41 Markings on Prepackaged Foods.
All food and food products which are packaged or wrapped by the retailer in
advance of being exposed or offered for sale by the retailer shall be
accurately marked with
   (a)   the net weight or standard measure or numerical count;
   (b)   the selling price per pound or unit of standard measure, and
   (c)   the total selling price.
§ 3-42 Notices of Bread Weight.
   (a)   All wrapped and unwrapped breads, except those specifically exempted
by law, shall be labeled clearly, plainly and conspicuously as to net weight,
kind of bread and the name and address of the manufacturer or distributor,
except that, when bread is sold or offered for sale in the premises of the
manufacturer, only the kind of bread and the net weight are required on the
loaf and such information may be given on a posted notice in English and, if a
different language is spoken, also the language or languages of the
neighborhood. Such notice shall be conspicuous, in plain view of the buyer and
in close proximity to each size and kind of bread offered for sale in the
premises.
   (b)   Bread cut from a loaf shall be weighed in the presence of the buyer
and sold by net weight.
§ 3-43 Cookies and Crackers.
Containers of cookies and crackers, the contents of which weigh over three
ounces net weight, must be marked in terms of net weight. Containers, the
contents of which weigh three ounces or less net weight, which contain more
than six cookies or crackers, shall be marked in terms of net weight or
numerical count.
§ 3-44 Candy.
Candy in containers must be marked to show the net weight of the contents.
§ 3-45 Sale, Labeling and Advertising of Milk, Cream and Substitutes Thereof.
   (a)   Definitions and standards of identity.
      Melloream or a vegetable oil blend. As used in this section, the terms
"melloream" or a "vegetable oil blend" mean any substance, mixture or compound
regardless of the name by which it is represented, which contains vegetable
fats or oils and proteins derived from animal or vegetable sources, and whose
appearance, odor and taste is similar to cream, half and half, milk or a
mixture of milk and cream, to the point of rendering these products difficult
to differentiate from each other.
   (b)   Labeling of melloream and vegetable oil blends. Whenever the brand
name of melloream or a vegetable oil blend, as defined in subdivision (a)
appears on the container so conspicuously as to be seen under customary
conditions of purchase, there shall immediately and conspicuously precede or
follow the brand name or product designation, without intervening written,
printed or graphic matter, in letters at least one-third the size of the brand
name on a contrasting background, any one of the following statements:
"melloream," "a vegetable oil blend," "a vegetable oil product," "not a dairy
product," "contains no milk or milk fat." There shall also appear on the label
an accurate list of ingredients.
   (c)   Serving melloream, vegetable oil blends and cream in restaurants and
other public eating places. Whenever melloream, a vegetable oil blend, cream,
half and half, milk or a mixture of milk and cream is served in a restaurant,
hotel, boarding house, lunch counter, place of entertainment, public eating
place or any establishment where food is sold for consumption on the premises,
the name of the product served should be clearly stated by label, sign or menu
statement in a manner likely to be read by the customer.
§ 3-46 Sale of Eggs to Retailers.
   (a)   Any person selling eggs to a re-tailer shall furnish to him an
invoice, prior to or accompanying the delivery, specifying the grade and size
according to the New York Retail Egg Grades.
   (b)   Invoice. This shall be understood to mean a statement bearing the name
and address of the wholesaler or jobber, the name and address of the retailer,
the date of delivery and the grade and size of each lot of eggs.
   (c)   Each lot of eggs covered by an invoice must be listed separately and
the grade and size stated.
§ 3-47 Advertising of Eggs.
An advertisement of eggs for sale at a given price shall plainly and
conspicuously indicate the grade and size.
§ 3-48 Sale of Eggs to Consumer.
Any person exposing for sale or offering for sale eggs to a consumer shall give
notice of the exact grade and size of the eggs in the following manner:
   If the eggs are offered or exposed for sale in cartons or other containers,
by plainly and conspicuously printing or writing on each carton or container an
exact grade and size.
   If the eggs are offered or displayed for sale in bulk, by plainly and
conspicuously indicating the exact grade and size by a placard exhibited among
or closely adjacent to the eggs.
§ 3-49 Marking of the Grade.
The marking of the grade and size upon any placard as to eggs offered or
displayed for sale in bulk, or upon any carton, bag or other container in which
eggs are exposed for sale or delivered to the purchaser, shall be in legible
printing or writing in letters not less than 3/8 inch in height, and the size
designation shall not be abbreviated.
§ 3-50 Use of the Term "Fresh".
The use of the term "fresh" or any other term of similar import shall not be
deemed to be a substitute for grade designation.
§ 3-51 Weights and Size of Eggs.
Terms designating weight and size must be applied to each lot of eggs in
connection with a sale, offering for sale or advertisement for sale. The
following terms shall be used according to the weights given:
 
                     Minimum Net Weight Minimum Net Weight Minimum Weight for
Size or Weight Class Per Dozen          Per 30 Dozen       Individual Eggs at
                                                           Rate Per Dozen
Jumbo                30 ounces or over  56 pounds          29 ounces
Extra large          27-30 ounces       50 1/2 pounds      26 ounces
Large                24-27 ounces       45 pounds          23 ounces
Medium               21-24 ounces       39 1/2 pounds      20 ounces
Small                18-21 ounces       34 pounds          17 ounces
Peewee               15-18 ounces       28 pounds          ____________
 
Any person selling, offering or exposing for sale eggs to a consumer shall post
conspicuously a plain, clear and legibly printed sign at the point of display
setting forth the denominations of size and related weight range per dozen of
each hereinabove described.
§ 3-52 Markings on Standard Containers.
Standard containers for small fruits, berries and vegetables, so designated and
defined by Congress and by the New York Agriculture and Markets Law, must be
marked with the standard name of such container unless marked in terms of
weight, count or other standard of dry measure.
§ 3-53 Sales of Fruits, Vegetables, Grains and Nuts.
Except when sold in the original container, fruit, vegetables, grains and nuts
shall be sold at retail by avoirdupois weight or numerical count. The words
"original container" as used in this section shall mean any container or
integral thereof, which integral is a smaller container, the contents of which
have not been removed or repacked by the retailer. Any such original container
must be plainly and conspicuously marked to show the net quantity of the
contents thereof in terms of net weight, standard measure or numerical count.
§ 3-54 Meat, Poultry and Fish.
Except for immediate consumption on the premises where sold or as one of
several elements comprising a ready-to-eat meal sold as a unit for consumption
elsewhere than on the premises where sold, all meat, meat food products,
poultry (whole or parts) and all seafood, except shellfish, offered or exposed
for sale or sold as food shall be offered or exposed for sale by net weight.
§ 3-55 Labeling of Frozen, Defrosted or Thawed, and Refrozen Meat, Poultry,
Fish and Products Thereof.
   (a)   Definitions. Whenever used in this section the following terms mean or
include:
Defrosted (Thawed). "Defrosted (thawed)" shall mean the physical state of a
food product which, having been frozen, is exposed to a temperature which
produces a flexible condition and liquification of the fluids of the food
product.
Frozen. "Frozen" shall mean the physical state of a food product resulting from
exposure to a temperature which produces a rigid condition and ice
crystallization of the fluids of the food product.
Refrozen. "Refrozen" shall mean the physical state of a food product, which has
been frozen, defrosted or thawed, and frozen, in that order, as those terms are
hereinabove defined in this subdivision (a).
   (b)   Labeling for retail sale. Meat, poultry, fish and products thereof in
which such meat, poultry or fish is the predominant ingredient of such product,
whether packaged or not, which has been manufactured, processed or prepared in
a frozen condition and which is sold or offered or exposed for sale at retail,
shall be correctly labeled as "frozen," either "defrosted" or "thawed," or
"refrozen." Such labeling shall be by poster, sign, tag or other notice at, on
or near these foods and food products. Such labeling shall be plain, clear and
conspicuous.
   (c)   Delivery of tickets and invoices.
      (1)   All packers, processors, manufacturers, wholesalers, distributors
and jobbers of meat, poultry, fish and the products thereof in which such meat,
poultry or fish is the predominant ingredient of such product, whether packaged
or not, which has been manufactured, processed or prepared in a frozen
condition, shall correctly mark all delivery tickets and invoices as "frozen,"
either "defrosted" or "thawed," or "refrozen," according to the condition of
such food or food products at the time of delivery to the retailer.
      (2)   All retailers shall keep all delivery tickets and invoices, marked
as hereinabove required in paragraph (1) of this subdivision (c), available for
inspection on the premises where such food or food products are being sold or
offered or exposed for sale at the time of such sale, and at those premises or
at another New York City office for a period of two years thereafter.
§ 3-56 Sale of Meat Ground Upon Request by Customer.
All meats purchased in original cuts, whether prepackaged or cut to order and
then requested to be ground on the premises, shall be ground in a meat grinder
which shall be in open view of the public.
§ 3-57 Colored Lighting of Meats.
There shall be no colored lights or spotlights in, on, near or above the meat
display case or show case which make the food products contained therein appear
better than they actually are.
§ 3-58 Colored and Misleading Containers.
   (a)   No food product shall be sold, offered for sale or exposed for sale in
a container so made, formed, colored or filled as to be misleading or which
makes the food product appear better than it actually is.
   (b)   Transparent or semitransparent wrappings or coverings for use in
packaging of cured, cured and smoked, or cured and cooked sausage products and
sliced meat products must provide for at least 50 percent of the total product
surface being visible through a wrapper or covering that is free of -color,
print or graphic material to ensure that the actual color of the product is
easily recognized.
   (c)   Processed meats and meat products, other than processed sausages and
sliced meat products, packaged in wrappings or containers bearing an inspection
legend of the United States Department of Agriculture or the New York State
Department of Agriculture and Markets, shall be deemed to comply with the
requirements of subdivision (a).
   (d)   Processed meats and meat products, other than processed sausages and
sliced meat products, packaged in wrappings or containers of a kind and type
permitted by the United States Department of Agriculture or the New York State
Department of Agriculture and Markets, shall be deemed to comply with the
requirements of subdivision (a).
§ 3-59 Cooked or Smoked Sausages.
   (a)   Definitions. 
Cooked or Smoked Sausage. Whenever used in this section, the term "cooked or
smoked sausage" shall mean or include "frankfurter," "wiener," "vienna,"
"bologna," "garlic bologna," "knockwurst" and similar sausages which are
comminuted semi-solid meat food products prepared from one or more kinds of
meat or meat and meat by-products, poultry products and other ingredients as
permitted by this section.
   (b)   Standard for cooked or smoked sausage. It shall be unlawful for any
person to sell or offer for sale cooked or smoked sausages unless such products
comply with the following specifications. The cooked or smoked sausage
products:
      (1)   shall not contain more than 30 percent fat;
      (2)   may contain binders or extenders, but individually or collectively
they shall not exceed 3 1/2 percent of the total ingredients in the sausage
except that 2 percent of isolated soy protein shall be deemed to be the
equivalent of 3 1/2 percent of other binders or extenders;
      (3)   may not contain more than 10 percent of added water; and
      (4)   may contain poultry products which, individually or in combination,
are not in excess of 15 percent of the total ingredients, excluding water in
cooked or smoked sausage. For purposes of this paragraph (4), poultry products
means chicken or turkey, chicken or turkey meat, or chicken or turkey by-
products.
   (c)   Labeling and advertising of cooked or smoked sausages. It shall be
unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale cooked or smoked sausages
unless the labeling, advertising and representations made concerning such
sausages conform to the following provisions:
      (1)   cooked or smoked sausages containing poultry products must state
such content in the ingredient statement on the label of the package in which
they are sold;
      (2)   cooked or smoked sausages labeled, advertised or represented as
"all meat" shall contain only beef, pork, veal, mutton, lamb or goat meat, or
chicken or turkey meat, or any combination thereof consistent with this section
and condiments, curing agents and water as permitted in this article; and
      (3)   cooked or smoked sausages labeled, advertised or represented as
"all (species)," e.g., "All Beef Franks," or "All Pork Franks," shall contain
only meat of the specified species, with condiments, curing agents and water as
permitted by this section.
§ 3-60 Required Sign for Meats Prepackaged on Premises.
   (a)   The sign required to be posted by § 20-682 of the Administrative Code
of the City of New York at the point of display of any prepackaged unprocessed
or untreated fresh or frozen meat, except ground meat, to inform consumers of
the right to a refund or exchange if such product was unsatisfactory shall:
      (i)   read substantially as follows:
         "SATISFACTION GUARANTEED" (In capital block letters at least 3/4 inch
high bold face type).
         "IF YOU ARE DISSATISFIED WITH A MEAT PURCHASE THAT WAS PREPACKAGED IN
THIS STORE, PLEASE RETURN IT WITH PROOF OF PURCHASE AND WE WILL REPLACE IT OR
PROVIDE A FULL REFUND AS REQUIRED BY LAW." (In capital block letters at least
1/2 inch high.)
      (ii)   be not less than 11 inches by 17 inches in size.
Subchapter D: All Other Products and Services
§ 3-71 Advertising of Ladders.
   (a)   All advertisement of ladders in newspapers, magazines or other
publications, catalogues, circulars, pamphlets or on other such written notices
as signs, placards or posters which state the overall height dimension must
also specify the usable height dimension of the ladders so advertised where
such dimension differs from the overall height dimension.
   (b)   All cards, tags, labels or other such written statements on ladders
which state the overall height dimension must also specify the usable height
dimension of the ladders to which they are attached when this dimension differs
from the overall height dimension.
§ 3-72 Weighing Devices in Laundries.
All commercial laundries per forming, selling or offering for sale laundry
services on the basis of weight shall have legal scales of approved type and
design properly tested and sealed in their premises.
§ 3-73 Paints, Oils and Varnishes.
The labels on containers of paints, oils, varnishes, japans and similar
commodities must be marked in one of the following ways:
   (a)   Weight of the contents in terms of pounds and ounces.
   (b)   Fluid contents in terms of gallons, quarts, pints, half-pints and
gills or fractional parts of these.
§ 3-74 Paper Napkins and Paper Towels.
The declaration of quantity on a package of paper napkins or paper towels shall
indicate the numerical count and the dimensions of the individual napkins or
towels contained in the package.
§ 3-75 Writing Paper, Notebook Paper, Envelopes.
The declaration of quantity on a package of writing paper, notebook paper or
envelopes shall indicate the number of sheets or envelopes, as the case may be,
in the package. When envelopes are included in a package of writing paper, the
declaration shall indicate both the number of sheets of paper and the number of
envelopes. The size of the lettering setting forth the number of sheets shall
be equal to or greater than any other quantity representation on the package.
§ 3-76 Tablets and Books of Writing Paper.
The declaration of quantity on a package of tablets or books of writing paper
shall indicate the number of tablets or books in the package.
§ 3-77 Wrapping Paper.
The declaration of quantity on a package of wrapping paper in sheet form may be
in terms of either numerical count or net weight. If the declaration is in
terms of numerical count, it shall indicate both the dimensions of an
individual sheet and the number of sheets in the package.
§ 3-78 Facial Tissues.
The declaration of quantity on a package of facial tissues shall indicate the
numerical count of usable units (a sheet of two or three ply shall be
considered a single usable unit) and the dimensions of the individual unit.
§ 3-79 Toilet Tissues.
The declaration of quantity on a package of toilet tissues in roll or sheet
form shall indicate the numerical count of usable units (a sheet of two or
three ply shall be considered a single usable unit) and the dimensions of the
individual unit.
§ 3-80 Supplementary Quantity Declaration.
Any declaration or statement relating to the quantity of contents of a package
of paper product that is in addition to or supplementary to the declaration
required by these regulations shall be in juxtaposition with and shall be
subordinated to the required declaration; provided, that no supplementary
declaration of the number of "single-ply sheets" in a package containing a
"multiple-ply" product shall be permitted.
§ 3-81 Purchase of Gold, Silver or Precious Metal.
Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of purchasing old or
used gold, silver or other precious metal, as defined by the United States
Federal Trade Commission, shall, at the time of purchase, inform the seller of
the troy weight of the gold, silver or other precious metal offered for
purchase, the price per unit weight used to compute the purchase price and the
quality of the gold, silver or other precious metal so offered for purchase.
§ 3-82 Cost of Prescriptions.
Any pharmacist must, upon request, indicate to the holder of a prescription the
cost of such prescription before it is filled or compounded.
§ 3-83 Woolen Yarn.
Woolen yarn must be sold either by weight or by linear measure. If sold in or
by the package such package must be definitely, plainly and conspicuously
marked to show the linear measure or net weight of the contents.
§ 3-84 Twine, Cordage, Thread and Yarn.
Each ball, tube, bale, bobbin or spool must be marked with the net weight or
linear measure of the twine, cordage, thread or yarn contained therein or with
the gross and tare weights thereof. If a number of similar balls, tubes, bales,
bobbins or spools are sold in a container and are not sold separately, it will
be sufficient either to mark the total length or weight on the container
together with the number of units in the container or to mark the length or
weight of each unit together with the number of units in the container.
§ 3-85 Textile Products – Retail.
Textile yard goods, when sold at retail, must be sold by linear measure and
when put up or packaged in advance of sale shall be definitely, plainly and
conspicuously marked to show the linear measure of the contents.
§ 3-86 Textile Products – Wholesale.
Textile yard goods when sold for resale or for industrial use must be sold by
linear measure or by net weight and when put up or packaged in advance of sale
shall be definitely, plainly and conspicuously marked to show the linear
measure or net weight of the contents.
Subchapter E: Method of Sale of Fuel Oil
§ 3-91 Delivery Tickets.
All deliveries of fuel oil to purchasers, in vehicle tanks used as measures,
shall be recorded by the seller upon forms known as delivery tickets. At the
time of delivery, one copy of the delivery ticket shall be left at the point of
the delivery. Delivery tickets shall be consecutively numbered and contain the
following: date of delivery, name and address of the seller and purchaser, and
grade, price per gallon, quantity and total price of oil delivered; provided,
however, that a delivery ticket need not set forth the total price if within
five days after delivery the seller provides the purchaser with a written
statement setting forth all the foregoing information including the total
price.
§ 3-92 Marker Capacity.
No deliveries shall be made in excess of the "marker capacity" of the truck or
compartment. Every driver of a vehicle tank used as a measure shall have in his
possession, and present to the inspector upon request, the calibration chart
for the truck from which he is delivering fuel oil, together with loading
tickets and delivery tickets for the current day.
§ 3-93 Temperature of the Oil.
All fuels oils with a temperature greater than 60 degrees Fahrenheit shall be
sold, offered for sale or delivered on a basis of a temperature reading of 60
degrees Fahrenheit. A tolerance of 25 degrees Fahrenheit will be permitted for
Number 4 and 6 oils. A tolerance of 10 degrees Fahrenheit will be permitted for
Number 2 oil.
§ 3-94 Printer Tickets.
All deliveries of fuel oil to purchasers thereof, from vehicle tanks equipped
with meters, shall be recorded in terms of gallons and grades of oil by means
of the ticket printing device upon forms known as "printer tickets."
§ 3-95 Contents of Printer Tickets.
Such printer tickets shall be consecutively numbered and shall contain the
following: date of delivery, name of the customer and the delivery address,
truck number, at least the last six digits of the Vehicle Identification
Number, sales number, grade, price per gallon and quantity of the oil delivered
and the driver's signature; except that on those truck meters not equipped to
print a sales number, the driver must have the initial totalizer readings
recorded in ink or typed on his -daily route sheet, and the original totalizer
numbers must be kept in the office; or the printer shall print totalizer
readings on the delivery ticket; provided, further, that the price per gallon
may be omitted on the copy of the delivery ticket required to be left at the
point of delivery if a second copy of the delivery ticket, on which the price
per gallon is recorded, is mailed or delivered to the purchaser of the fuel oil
within 48 hours of delivery.
(Amended City Record 8/8/2018, eff. 9/7/2018)
§ 3-96 Printer Tickets During Delivery.
Every driver or person in charge of a vehicle tank in which fuel oil is being
transported or from which it is being delivered shall, before starting the
delivery and at the point of delivery only, place the printer tickets into the
printer device for the purpose of recording the quantity of fuel oil to be
delivered and shall, upon termination of each delivery, effect the completion
of the printer ticket and the removal thereof from the printer.
§ 3-97 Delivery Ticket Upon Delivery.
One copy of the delivery ticket shall be left at the point of delivery.
§ 3-98 Measured Liquid Diversion.
Vehicle tanks equipped with meters shall have no by-pass or other device or
mechanism attached thereto by which any measured liquid can be diverted from
the measuring chamber of the meter or the discharge line therefrom.
§ 3-99 Mechanical Air Eliminators.
Vehicle tanks equipped with meters shall be provided with a mechanical air
eliminator adjacent to the meter inlet and shall be so equipped as to prevent
air or an emulsion of air and oil from passing through the meter or being
delivered to the consumer. The vent from the air eliminator shall terminate in
the nearest compartment not more than one inch below the top of the
compartment. The vent shall be of rigid material and shall be of the largest
size that can be accommodated in the fitting on the air eliminator housing, as
designed by the manufacturer. No device shall be provided or used to shut off
or otherwise obstruct such vent.
§ 3-100 Delivery Tickets – Quantity Representations.
No person shall issue, or direct the issuance of, or have in his possession
delivery tickets showing different quantities of oil for the same delivery or
tickets with preprinted quantity representations for undelivered oil.
§ 3-101 Loading Tickets.
When fuel oil is purchased for resale, or is sold, offered for sale or
delivered directly to the public by the dealer or owner of a fuel oil bulk
plant, the operator of the vehicle transporting or delivering such oil shall
retain in his possession during such transportation or delivery and shall
exhibit to an inspector, upon request, a ticket commonly known as a "loading
ticket," which must be issued by the seller or his agent, and which shall
indicate the grade of fuel oil as well as the quantity. If the temperature of
the oil is above 60 degrees Fahrenheit, a volumetric correction to 60 degrees
Fahrenheit must be made. A tolerance of 25 degrees Fahrenheit will be permitted
for Number 4 and 6 oils. A tolerance of 10 degrees Fahrenheit will be permitted
for Number 2 oil.
§ 3-102 Inspection.
Any person engaged in the business of or owning a vehicle used for the delivery
of gasoline, kerosene or petroleum products, other than liquefied petroleum
gases, in the City of New York, shall submit for inspection, at least annually,
at a location and time designated by the Commissioner, the measuring devices
and the vehicle tanks used as measures employed to determine the quantity
delivered; provided, further, that measuring devices, which have been repaired
or condemned and repaired, or whose security seals have been broken, for any
reason whatsoever, shall be submitted for reinspection at a location and time
designated by the Commissioner and that such procedure shall be applicable to
any change or modification of a tank measure.
§ 3-103 Inspection of Printer Tickets.
Any person engaged in the business of delivering fuel oil to purchasers in the
City of New York from vehicle tanks equipped with meters must retain a copy of
each printer ticket for a period of two years after the corresponding delivery
is made. At the time of inspection by the Department, the person must produce,
upon request, a copy of any printer ticket delivered to a consumer within the
past two years.
(Added City Record 8/8/2018, eff. 9/7/2018)
Subchapter F: Open Air Street Markets [Repealed]
§ 3-111 Qualifications for Permit. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/7/2018, eff. 7/7/2018)
§ 3-112 Procurement of Permit. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/7/2018, eff. 7/7/2018)
§ 3-113 Suspension, Revocation and Reissuance. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/7/2018, eff. 7/7/2018)
§ 3-114 Identification Photographs. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/7/2018, eff. 7/7/2018)
§ 3-115 License Plates. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/7/2018, eff. 7/7/2018)
§ 3-116 Weekly Rental Fee. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/7/2018, eff. 7/7/2018)
§ 3-117 Sale, Assignment or Sublease of Stand. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/7/2018, eff. 7/7/2018)
§ 3-118 Commodities and Stands. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/7/2018, eff. 7/7/2018)
§ 3-119 Loss of Permit or Plate. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/7/2018, eff. 7/7/2018)
§ 3-120 Compliance with Other Laws and Regulations. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/7/2018, eff. 7/7/2018)
§ 3-121 Disposal of Refuse. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/7/2018, eff. 7/7/2018)
§ 3-122 Obstruction by Pushcarts and Vehicles. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/7/2018, eff. 7/7/2018)
§ 3-123 Obstruction by Merchandise. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/7/2018, eff. 7/7/2018)
§ 3-124 Attendance. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/7/2018, eff. 7/7/2018)
§ 3-125 Official Hours. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/7/2018, eff. 7/7/2018)
§ 3-126 Failure to Operate Stand. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/7/2018, eff. 7/7/2018)
§ 3-127 Assistants. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/7/2018, eff. 7/7/2018)
§ 3-128 Loitering. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/7/2018, eff. 7/7/2018)
§ 3-129 Advertising Signs. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/7/2018, eff. 7/7/2018)
§ 3-130 Misrepresentation and Discourtesy. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/7/2018, eff. 7/7/2018)
§ 3-131 Rules to be Furnished to Permittees. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/7/2018, eff. 7/7/2018)
Chapter 4: Market Regulations
Subchapter A: Repairs of Second-Hand Weighing or Measuring Devices
§ 4-01 Removal of New York City Security Seal.
Immediately upon the completion of any repairs, or replacement or servicing of
any component parts thereof, the licensed repairman shall replace the New York
City security seal affixed to a weighing or measuring device.
§ 4-02 Repairman's Security Seal.
The licensed repairman shall replace the New York City security seal with a
security seal, bearing the name or initials of the licensed repairman (company)
and his or its license number. Said security seal shall have such information
clearly and legibly imprinted on each side of the security seal on the sides
visible to any interested person.
§ 4-03 Use of Initials, Abbreviations, Trademarks and Logos.
Any licensed repairman who elects to use initials, abbreviations, trademarks or
logos in lieu of his or its full company name, may only do so by first
notifying the Commissioner, in writing, in duplicate, of its intention to do
so. Said notification must contain an exact replica of the initials,
abbreviations, trademark or logo desired. If approved by the Commissioner, one
copy of said notification will be returned by the Commissioner to the licensed
repairman. The license number must be used in conjunction with said initials,
abbreviation, trademark or logo.
§ 4-04 Employees' Identification Number or Letter.
Each licensed repairman (company) shall, if he or it employs more than one
repairman or serviceman, assign an identification number or letter to each such
individual. Said identification number or letter must also be imprinted upon
the security seal in addition to the information required in 6 RCNY §
4-02.
§ 4-05 New Repairmen and Servicemen.
Each licensed repairman (company) shall notify the Commissioner, in writing, in
duplicate, within three (3) business days of the employment of a new repairman
or serviceman, and of the number or letter assigned to said employee. The
Commissioner shall acknowledge receipt of said notification by return of the
duplicate copy to the licensed repairman. Said receipted copies shall be
retained by the licensed repairman for a period of two (2) years.
§ 4-06 Cumulative List of Employees. [Repealed]
Subchapter B: Warning Sign to Be Posted about Prohibiting Selling or Giving
Laser Pointers to Minors
§ 4-10 Content of Sign.
The sign required to be posted pursuant to § 10-134.2 of the Administrative
Code of the City of New York shall contain only the following notice within a
black bordered box, with the names and titles of the current City officials set
off in a separate box. The italicized text included below is instructional, and
is not intended to be part of the text required to be included in the sign.
WARNING-LASER POINTERS: Selling or giving a laser pointer to anyone 18 years of
age or under is PROHIBITED BY LAW and punishable as a MISDEMEANOR [to be in 54-
point type].
New York City Administrative Code § 10-134.2 [in 16-point italic type].
[Insert Name], Commissioner [in 16-point bold type] Department of Consumer
Affairs [in 16-point type]
[Insert Name], Commissioner [in 16-point bold type] Police Department [in 16-
point type]
City of New York [in 16-point bold type] [Insert name], Mayor
§ 4-11 Size of Sign.
The sign containing the information specified in 6 RCNY §
4-10 shall not be smaller than eleven inches in length and eight and one-half
inches in height, and the letters shall be printed in the font type identified
above in italics.
§ 4-12 Posting of Signs.
The sign required to be posted pursuant to § 10-134.2 of the Administrative
Code of the City of New York shall be conspicuously placed within ten feet of a
retailer's cash register(s), and shall be clearly visible to consumers prior to
the time they pay for their merchandise.
§ 4-15 Number of Signs.
A retailer shall post a sign at each cash register, except that for cash
registers that are placed adjacent to each other, a retailer shall post a sign
for every group of four such adjacent cash registers.
§ 4-16 Signs in Foreign Languages.
The signs required to be posted pursuant to § 10-134.2 of the Administrative
Code of the City of New York shall be in English and shall also be in any other
language which the retailer uses to attract customers or to transact business.
Subchapter C: Language Assistance Notices at Pharmacies
§ 4-11* Content and Form of Language Assistance Sign.
   (a)   The sign required to be posted at chain pharmacies pursuant to § 20-
623 of the Administrative Code of the City of New York to inform limited
English-proficient individuals of their rights to language assistance in the
seven languages identified biennially by the Department of City Planning shall
include the following statement in English and in each of the languages listed:
"Point to your language. Language assistance will be provided at no cost to
you."
   (b)   The statement in each of the required languages shall be in 20 point
bold faced, Arial type in a color that sharply contrasts with the background
color of the sign. Each such statement shall be enclosed in a box, and there
shall be at least a 1/4 inch clear space between adjacent boxes.
   (c)   The statements in all of the required languages shall be printed on
one sign that shall be conspicuously displayed on or at each counter where
prescription drug orders are dropped off, where they are picked up, and near
every cash register where prescription drugs are paid for. Such signs shall be
positioned so that a consumer can easily point to the statement identifying the
language in which such person is requesting assistance.
Subchapter D: Hamburger and Chopped Meat [Repealed]
§ 4-41 Custom Meat Grinding. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 4-42 Sale of Hamburger. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021)
Subchapter E: Retail Sales of Petroleum Products
§ 4-51 Testing and Approval of Pumps and Measuring Devices.
No person, firm or corporation in the business of selling or offering for sale
gasoline or other petroleum products, shall use any pump or measuring device,
after installation or repair, unless such device has been tested and approved
by the Commissioner of Consumer Affairs or an Inspector of the Department.
§ 4-52 Priming of Pumps.
Every person, firm or corporation in the business of selling or offering for
sale gasoline or other petroleum products for use in a motor vehicle, shall
prime each pump every day before serving the public, and shall have an approved
and sealed five (5) gallon test measure on the premises to test these pumps
daily. The name and address of the premises shall be indelibly imprinted on the
five (5) gallon test measure and such markings shall be clear, legible and in
letters not less than one inch in height.
§ 4-53 Official Seal.
The official seal placed on pumps or other measuring devices by an Inspector of
the Department, shall not be removed, defaced, or obscured.
§ 4-54 Security Seal.
The security seal attached to the meter adjustment shall remain unbroken,
except that a licensed repairman may break the city seal to make necessary
repairs or recalibrations. Immediately upon completion of repair, the licensed
repairman shall replace the security seal with his own, bearing proper
identification. The repairman shall then notify this Department, in writing,
within twenty-four hours, of such repair.
§ 4-55 Out-of-Order Pumps.
A sign, placard, or other display, printed with red letters of at least one
inch in height, must be placed over the dial face of any gasoline or diesel
motor fuel dispensing device which is not in proper working order. The delivery
hose must be disconnected therefrom. The sign must read as follows:
"THIS PUMP IS OUT OF ORDER."
(Amended City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 4-56 Dispensing Devices.
No sale or offer for sale of gasoline or diesel motor fuel shall be made, at
retail, from a dispensing device which has a broken interlock and which does
not have on its face or dial, in red letters, the following statement, "Gallon
and Total Price Indicators Must Be At Zero When Delivery Is Begun, Under
Penalty Of Law."
§ 4-57 Bottles and Measures.
All bottles and measures, used in measuring and selling petroleum products,
shall conform to the following specifications:
   (a)   All bottles must be legal type with a line blown in the bottle,
denoting capacity of bottle.
   (b)   Dented or damaged standard liquid measures are prohibited.
   (c)   Vendors shall not deliver liquid petroleum products in measures larger
than necessary, i.e.:
      1 quart of oil in a 1/2 gallon measure.
      3 quarts of oil in a gallon measure.
§ 4-58 Grease Measuring Devices.
Grease measuring devices for transmission and differential lubricants.
   (a)   Each unit must be primed each time before use.
   (b)   The unit of measure shall be one pint and multiples thereof. Delivery
must be made by liquid measure, not pounds.
§ 4-59 Inspection Certificates.
All owners or users of weighing or measuring devices shall retain, for one year
and have available for examination, the inspection certificate issued to them
by a Consumer Affairs Inspector, as evidence that these devices have been
tested and sealed in accordance with law.
§ 4-60 Yard and Delivery Tickets.
   (a)   The driver of each truck making a delivery of gasoline shall be
supplied with a yard or delivery ticket, to be kept in his possession until
completion of the delivery of the entire load.
   (b)   Each yard or delivery ticket shall be consecutively numbered.
   (c)   Each yard or delivery ticket shall indicate clearly the type of
gasoline in each compartment.
   (d)   Yard or delivery tickets shall be made available to Inspectors of the
Department at any time during delivery.
   (e)   The yard or delivery ticket shall be shown to a purchaser upon his or
her demand during delivery.
§ 4-61 Return and Inspection of Tickets.
Upon completion of delivery, the yard or delivery ticket shall be turned in by
the driver to the originating terminal, where it shall be kept on file for six
(6) months, and shall be made available during business hours, for inspection.
§ 4-62 Selector Valves.
Selector valves on each truck used for making a delivery of gasoline shall be
clearly and indelibly marked and maintained, so that the relationship of the
selector valve to the numbered compartment is readily visible.
§ 4-63 Signs.
   (a)   Pump-signs.
      (1)   Each pump which dispenses gasoline or diesel motor fuel for sale at
retail shall display a sign in compliance with the requirements of § 20-672 of
the Administrative Code (hereinafter referred to as the "Sign"). The Sign shall
be composed of two units, one shall contain the total selling price and the
other shall contain the price breakdown box.
      (2)   The unit of the Sign setting forth the total selling price shall
display the selling price per gallon including all applicable taxes and shall
be accompanied by the statement "Includes All Taxes." All numbers used to
display the total selling price shall be of uniform size and shall be at least
8 inches in height, and a stroke width of at least 7/8 inch. The statement
"Includes All Taxes" shall be in letters of uniform size at least 1/2 inch in
height and extending at least 5 1/2 inches.
      (3)   The unit of the Sign setting forth the price breakdown box shall be
located in the lower right hand corner of the Sign and shall be no less than 6
inches in height and 4 inches in width. The price breakdown box shall include
the basic price per gallon, the Federal and State taxes per gallon, the New
York City sales tax per gallon, the City lead tax per gallon and the total
selling price per gallon. All numbers used in the price breakdown box shall be
of uniform size and shall be at least one inch in height with a stroke width of
at least 3/16 of an inch.
      (4)   Where a tenth of a cent number is used on the Sign, that number
must be at least 1/2 the size of the number to which it relates.
      (5)   All letters used to explain the information in the price breakdown
box of the Sign shall be at least 1/4 inch in height and 1/8 of an inch in
width.
      (6)   The Sign shall be securely fixed to the pump so that the
information may be easily read from the dispensing side of the pump.
      (7)   If service of gasoline or diesel motor fuel may be made from more
than one side of a pump or dispensing device, the Sign shall be so constructed
as to be visible from each side from which dispensing takes place or a Sign
shall be posted on each side that dispensing takes place.
      (8)   Each pump which dispenses more than two grades of gasoline shall
display a sign which shall be not less than 13 inches in height and 26 inches
in width and shall contain the total selling price and a price breakdown box
for each grade of gasoline dispensed, and shall satisfy the following
conditions and paragraphs (4), (6) and (7) of this 6 RCNY §
4-63(a): (i) The width space of the sign shall be equally divided among all of
the grades of gasoline dispensed.
         (ii)   Each grade subdivision of the sign shall be composed of two
units. One shall contain the total selling price and the other shall contain
the price breakdown box.
         (iii)   The unit of the sign setting forth the total selling price
shall display the grades and grade numbers advertised and prices per gallon
including all applicable taxes and shall be accompanied by the statement
"Includes All Taxes." All numbers used to display the total selling price shall
be of uniform size.
         (iv)   For signs containing three or more grades of gasoline, the
numbers relating to price shall be at least 7 1/2 inches in height and at least
1 1/2 inches in width and a stroke width of 1/2 inch.
         (v)   The price breakdown box for each grade subdivision shall be
located directly below the total selling price for each grade and grade number
advertised and shall be at least 3 3/8 inches in height and as wide as each
grade subdivision. The price breakdown box shall include the basic price per
gallon, the Federal and State taxes per gallon, the New York City sales tax per
gallon, the City lead tax per gallon and the total selling price per gallon.
All numbers in the price breakdown box shall be at least 5/8 inch in height and
at least 3/8 inch in width with a stroke width of 1/8 inch.
         (vi)   All letters used to explain the information in the price
breakdown box of the sign shall be at least 1/4 inch in height and at least 1/
8 inch in width.
         (vii)   All letters and numbers advertising the grades of gasoline
dispensed shall be at least one inch in height and at least 1/2 inch in width
with a stroke width of at least 1/8 inch. The statement "Includes All Taxes"
shall be in letters of uniform size at least one half inch in height.
   (b)   Petroleum product signs related to price, not located on dispensing
equipment. 
      (1)   Every sign, poster or placard used to display, advertise, or refer
to the price of any petroleum product, including gasoline and diesel motor
fuel, other than that used on a dispensing device, must clearly display:
         (i)   The name, trade name, brand, mark or symbol, and grade or
quality classification, if any, and method of processing, of any displayed,
advertised, or referred to products, or, if such products are sold without
identification, such sign, placard or other display must refer clearly to such
products as unbranded;
            (a)   If a product displayed, advertised, or referred to is
associated with the same brand as the petroleum station offering such product
for sale, the name, trade name, brand, mark or symbol of such product may be
placed either adjacent to or directly above the grade or quality classification
and the price(s) of such product, and all such information shall be deemed to
be displayed on the same sign;
            (b)   If a product displayed, advertised, or referred to is
unbranded or is associated with a different brand than the petroleum station
offering such product for sale, the term "unbranded" or the name, trade name,
brand, mark or symbol associated with such product must be displayed adjacent
to the grade or quality classification and the price(s) of such product;
         (ii)   the price, including all applicable taxes, per unit of measure
at which such product is customarily sold at retail, which for gasoline or
diesel motor fuel must be by gallon;
         (iii)   near the price, the legend "Includes All Taxes;"
         (iv)   if gasoline is offered for sale, the price of the lowest grade
of gasoline offered for sale; and
         (v)   if the price charged for a petroleum product displayed,
advertised or referred to on the sign, poster or placard varies based on the
form of payment, each price charged for that product along with language
identifying the product and form or forms of payment associated with each
price.
      (2)   The total number of signs, posters, and placards used to display,
advertise or refer to the price of petroleum products shall not exceed the
number of vehicular traffic streets upon which the service station faces. For
the purpose of this section, signs used on dispensing devices shall not be
included in the number of signs permitted to be displayed and a sandwich or "A"
sign, placard, or poster shall be considered one sign.
      (3)   Any sign, poster or placard shall be located within the building
line of the service station.
      (4)   Size requirements for letters and numbers on signs:
         (i)   All numbers referring to price must be the same height, width
and thickness except when a tenth of a cent number is used, that number must be
at least one half the size of the number to which it relates.
         (ii)   All letters must be of a height, width, and thickness that is
no greater than the size of the largest number on the sign, poster, or placard
referring to price.
         (iii)   Identification of the petroleum product offered for sale and
any non-numerical language distinguishing the prices charged for different
forms of payment must be in letters and numbers not less than one-half of the
height, width and thickness of the numbers referring to price.
         (iv)   All letters and numbers shall be black on a white background or
displayed on an illuminated light-emitting diode sign.
(Amended City Record 12/8/2017, eff. 1/7/2018)
§ 4-64 "Fill" and "Stick" Lines – General.
The covers of "fill" lines and "stick" lines shall be painted with distinctive
colors and, city wide, shall be uniform as to trade name, brand, mark or
symbol, and grade or quality classification. The colors on the covers of "fill"
and "stick" lines pertaining to the same products shall be identical.
§ 4-65 "Fill" and "Stick" Lines – Major Oil Companies.
Major oil companies, whose products are sold or offered for sale in the City of
New York, shall notify the Department as to the colors currently being used on
the covers of "fill" and "stick" lines on premises dispensing their gasoline
and diesel motor fuel.
§ 4-66 Color Samples.
Each company selling gasoline in the City of New York shall supply the
Department with one (1) gallon of color sample of each type of gasoline. The
color sample may be in either an aqueous solution or in a miscible oil base.
Whenever a product is so changed that the color is changed, the company making
the change shall supply the Department with a new one (1) gallon sample
denoting the new color.
§ 4-67 Gauges.
Gauges installed where "stick" lines have been sealed pursuant to Fire
Department regulations, shall be maintained within a tolerance of 3 percent.
§ 4-68 Sale of Petroleum Products Other Than Gasoline and Diesel Motor Fuel.
A petroleum product, other than gasoline and diesel motor fuel, shall be sold
or offered for sale only in a sealed container if the container of such product
has imprinted thereon a name, trade name, brand, mark or symbol or other
identification of the product.
§ 4-69 Water in Gasoline.
   (a)   Storage tanks on premises from which gasoline or diesel motor fuels
are drawn and sold or offered for sale, at retail, for use in motor vehicles
shall be checked daily by the operators of the premises for water content. Such
test should always be made at a reasonable time after a truck delivery of the
product and may be considered as complying with the once-a-day requirement. If
one or more inches of water are present in any of the tanks, the operators
shall cease dispensing gasoline or diesel oil from those pumps drawing from
these storage tanks and shall take immediate steps to remove the water from
these storage tanks.
   (b)   It shall be a violation of these rules and regulations to sell, offer
for sale or have available for sale, at retail, for use in a motor vehicle,
gasoline or diesel motor fuel from a storage tank, which, on test, is shown to
have two or more inches of water.
   (c)   No operator of service station selling or offering for sale gasoline
or diesel motor oil, at retail, for use in a motor vehicle, shall use or allow
the use of a dispensing pump which draws gasoline or diesel oil from a storage
tank into which a truck is delivering either of these petroleum products.
§ 4-70 Octane Posting.
   (a)   Retailers must post the octane rating of all gasoline sold to
consumers. The posting is fulfilled by putting at least one label on each face
of each gasoline dispenser through which the gasoline is sold. If two or more
kinds of gasoline are sold with different octane ratings from a single
dispenser, then separate labels must be placed for each kind of gasoline on
each face of the dispenser.
   (b)   (1)   The label or labels must be placed conspicuously on the
dispenser so as to be in full view of consumers as near as reasonably practical
to the price per gallon of the gasoline.
      (2)   Petitions for an exemption from the placement requirements are to
be submitted in writing to the secretary of the United States Federal Trade
Commission. The petition must include the reasons for the desired exemption.
   (c)   (1) If the gasoline is not blended with other gasoline, then the
posting must be consistent with the certified octane rating. If the gasoline is
blended with other gasoline, then the posting must be consistent with the
determination of the average, weighted by volume, of the certified octane
ratings for each gasoline in the blend, or consistent with the lowest octane
rating certified for any gasoline in the blend. Whether the gasoline is blended
or not, a retailer may choose to post the determination of the octane rating
according to the method below, which is in accordance with Part 306.4 of the
Federal Trade Commission regulations.
      (2)   To Determine Octane Rating.
         (i)   Refiners, importers or producers must determine the octane
rating of all gasoline before it is transferred. This can be done by the
refiner, importer, producer, or through a testing lab.
         (ii)   (A)   To find the octane rating, add the research octane number
and the motor octane number and divide by two as explained by the American
Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) in ASTM D 439-78, entitled "Standard
Specifications for Automotive Gasoline." To determine the research octane
number, use ASTM standard test method D 2699-75 and to determine the motor
octane number, use ASTM standard test method D 2700-75.
            (B)   If ASTM changes these standards, there will be a 30-day
comment period, beginning after the Commission publishes the change in the
FEDERAL REGISTER. During this time, Commission staff or any person affected by
the change may petition the Commission not to adopt the change because it is a
change in the procedures for determining octane ratings, or to extend the
length of time of the grace period that follows the comment period. If based on
comments, the Commission decides to permit incorporation of the change into the
rule. The change will become effective 60 days after expiration of the comment
period, unless this period is extended by the Commission. If the Commission
decides not to permit automatic incorporation, formal procedures may be
initiated to evaluate the change.
   (d)   (1)   Retailers must maintain and replace labels as needed to make
sure consumers can easily see and read them.
      (2)   If the labels are destroyed or are unusable or unreasonable for
some unexpected reason, a retailer may post a temporary label as much like the
required label as possible. However, the required label must be posted as soon
as possible.
      (3)   Retailers who receive gasoline from a common carrier, must receive,
from the common carrier, a certification of the octane rating of the gasoline,
either by letter or on the delivery ticket or other paper.
§ 4-71 Octane Posting Labels.
All labels must meet the following specifications:
   (a)   Layout. The label is 3" wide × 2 1/2" long. Helvetica type is used
throughout except for the octane rating number which is in Franklin gothic
type. Spacing of the label is 1/4" between the top border and the first line of
text, 1/8" between the first and second line of text, 1/4" between the octane
rating and the line of text above it. All text and numerals are centered within
the interior borders.
   (b)   Type size and setting. The Helvetica series is used for all numbers
and letters with the exception of the octane rating number. Helvetica is
available in a variety of phototype setting systems and by linotype.The line
"MINIMUM OCTANE RATING" is set in 12 point Helvetica Bold, all capitals, with
letterspace set at 12 1/2 points. The line "(R M)/2 METHOD" is set in 10 point
Helvetica Bold, all capitals, with letterspace set 10 1/2 points. The octane
number is set in 96 point Franklin gothic condensed with 1/8" space between the
numbers.
   (c)   Colors. The basic color on all labels is process yellow. All type is
process black. All borders are process black. Both colors must be non-fade.
   (d)   Contents. The proper octane rating for each gasoline must be shown. No
marks or information other than that called for by this rule may appear on the
label.
Subchapter F: Moisture Content of Processed Meats and Meat Products [Repealed]
§ 4-81 Definitions. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 4-82 Labels. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 4-83 Meat and Cheese Products. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 4-84 Invoices. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 4-85 Inspection of Invoices. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 4-86 Labeler Identified. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 4-87 Wholesale Labels. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 4-88 Delivery Invoices and Inventory Sheets. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 4-89 Bulk Parts and Cuts. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 4-90 Retail Containers. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 4-91 Variations in Moisture Content. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 4-92 Display and Legibility. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 4-93 Punishment. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 4-94 Violations. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021)
Subchapter G: Etching Acids
§ 4-100 Valid Photo Identification.
The valid photo identification that a dealer of etching acid shall request from
each purchaser of etching acid must:
   (a)   be issued by a government entity, including a foreign government or a
duly accredited educational institution,
   (b)   be issued as a tamper-proof document, and
   (c)   include the name, date of birth and photograph of the person it
identifies.
§ 4-101 Purchasing Records to be Maintained.
   (a)   A dealer of etching acid shall record the following information about
each sale of etching acid:
      1.   the date of the sale;
      2.   the name and age of the purchaser as shown on the valid
identification provided by the buyer;
      3.   a complete description of the valid identification document that was
accepted, including the name of the issuing agency, the type of identification
document, the expiration date of the document, and any identification number or
code appearing on the document;
      4.   the amount of etching acid sold to the purchaser; and
      5.   the unit price of the etching acid and the total cost of the
purchase.
   (b)   The above information shall be:
      1.   recorded in writing on a separate page for each transaction and kept
in chronological order by the date of each sale, either in a bound volume or in
a separate file, where only such documents are retained; or
      2.   retained in an electronic format and maintained in a data base from
which the information can be retrieved by the date of the sale, the identity of
the purchaser and the type of identification that was used.
§ 4-102 Posting of Notice.
   (a)   The notice of the required information must be conspicuously posted at
the point of sale, shall include a statement that reads substantially as
follows and shall be printed as indicated in brackets: "NOTICE TO ETCHING ACID
PURCHASERS: [To be printed in capital letters in 16-point bold-faced type] You
are required by law to furnish us with a valid, government-issued photo
identification card, and we are required to record and maintain personal
information about you that identifies you. [To be printed in 14-point type]
   (b)   The sign shall be sufficiently large to contain the statement in the
specified print size.
Subchapter H: Perishable Foods
§ 4-111 Definitions.
For the purposes of the application of these 6 RCNY §§
4-111 through
4-114 (unless the context indicates otherwise) the following definitions apply:
Sell or offer to sell. "Sell" or "offer to sell" shall mean the act of selling,
displaying, or offering for sale by a retailer or retail entity to the public
for off-premises human consumption.
§ 4-112 Display of Required Information.
   (a)   On the containers of all foods specified in 6 RCNY §
4-113 there shall be stamped, printed or otherwise plainly and conspicuously
marked, a statement indicating recommended conditions and methods of storage.
   (b)   On the containers of all foods specified in 6 RCNY §
4-113 there shall be stamped, printed or otherwise plainly and conspicuously
marked either the last day or date of sale or the last day or date for
recommended usage.
   (c)   The information required in subdivisions (a) and (b) of this 6 RCNY §
4-112 shall be clearly marked on each and every package or item as follows:
      (1)   the information shall appear on the top cover or principal panel of
its container, or, on a label affixed thereto; or
      (2)   a notice shall appear on the top cover or principal panel or on a
label affixed thereto indicating the location on the package of such
information.
§ 4-113 Perishable Foods Covered.
The following commodities shall be labeled in accordance with the provisions of
§ 20-685 of the Administrative Code "Perishable foods," and 6 RCNY §
4-112 governing the labeling of perishable foods:
   (a)   Eggs – Grade AA, Grade A and Grade B shell eggs.
   (b)   All pre-packaged, fully or partially prepared baked goods, which have
a moisture content exceeding 18 per cent, with or without additives known as:
      (1)   Bread, rolls and buns as defined in Title 21, Chapter 1, Part 17 of
the Code of Federal Regulations, except those products traditionally known as
"fruit-cake"
      (2)   Cakes, pastries and cookies, except those that are offered for sale
in individual, portionpack, snack type packages;
      (3)   English muffins, corn muffins, bran muffins and other similar
products.
   (c)   The following pre-packaged dairy and dairy-type products:
      (1)   Those products with or without additives or flavorings, known as
cheese, as defined in Title 21, Chapter 1, Part 19, §§ 19.499 through 19.685 of
the Code of Federal Regulations, that contain 50 per cent or more moisture in
the finished product.
      (2)   Low-fat, multi-vitamin, multi-mineral type milk products, which are
normally stored at temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit and 40 degrees
Fahrenheit;
      (3)   Flavored milk;
      (4)   Cultured milk, cultured milk products, cultured skim-milk and
cultured skim milk products, with or without fruits, vegetables, meats or
cheeses, or other additives;
      (5)   Milk shake;
      (6)   Eggnog;
      (7)   Yogurt, made from skim-milk or whole milk, with or without fruits,
vegetables, meats or other additives;
      (8)   Whipped cream and instant whipped cream;
      (9)   Sour cream, cultured cream, salad cream, and non-cultured sour
cream, with or without fruits, vegetables, meats or cheese or other additives;
      (10)   Sour half and half, cultured half and half, non-cultured sour half
and half and non-cultured half and half;
      (11)   Dairy dressing, and dairy dip;
      (12)   Non-dairy coffee creamers which are normally stored at
temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit and 40 degrees Fahrenheit.
   (d)   All pre-packaged, prepared foods which require refrigeration.
§ 4-114 Exemptions.
   (a)   This subchapter shall not include any product stored in a retail store
at or below a temperature of 32 degrees Fahrenheit, in accordance with the
recommendations of the manufacturer or processor.
   (b)   This subchapter shall not include any product hereinabove designated
which is sterilized when hermetically sealed and packaged and is so maintained
until the time of sale by a retailer to the public.
   (c)   This subchapter shall not include products made from products after
the date marked where such secondary products are the result of an additional
processing stage.
   (d)   Upon written application to the Commissioner, and upon a showing of
exceptional circumstances, a manufacturer or processor may be granted an
extension in writing, not to exceed six months, in which to comply, in whole or
in part, with the requirements of 6 RCNY §
4-112. In the event that a manufacturer or processor has substantially complied
with 6 RCNY §
4-112 during the previously granted extension period, but exceptional
circumstances exist which render full compliance during the extension period
impossible, impracticable, or create undue financial hardship, a manufacturer
or processor may apply in writing to the Commissioner for an additional final
extension in order to fully comply with 6 RCNY §
4-112. Any request for an additional final extension must be supported by
evidence of exceptional circumstances and substantial compliance during the
previously granted extension period. The granting of a further extension, if
any, shall be in the discretion of the Commissioner.
Subchapter I: List of All Populations of Endangered or Threatened Species
§ 4-120 Definitions.
   (a)   Terms used in this subchapter shall have the meanings specified in §
20-698 of the New York City Administrative Code.
   (b)   Whenever used in this subchapter, the term:
      (1)   "All populations" means every member of the species identified as
an endangered or threatened species wherever such members are found.
      (2)   "Endangered or threatened species list" or "list" means the
information published by the commissioner on the department's website that
references endangered or threatened species and that specifically identifies
which of such species includes all populations.
§ 4-121 Publication of Endangered or Threatened Species List.
   (a)   The commissioner shall publish the endangered or threatened species
list by April 1, 2005 and annually thereafter on the same date or on the first
business day thereafter on the website of the department. Such list shall be
published in English and in Chinese.
   (b)   The endangered or threatened species list shall:
      (1)   include a description of the contents of, and a link to, the
website of the New York Department of Environmental Conservation that
identifies all endangered or threatened species; and
      (2)   identify by common name such of the endangered or threatened
species that includes all populations.
§ 4-122 Selection of Species Including All Populations.
The commissioner shall, prior to the publication of the endangered or
threatened species list, determine which of the threatened and endangered
species includes all populations, and shall identify such species by common
name in the endangered or threatened species list.
§ 4-123 Identification of Prohibited Products.
   (a)   Any product that is labeled, advertised or described as containing any
part or ingredient derived from a species identified as including all
populations in the endangered or threatened species list shall be subject to
the prohibitions specified in § 20-699 of the New York City Administrative
Code.
   (b)   Any member, or any part derived from a member of an endangered or
threatened species identified by the common or scientific name that is listed
on the website of the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation,
which will be linked to the website of the department, shall be subject to the
prohibitions specified in § 20-699 of the New York City Administrative Code.
Subchapter J: Retail Laundries
§ 4-130. Definitions.
Laundry service. The term "laundry service" means washing, drying, starching or
ironing laundry for a fee, and includes such services when they are provided
along with or as an incident to the rental of clothing, apparel or other
fabrics. The term "laundry service" does not include dry cleaning.
Retail laundry. The term "retail laundry" means (i) a business that provides
laundry services to the general public; (ii) a business that stores or collects
laundry for laundry services or delivery for the general public; or (iii) a
business that offers self-service laundry machinery for direct use by the
general public. The term "retail laundry" does not include the laundry
facilities of any hospital or the laundry facilities of any residential
dwelling intended for use exclusively by the owners, tenants or occupants of
such dwelling.
(Added City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022)
§ 4-131. General Provisions.
   (a)   Disclosures. 
      (1)   Each retail laundry must display prominently and conspicuously on
its premises, at the point at which orders are placed or payment is made, a
price list sign providing:
         (i)   a list of all services offered by the retail laundry regardless
of whether the services meet the definition of a laundry service;
         (ii)   the minimum fee charged for each service;
         (iii)   factors which may cause the fee to be higher than the minimum
fee and, for each factor listed, the additional fee or the range of possible
additional fees charged. That list of factors must include, but is not limited
to whether a minimum weight is required for a service and if so the fee for
that minimum weight, and the additional fee or the range of possible additional
fees charged in excess of the minimum weight.
      (2)   Compliance by a retail laundry with subdivision (a)(1) of this
section satisfies the requirements of § 20-750(a) of the Administrative Code
and 6 RCNY §
5-70(a). The requirements of subdivision (a)(1) of this section apply to all
services offered by the retail laundry, regardless of whether such services
pertain to laundry services.
      (3)   (i)   Each retail laundry must also post the price list information
required by subdivision (a)(1) of this section on its website and within any
mobile application that provides access to the retail laundry's services. As
used in this section, "mobile application" means any software program residing
on a smartphone or other electronic device that a consumer may download from a
retail laundry's website or any other source.
         (ii)   The price list information must be posted at the point at which
orders are placed or payment is made and in lettering that is clear and
legible.
      (4)   Each retail laundry that offers self-service laundry machinery for
direct use by the general public shall display:
         (i)   prominently and conspicuously on its premises, in letters no
less than two inches in height, a sign stating "All complaints and claims for
refunds can be made to the attendant or, if an attendant is not present, to
_______________." The retail laundry must provide in the blank space the name,
address and telephone number of the person or persons to whom the complaints
and claims for refunds are to be made.
         (ii)   at each defective or inoperable machine, in letters no less
than two inches in height, a sign stating "OUT OF ORDER."
   (b)   Refunds. Each retail laundry that offers self-service laundry
machinery for direct use by the general public must provide a refund for any
money lost by reason of defective or inoperable machines.
   (c)   Scales. Each retail laundry that charges for its services on the basis
of weight must use a scale of a type and design that has been approved by the
New York State Department of Agriculture & Markets and tested and sealed by the
Department pursuant to Chapter 3 of Title 20 of the Administrative Code. The
retail laundry must make the scale available for inspection by the Department
during business hours.
(Added City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022)
Subchapter K: Amusement Devices, Amusement Arcades, Amusement Operators, and
Gaming Cafes
§ 4-140 Definitions.
Accident. The term "accident" means a mechanical, electrical or structural
malfunction which caused or could cause human injury or damage to property.
Amusement device. The term "amusement device" means any contrivance, open to
the public, that carries and conveys passengers along, around or over a fixed
or restricted course or within a defined area for the purpose of amusing or
entertaining its passengers, other than coin-operated amusement devices as
defined in § 20-626 of the New York City Administrative Code.
Amusement operator. The term "amusement operator" means any person who
maintains or operates any amusement device.
Gaming cafe. The term "gaming cafe" means a place where, for a fee charged
directly or indirectly, persons are provided access to three or more computers
or electronic devices in which game software has been installed by or for the
owner or operator for the purpose of playing a game on the premises.
(Added City Record 3/11/2022, eff. 4/10/2022)
§ 4-141 Notification of Accidents Relating to Amusement Devices.
   a.   Every amusement operator must submit to the Department, on a form
provided for such purpose by the Department on its website, a written report of
every accident relating to an amusement device within 24 hours after the
occurrence of such accident. Such completed form must be signed by the
amusement operator or his or her agent.
   b.   Whenever any person sustains an injury requiring medical treatment or
dies in an accident related to an amusement device, the amusement operator who
maintains or operates such amusement device must immediately notify the
Department by telephone and by facsimile transmission to the telephone numbers
prescribed by the Department, and furnish such information as is sufficient to
identify the time and location of the accident and the nature of the injuries
sustained by any person.
(Added City Record 3/11/2022, eff. 4/10/2022)
§ 4-142 Sign Requirements for Amusement Arcades and Gaming Cafes.
Each amusement arcade or gaming cafe owner or operator must prominently post in
his or her establishment an 11 inch by 17 inch sign containing a notice that
must be substantially worded as follows: "Warning! Unless exempt under New York
State Education Law, persons under the age of 18 are not allowed on these
premises Monday through Friday, between the hours of 9 a.m. and 3 p.m. during
the regularly scheduled school year. New York State truancy laws will be
enforced against such persons who remain upon these premises during those
hours." The requirements of this section may be fulfilled by posting a color
print of the amusement arcades and gaming cafes truancy sign, which is publicly
available on the Department's website, in a clear and conspicuous manner in the
establishment.
(Added City Record 3/11/2022, eff. 4/10/2022)
Subchapter L: Powered Mobility Devices
§ 4-150 Accredited Testing Laboratories.
“Accredited testing laboratory,” as used in § 20-610 of the Administrative
Code, shall mean any laboratory that:
   (i)   is an International Organization for Standardization and International
Electrotechnical Commission (ISO/IEC) 17025 Accredited Independent Testing
Laboratory;
   (ii)   is an International Organization for Standardization and
International Electrotechnical Commission (ISO/IEC) 17065 Accredited Certifying
Body; or
   (iii)   is identified as a Nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory by the
United States Department of Labor Occupational Safety and Health
Administration.
(Added City Record 12/4/2023, eff. 1/3/2024)
Chapter 5: Unfair Trade Practices
Subchapter A: Consumer Protection Law
 Part 1: General Provisions
§ 5-01 Definitions.
Consumer. "Consumer" means an individual who buys or leases consumer goods or
services, and that individual's co-obligor or surety.
Consumer goods and services. "Consumer goods and services" means goods or
services (including credit) that are primarily for personal, household, or
family purposes.
Item. "Item" means goods and services.
Legal name. "Legal name" means:
   (1)   the true corporate name of a corporation; or
   (2)   the name of at least one partner of a partnership; or
   (3)   the name of at least one owner of a business that is not a corporation
or a partnership.
Seller. "Seller" means any individual or business that offers to sell or lease
consumer goods or services. "Seller" includes manufacturers, wholesalers, and
others who are responsible for any act or practice regulated by this code.
 Part 2: Advertising and Promotion
§ 5-06 The Word "Free" and Similar Representations.
   (a)   Scope. This section governs the use of the words "free," "gift,"
"given without charge," "bonus," "1¢ additional," and any other terms which
imply that an item, as defined in 6 RCNY §
5-01, is free or offered at a nominal cost in the sale or offering for sale of
any consumer goods or services. It governs signs inside stores, storefront
advertising, handbills and all other types of written advertisement, but not
advertising on packages placed thereon by a person or entity other than the
retailer. In this section, the word "free" refers to any word or phrase of
similar meaning. A "free offer" is an offer involving the use of any such word
or phrase.
   (b)   Disclosure of conditions on free offers. A seller who imposes a
condition on a free offer must describe the condition clearly and
conspicuously. The description of every condition on a free offer must be
placed near the word "free." An asterisk or other symbol near the word "free,"
which refers the customer to a footnote containing conditions, does not satisfy
this section. This condition must be in print at least half as large as the
print used for the word "free."
   (c)   Free offers conditioned upon another purchase.
      (1)   The "regular price" is the price at which an item has been actively
and openly sold by the seller for a substantial period of time in the recent
past.
      (2)   A seller who makes a free offer contingent upon another purchase
may not:
         (i)   charge more than the regular price for the item; or
         (ii)   reduce the item's quantity or quality; or
         (iii)   continuously make such offer or repeat it so frequently that
the two items are being sold in combination at one price; or
         (iv)   make such offer in connection with the sale of an item that is
usually sold at a price negotiated with consumers.
   (d)   Combination offers. This section permits non-deceptive "combination"
offers, in which two or more items (for example, toothpaste and a toothbrush)
are offered for sale as a single unit at a single stated price.
§ 5-07 Number Size in Advertised Prices.
   (a)   Sellers who advertise a price over one dollar must state the number of
cents in figures at least one-half as tall and broad as the figures used to
state the number of dollars.
   (b)   This section does not apply when the advertised price is stated in
whole dollar amounts. For example, if the price is $6.00, the zeros may be less
than half the size of the six.
§ 5-08 Sales Promotions.
Sellers must comply with the provisions of § 369-ee of the New York State
General Business Law ("Prize award schemes").
§ 5-09 Limitations on Offers.
   (a)   Sellers offering consumer goods or services in print advertising and
promotional literature must disclose clearly and conspicuously all material
exclusions, reservations, limitations, modifications or conditions. A
disclosure made in print at least one-third as large as the largest print used
in the advertisement or promotional literature satisfies this section.
Examples: If the following facts are true, they must be disclosed:
      (1)   In an advertisement for an item sold from more than one location:
         (i)   locations which do not have certain items mentioned and
         (ii)   locations which charge rates higher than those mentioned in the
advertisement. Where such locations are not known and cannot be reasonably
ascertained, a seller must include the following statement in the
advertisement: "Not available at all locations." The seller shall also include
a statement in the advertisement that indicates how a consumer may obtain
information about the availability of an item at a specific location such as:
"Check with your local store for availability."
      (2)   That advertised prices are available only during certain days or
times.
      (3)   That advertised prices are available only if complete sets are
purchased.
      (4)   That minimum or maximum amounts must be purchased for advertised
prices to apply.
      (5)   That there are trade-in requirements.
      (6)   That there are additional charges for delivery or for mail orders.
   (b)   Offers in radio or television advertising must include oral statements
of any material exclusions, limitations, modifications or conditions.
   (c)   This section does not apply when another law or regulation
specifically provides a different rule for the disclosure of exclusions,
reservations, limitations, modifications or conditions.
§ 5-10 Deceptive Classified Ads.
   (a)   Dealers, brokers, or business entities advertising in the classified
section of a newspaper, magazine or other printed media must disclose that they
are businesses.
   (b)   An advertiser can disclose that it is a business by use of the word
"dealer," "broker," or other similar terms.
   (c)   Examples: A dealer's classified ad which reads: "Dodge '68 $795, Call
OF7-1452" would not satisfy the requirements of this Regulation because it does
not disclose that the advertiser is a business. A classified ad which reads: "3
room apt., $160, call Acme Rental, Inc." sufficiently discloses that the
advertiser is a business.
§ 5-11 Limited Editions.
   (a)   Items offered for sale to consumers may not be described as limited
unless their edition, printing, minting, crafting, or production is restricted
to either:
      (1)   A predetermined maximum quantity; or
      (2)   The actual quantity ordered or subscribed to within a specified,
reasonably short time. All terms that indicate that production of a product is
limited are covered by this section.
   (b)   Any claim that a product is limited must state the maximum quantity or
the specific time period or date by which the product must be ordered. This
statement must be made clearly and conspicuously and close to the claim or
limitation.
§ 5-12 Prices in Multi-Product and Multi-Service Advertisements.
   (a)   In any advertisement for two or more similar items or services, when a
range of prices is stated, or the existence of a range is implied, the highest
price must be stated in figures at least as tall and broad as the figures in
the lowest price stated. The existence of a range is implied where words such
as, but not limited to, "from," "as low as," "beginning at," "starting at," or
"______ and up" are used in an advertisement. This subdivision (a) applies even
where an advertisement discloses the price of all items and services.
   (b)   Any prices stated must relate to specific items or services.
   (c)   If the price of items or services is unascertainable, any price or
prices stated must include the average price for which the goods or services
were sold by the advertiser during the previous year or selling season. Such a
price must be described as the "average price."
§ 5-13 Advertisements Claiming to Boost the Immune System.
   (a)   It is a deceptive trade practice to make a claim or to imply in an
advertisement that the use of a product or treatment will boost, enhance,
stimulate, assist, cure, strengthen or improve the body's immune system unless
such advertisement discloses either:
      (1)   the effect of the treatment or use of the product on an HIV-
positive person or a person with AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome) or;
      (2)   that use of the products or treatment has not been proven to
prevent primary infection with HIV, nor is to be a cure for AIDS, nor to extend
the life or improve the health of an HIV-positive person or a person infected
with AIDS.
   (b)   Any claimed effects of the treatment or use of the product on an HIV-
positive person or a person with AIDS in an advertisement shall be deemed a
deceptive practice unless such claims are capable of being substantiated by
scientific documentation including, but not limited to, medical clinical
trials, small scale and informal clinical trials, compilations of clinical data
from patients or other clinical information. Such documentation must support
any claimed effects of the treatment or use of the product on an HIV-positive
person or a person with AIDS. All documentation must be made available at the
request of a consumer.
   (c)   All disclosures and words of limitation or qualification as required
by this section shall be written or printed in letters at least one third as
high and one third as broad as the largest words or numbers appearing in the
advertisement, but in no event in less than ten point type./n radio
announcements, the disclosure or words of limitation or qualification shall be
clearly spoken, and in television announcements they shall be part of the audio
track and not merely part of the picture.
§ 5-14 Certifications.
   (a)   It shall be a deceptive trade practice for a seller to represent a
good or service as “certified” or “certified pre-owned” unless (1) such
certification is based upon specific criteria established by an entity other
than the seller; (2) the entity that established such criteria is clearly and
conspicuously disclosed; (3) the seller is authorized by said entity to offer
for sale such “certified” or “certified pre-owned” goods or services; (4) the
certification criteria, as well as confirmation the good or service has met
such criteria, are provided to the buyer prior to sale; and (5) the good or
service satisfies the certification criteria.
   (b)   It shall be a deceptive trade practice for a seller to represent a
good as manufacturer certified, unless, in addition to the requirements of
subdivision (a) of this section, such certification is based upon specific
criteria established by the manufacturer, and the seller is authorized by the
manufacturer to offer for sale such manufacturer certified.
   (c)   It shall be a deceptive trade practice for a second-hand automobile
dealer to make any representation that has the tendency or effect of misleading
a consumer to believe that certification of a second-hand automobile pursuant
to section 417 of the New York Vehicle and Traffic Law confers any sponsorship,
approval, certification, accessories, characteristics, approval, or status
other than meeting the minimum standards required by sections 417 and 419-a of
the New York Vehicle and Traffic Law.
(Added City Record 3/19/2024, eff. 4/18/2024)
Part 3: Consumer Credit
§ 5-21 Compliance with Federal, State and Local Laws Regarding the Extension of
Credit.
   (a)   Scope. This section applies to all persons and businesses engaging in
activities relating to consumer credit. In this section, such persons and
businesses are called creditors.
   (b)   Creditors must comply with all applicable federal, state and local
laws relating to consumer credit.
§ 5-22 [Reserved.]
§ 5-23 Layaway Plans.
Merchants who accept payment from a consumer that will be applied to the
purchase of merchandise on a "layaway plan," as such term is defined in § 396-
t of the New York General Business Law, must comply with all the requirements
of that section.
§ 5-24 Credit Card Limitations.
   (a)   A seller who accepts credit cards must conspicuously disclose every
limitation the seller imposes on their use and must comply with all provisions
of New York General Business Law § 518.
   (b)   Disclosures required by this section must appear at or near every
entrance to the seller's business premises and in all advertising that
indicates credit cards are accepted. Where a disclosure is required by this
section to be consistent with the notice requirements of New York General
Business Law § 518, such disclosure must be clearly and conspicuously posted in
compliance with such section.
(Amended City Record 6/6/2025, eff. 8/5/2025)
Part 4: Contracts and General Business Practices
§ 5-31 Future Services Contracts.
   (a)   Definition. A contract for consumer services that will be provided on
a continuing basis is a "contract for future consumer services." However, this
section does not apply to:
      (1)   boarding accommodations;
      (2)   travel arrangements made less than a year in advance;
      (3)   the sale of goods which include warranties of service and repair;
      (4)   services by non-profit educational institutions.
   (b)   Liability for cancellation. A consumer who cancels a contract for
future services cannot be charged more than the full contract price. However,
up to the amount of the full contract price, the consumer may be charged the
total of the following amounts:
      (1)   5 percent of the cash price, or $50, whichever is less;
      (2)   the cost to the seller for any goods the consumer used or the
consumer is keeping; (3) the portion of the full contract price representing
services received by the consumer (if a consumer cancels a contract for lessons
by missing consecutive lessons that represent at least 25 percent of the
lessons in the entire course, those missed lessons up to 25 percent can be
treated as services received by the consumer).
   (c)   Prompt refunds. If a buyer has paid a seller more money than this
section allows a seller to keep, the seller must refund the extra payment, or
make a refund available, within ten days of cancellation.
   (d)   Cancellation. Cancellation occurs when:
      (1)   the consumer mails the seller notice of intent to cancel; or
      (2)   the seller actually knows the consumer intends to cancel; or
      (3)   the consumer misses consecutive lessons that represent at least 25
percent of an entire course, and the consumer does not inform the seller in
writing that he or she intends to remain enrolled.
   (e)   Notice. The seller's contract form must conspicuously disclose the
seller's refund policy, and must contain the following notice in a prominent
place: IF YOU CANCEL THIS CONTRACT (THE SELLER) MAY KEEP ONLY 5% OF THE CASH
PRICE UP TO A MAXIMUM OF $50, PLUS A PORTION OF THE CONTRACT PRICE BASED UPON
THE LESSONS OR SERVICES YOU HAVE USED. YOU MAY NOTIFY (THE SELLER) OF YOUR
INTENT TO CANCEL BY MAIL, ADDRESSED TO (THE SELLER) AT (SELLER'S ADDRESS).
§ 5-32 Documentation of Transactions.
   (a)   Definitions.
      Audio equipment. "Audio equipment" means any apparatus or equipment that
is used for sound reproduction, including but not limited to amplifiers,
phonographs, radios, receivers, speakers, tape players, tape recorders and
turntables. Audio equipment does not include prerecorded or blank audio
recording tape or records.
      Photographic equipment. "Photographic equipment" means any apparatus or
equipment used for the taking of photographs, including but not limited to
cameras, camera cases, lenses and tripods. "Photographic equipment" does not
include film, photograph albums or apparatus or equipment used to develop or
enlarge photographs.
      Video equipment. "Video equipment" means televisions and any apparatus or
equipment that is used in the process of producing images on a television set,
including but not limited to video disk players, video game units and
cartridges, video tape players and video tape recorders. "Video equipment" does
not include prerecorded video discs and tapes or blank video tapes.
   (b)   Receipts. A seller must:
      (1)   offer a consumer a receipt for any retail purchase if the amount of
the purchase is twenty dollars or more; and
      (2)   provide a consumer with a receipt upon request for any retail
purchase if the amount of the purchase is between five and twenty dollars.
   (c)   Contents of receipts. The receipt must contain:
      (1)   the amount of money paid for each item;
      (2)   the total amount of money paid including a separate statement of
tax;
      (3)   the date of the purchase;
      (4)   the legal name and address of the seller in accordance with Section
"Legal Name" (5) where the cost of any item of "audio equipment," "photographic
equipment" or "video equipment" exceeds one hundred dollars, any make and model
number.
   (d)   Exemptions. This section applies to the retail sale of all consumer
goods and services except:
      (1)   food or drink intended for on-premises consumption; or
      (2)   oil, gasoline or parking fees paid for in cash. Sellers of these
goods and services must provide consumers with receipts upon request if the
amount of a purchase is more than five dollars.
   (e)   Register tapes. A seller of food or drink for off-premises consumption
may give the consumer a register tape containing the seller's name, the date,
and the individual prices of items bought instead of giving a receipt.
   (f)   Other documents. Upon request, a seller must provide a consumer with a
copy of any document related to the sale which was signed by the consumer.
§ 5-33 Transactions Negotiated in Spanish.
   (a)   Scope. This section applies to the purchase or lease of consumer goods
and services by means of an agreement to pay in installments.
   (b)   When essential parts of a consumer agreement are negotiated in
Spanish, the consumer must be given a Spanish translation of any documents
related to the agreement. This requirement includes:
      (1)   any document which the consumer signs;
      (2)   any document containing the merchant's policy on refunds,
cancellations or exchanges;
      (3)   any document containing terms and conditions of the agreement;
      (4)   any guarantees or warranties given by the merchant;
      (5)   any exclusion or modification of express or implied warranties. The
consumer need not be given a Spanish translation of any document which the
consumer will receive at a later date, such as monthly bills and sales slips
for charge account purchases.
§ 5-34 Contract Cancellations.
   (a)   A contract for consumer goods or services may not be described as non-
cancellable, unless the seller has performed all its obligations at the time
the consumer signs the contract.
   (b)   A contract that complies with 6 RCNY §
5-34(a) may describe the fee or penalty that will be imposed if the consumer
cancels, or may state that the consumer who does not perform his or her
obligations under the contract will be responsible to the seller for damages.
§ 5-35 Pricing of Items with Manufacturer's Suggested Prices.
   (a)   Definition. 
      Manufacturer's suggested retail price. "Manufacturer's suggested retail
price" means the list price, catalog price or any other retail price
recommended by the manufacturer.
   (b)   A seller who sells or offers to sell any new item for more than the
manufacturer's suggested retail price must:
      (1)   disclose the selling price;
      (2)   disclose the manufacturer's suggested retail price; and
      (3)   identify the manufacturer's suggested retail price as the price
recommended by the manufacturer.
   (c)   The required information must be printed clearly and conspicuously on
the item's price tag or label, and in any advertisement that states the item's
selling price.
§ 5-36 Sale of Used Items.
   (a)   A seller of a used item must disclose clearly that the item is used,
in any advertisement or sales transaction concerning the used item.
   (b)   Words such as "used," "antique," "demonstrator," "floor model,"
"rebuilt," "renovated," "restyled," or "remodeled" may be used to indicate that
an item is used.
§ 5-37 Disclosure of Refund Policy.
Sellers of consumer goods and services must comply with all provisions of New
York General Business Law § 218-a. This regulation does not limit a consumer's
right to receive a refund, credit, exchange, or anything else permitted by law.
§ 5-38 Goods Temporarily in Short Supply.
   (a)   Scope. This section governs the sale of items which are temporarily in
short supply because of extraordinary circumstances. Extraordinary
circumstances can include fuel shortages, weather conditions, power failures,
and strikes which result in limited deliveries of items to New York City
consumers.
   (b)   Declaration of temporary shortage. The Commissioner of the Department
of Consumer Affairs shall make declarations about items temporarily in short
supply by:
      (1)   filing a declaration as soon as possible with the City Clerk; and
      (2)   publishing the declaration as soon as possible in The City Record;
and
      (3)   sending the declaration to the media specified in Section 1043 of
the Charter. A declaration of temporary shortage shall expire in 30 days,
unless it is terminated sooner by declaration. The Commissioner may issue a
renewed declaration of temporary shortage upon expiration of the original
declaration.
   (c)   Unconscionable sales practices. A seller of items the Commissioner has
declared in short supply may not:
      (1)   increase prices in excess of an amount reflecting normal market
fluctuations, except in accordance with the exemption rules in 6 RCNY §
5-38(e);
      (2)   require consumers to purchase another item in order to get the item
in short supply, if no additional purchase was required before the shortage;
      (3)   require the purchase of a minimum quantity of the item in short
supply;
      (4)   fail to give all consumers an equal opportunity to purchase the
item in short supply (to the extent that such opportunity existed before the
temporary shortage). A seller may, however, give preference to a category of
consumers having a special health- or safety-related need for the item in short
supply.
   (d)   Deceptive sales practices prohibited. A seller of items the
Commissioner has declared temporarily in short supply:
      (1)   may not represent falsely that an item is not available;
      (2)   must disclose any limitation or condition on sale of an item
conspicuously in a sign at the point of sale.
   (e)   Exemption.
      (1)   A seller of items the Commissioner has declared temporarily in
short supply may increase prices in excess of an amount reflecting normal
market fluctuations if he or she can show that additional costs have been
incurred in providing the item, through no fault of the seller or as a result
of the seller's attempt to give consumers additional opportunities to purchase
the item (for example, by increasing the hours during which an item can be
purchased). This exemption only applies to the increased cost incurred by the
seller.
      (2)   This exemption does not apply when another law or regulation
prohibits a price increase.
      (3)   A seller using this exemption must keep records, for one year, of
the increased costs incurred. The records shall be made available upon demand
to the Department of Consumer Affairs.
   (f)   Failure to comply with this section within two days of an original
declaration will not result in any penalty if the seller proves that he or she
did not know of the declaration.
§ 5-39 Cancellation of Home Appointments.
   (a)   Cancellation of home appointments.
      (1)   When a seller makes an appointment with a consumer to pick up,
deliver, inspect or repair goods at the consumer's home, the seller must keep
the appointment or give the consumer written or verbal notice of cancellation.
The notice must be received before the end of the business day before the day
of the appointment. If it is impossible for the seller to give notice by the
end of the day before the appointment day, the seller must give notice as soon
as possible.
      (2)   When verbal notice is given, the seller must mail a notice of the
cancellation the next day. This need not be done, however, if the seller and
consumer reschedule the appointment for a date within three days of the date
the seller cancelled.
      (3)   A seller may cancel an appointment without notice only if the
cancellation is caused by the consumer, by natural disaster, or by strike.
Employee illness and mechanical breakdown do not relieve the seller of the
obligation to give notice.
   (b)   Record keeping. A seller who cancels an appointment must prepare, and
keep for one year, a record with the following information:
      (1)   seller's name;
      (2)   consumer's name and address;
      (3)   description of the goods;
      (4)   date of appointment which was cancelled;
      (5)   date appointment has been postponed to, if any;
      (6)   date that notice of cancellation was given.
§ 5-40 Liability for Negligence.
A seller may not state that it is not liable for damages caused by negligence,
if such a statement is invalid according to a statute, regulation or ordinance.
For example:
   (a)   lessors may not disclaim liability for negligent operation or
maintenance of leased premises;
   (b)   caterers may not disclaim liability for negligence at catered affairs;
   (c)   contractors may not disclaim liability for negligent construction,
maintenance or repair;
   (d)   architects, engineers and surveyors may not disclaim liability for
negligence;
   (e)   garagekeepers, parkers, or servicers of motor vehicles may not
disclaim liability for negligence;
   (f)   operators of pools, gymnasiums and places of public amusement or
recreation may not disclaim liability for negligence.
§ 5-41 Unlawful Sales Tax.
   It is a deceptive trade practice for any seller to collect sales tax on the
sale of any good or service that is not subject to such tax under Article 28 of
the New York State Tax Law or the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
(Added City Record 7/7/2016, eff. 8/6/2016)
§ 5-42 Unlawful Price Gouging.
   (a)   Definitions. 
      "Covered goods or services." The term "covered goods or services" means
goods or services that are essential to health, safety or welfare, or are
marketed or advertised as such, including but not limited to staple consumer
food items such as milk, eggs and bread, goods or services used for emergency
cleanup, or emergency supplies such as water, flashlights, radios, batteries,
candles, blankets, soaps, diapers, toiletries, medical supplies such as
medications, bandages, gauze, isopropyl alcohol, medical masks, and
antibacterial products, or gasoline or other motor fuels.
      "Excessive price." The term "excessive price" means 10 percent or more
above the price at which the same or similar good or service could have been
obtained by a buyer in the City of New York 30 - 60 days prior to the
declaration of a state of emergency.
      "Merchant." The term "merchant" means a seller, lessor, or creditor or
any other person who makes available either directly or indirectly, goods,
services or credit, to consumers. "Merchant" includes manufacturers,
wholesalers and others who are responsible for any act or practice prohibited
by this subchapter.
   (b)   (1)   It is an unconscionable trade practice for a merchant to sell or
offer for sale covered goods or services at an excessive price during a
declared state of emergency in the City of New York.
      (2)   Exceptions. A merchant is permitted to sell or offer for sale
covered goods or services at an excessive price if such merchant:
         (i)   has increased its price of such goods or services to an
excessive price as a direct result of costs imposed on such merchant by the
supplier of such goods or services, or such increase in the price of such goods
or services is directly attributable to additional costs for labor or materials
used to provide the goods or services, provided that the increase charged to
the buyer is comparable to the increase incurred by the merchant; or
         (ii)   sold or offered for sale such covered goods or services to
buyers in the City of New York at an excessive price 30 days prior to the
declaration of a state of emergency and such merchant has not increased the
price of such goods or services during the state of emergency, or in the 30
days prior to such declaration, except in accordance with subdivision (i).
      (3)   Each sale or offer for sale in violation of this rule constitutes a
separate violation.
(Added City Record 3/18/2020, eff. 3/18/2020 and City Record 6/26/2020, eff. 6/
26/2020)
Part 5: Specific Business and Industry Regulations
§ 5-46 Car Rental. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 5-47 Jewelry Sellers and Appraisers.
   (a)   Definitions. 
      Jewelry. "Jewelry" means unset rare gems, precious stones and semi-
precious stones, and articles for personal wear which contain rare gems,
precious stones or semi-precious stones.
      Standard of monetary value. "Standard of monetary value" means the basis
for measurement such as retail replacement value, wholesale value, or resale
value.
   (b)   Jewelry appraisals – requirements.
      (1)   Every written appraisal must state the standard of monetary value
used, clearly and on the same side of the paper that contains the appraised
value. If the standard used is the retail replacement value, the appraisal form
must contain a notice which states clearly and conspicuously:
         (i)   that the appraisal value is the approximate price at which
retail jewelry stores would sell the item;
         (ii)   that the consumer should not expect to be able to sell the item
at the appraised value;
         (iii)   that appraisers' opinions as to the value of jewelry vary by
as much as 25 percent; and
         (iv)   that the appraiser does not guarantee that it will buy the item
from the consumer if the consumer desires to resell it in the future. (If the
appraiser is willing to make such a guarantee, then it must state the price at
which it will buy the item.) This disclosure need not be made if the appraiser
never buys jewelry from members of the public.
      (2)   Example: The following notice would satisfy the requirements of 6
RCNY §
5-47(b), in the case of an appraiser who also buys from the public and who is
not willing to make any guarantees concerning purchase:
         Notice – This appraisal tells you the approximate price at which you
could replace this article with comparable merchandise at a retail jewelry
store which normally sells jewelry of like quality. You should not expect to be
able to sell the article for this amount. The opinions of appraisers concerning
value vary by up to 25 percent. This company does not promise to buy the
article from you at the appraised value or at any fraction of the appraised
value.
   (c)   Jewelry sales – requirements. A seller who offers to sell an article
of jewelry for more than $75.00 must give to the buyer, at or before the time
of sale, a written sales slip which conspicuously contains:
      (1)   the price;
      (2)   in the case of a diamond or any article containing a diamond, the
weight of the diamond(s) stated in the manner and within the limits of
tolerance established by the Federal Trade Commission; and
      (3)   a description of the article, stating all materials of which it is
composed. [If a synthetic gem's composition is a trade secret, its trade name
may be disclosed instead of its actual composition; in such a case, the words
"imitation" or "synthetic" must be placed immediately before or after the trade
name.]
   (d)   Sales and appraisals – prohibited practices. A seller may not mislead
the consumer about any characteristic of the jewelry, including its type, kind,
name, grade, quality, quantity, size, weight, cut, color, character, substance,
durability, origin, prior ownership, price or value.
§ 5-48 Mail Orders.
   (a)   Mail order sellers who conduct business in New York City or who
advertise a New York City mailing address must, within 30 days of receiving an
order:
      (1)   deliver or mail the ordered merchandise; or
      (2)   make a full refund; or
      (3)   inform the consumer in writing of the time delivery is anticipated,
and offer to send a refund within one week if the consumer wishes to cancel the
order; or
      (4)   inform the consumer in writing of the intent to substitute an equal
or better item if the consumer wishes to cancel the order (the seller must
describe in detail how the substituted item differs from the one ordered); or
      (5)   send the consumer a substitute item of equal or better quality
together with:
         (i)   a written notice offering, without condition, to accept the
return of the item, at the seller's expense, within 14 days of delivery; and
         (ii)   a business reply label, and an explanation that the consumer
may return the item by resealing it, affixing the label, and mailing it to the
seller without postage; and
         (iii)   a postage-paid letter or card on which the consumer may
indicate whether the consumer wishes the purchase price to be refunded or
credited to his account. The consumer's request entered on this card or letter
must be honored within two weeks of the time the seller receives the items.
   (b)   In this section, substitute items of "equal or better" quality means
items that are substantially similar to the items ordered, that fit the
purposes for which the ordered items were intended; and that are not normally
offered by the seller at a lower price than the price of the ordered items.
   (c)   6 RCNY §
5-48(a) does not apply to:
      (1)   items ordered under an open-end credit plan (as defined in the
federal Truth-in-Lending law) or under any other credit plan which was opened
prior to the mail order in question and which permits the consumer to make
future purchases; or
      (2)   items, such as quarterly magazines, which by their nature are not
produced until a future date, and so cannot be stocked at the time of the
order; or
      (3)   installments, other than the first, of items ordered for serial
delivery, such as magazine subscriptions. The 30-day period of 6 RCNY §
5-48(a) does not apply when all advertising for the item conspicuously
specifies a different time period by which delivery may be expected. One week
after this specified time elapses, the requirements of 6 RCNY §
5-48(a) must be met.
   (d)   Any mail order seller using a Post Office Box address or Private Mail
Service Box in its advertisements or promotional material (including order
blanks and forms) must conspicuously disclose both the legal name of the
company in accordance with 6 RCNY §
5-01 "Legal Name" and the complete street address from which the business is
actually conducted on all advertisements and promotional material.
§ 5-49 Door-to-Door Sales.
"Door-to-door sales" means the offering for sale, lease or rental of consumer
goods or services at a location other than the seller's place of business. A
seller engaging or planning to engage in a door-to-door sale must, during the
initial contact, including telephone contact, with a prospective buyer, clearly
state that the purpose of the seller's visit will be to make a sale.
§ 5-50 Delivery of Furniture and Major Appliances.
   (a)   Scope. This section applies to the sale of furniture and major
appliances for use in a home. Furniture includes chairs, tables, cabinets,
desks, sofas, carpets, beds and chests. This section does not apply to
furniture which is in substantial part custom-made. Major appliances include
air conditioners, audio and video equipment, clothes dryers and washing
machines, dishwashers, freezers, refrigerators, stoves, ranges, ovens, sewing
machines, and televisions. This section does not apply to sales of major
appliances which have a purchase price of two hundred dollars or less.
   (b)   Disclosure.
      (1)   When a consumer orders furniture or a major appliance, the seller
must disclose an estimated delivery date or range of delivery dates,
conspicuously on the consumer's copy of the order.
      (2)   When a seller will not be able to deliver furniture or a major
appliance by the latest estimated delivery date disclosed on the order, the
seller must immediately notify the consumer in writing of:
         (i)   the delay;
         (ii)   a new estimated delivery date or range of delivery dates; and
         (iii)   the consumer's options, as set forth in 6 RCNY §
5-50(d), if delivery is not made by the latest estimated delivery date on the
order. The seller does not need to notify the consumer of a delay in delivery
if the delay is caused entirely by the consumer.
   (c)   Seller's extension of time due to strike. When a delay in a delivery
is caused by a strike, the seller is entitled to an additional amount of time
equal to the duration of the strike to make the delivery.
   (d)   Consumer options if a seller fails to deliver.
      (1)   When a seller does not deliver furniture or a major appliance by
the latest estimated delivery date on the order, unless the seller's time has
been extended because of a strike, the consumer can:
         (i)   cancel the order and request a refund; or
         (ii)   cancel the order and request a credit for the full amount paid;
or
         (iii)   negotiate a new delivery date; or
         (iv)   select new furniture or another major appliance.
      (2)   If the consumer cancels the order and requests a full refund or a
credit for the full amount paid, the seller must give the consumer the full
refund or credit for the full amount paid within two weeks of the consumer's
request.
      (3)   If the consumer negotiates a new delivery date, the new date chosen
shall replace the latest delivery date stated on the original order. The
consumer shall have the same rights with respect to the new date as if it were
the latest delivery date disclosed on the original order.
      (4)   This subdivision (d) does not apply if the delay or failure to
deliver is caused entirely by the consumer.
§ 5-51 Retail Sale of Gasoline.
A retail seller of motor vehicle gasoline:
   (a)   must afford all persons the opportunity to purchase gasoline on the
same terms and conditions, except as otherwise provided by law;
   (b)   may not represent falsely that gasoline is unavailable for sale;
   (c)   may not require the purchase of any other service or product as a
condition to the purchase of gasoline;
   (d)   may not require membership in any group as a condition to the purchase
of gasoline; and
   (e)   may not sell gasoline only to prior customers, or represent that sales
are so restricted.
§ 5-52 [Reserved.]
§ 5-53 Advertisements of Food Items Available in Limited Quantities.
Retail food stores shall obey the Federal Trade Commission Trade Regulations
entitled "Retail Food Store Advertising and Marketing Practices."
§ 5-54 Repair of Consumer Goods.
   (a)   Scope. This section applies to all repairs of consumer goods except
for repairs:
      (1)   performed at no charge; or
      (2)   made under an agreement with a fixed fee and specified time of at
least one year that entitles a consumer to have all repairs made without
additional charge; or
      (3)   performed by persons required to be licensed as television, radio
or audio equipment repairers under the Administrative Code of the City of New
York.
   (b)   Repairs under $15. When a repairer says repairs will cost $15 or less
(including all charges), the repairer's final bill may not exceed that estimate
by more than 20 percent. 6 RCNY §§
5-54(c) and
5-54(d) do not apply to these repairs.
   (c)   Repairs made outside the home.
      (1)   Requirements upon taking possession.
         (i)   A repairer who takes possession of a consumer's property must
immediately give the consumer a receipt and a written estimate. The receipt
must contain:
            (A)   the legal name and the address of the repairer, disclosed in
accordance with 6 RCNY §
5-01 "Legal Name"
            (B)   the name and signature of the person who actually takes the
item;
            (C)   a description of the item, including make and model number,
or such other features as will reasonably identify the item.
         (ii)   The written estimate must be signed by the repairer and must
contain:
            (A)   a list of each part to be replaced and its replacement cost;
            (B)   a general description of the labor required for the repair
and its cost;
            (C)   a statement of every additional charge such as charges for
estimates or service calls;
            (D)   the promised date of completion (this need not be given if
the repair is made the same day the item is first examined);
            (E)   a statement that the final cost, excluding tax, will not
exceed the estimate by more than 20 percent. This statement need not appear if
the repairer guarantees that the final cost will not be more than the estimate.
         (iii)   If it is impossible for the repairer to know what the repair
problem is, the repairer may postpone giving the estimate, but must then add to
the receipt the statement of:
            (A)   the charge (if any) for giving an estimate;
            (B)   the charge (if any) for pick-up and delivery; and
            (C)   every charge which will be imposed if the consumer does not
authorize repairs.
      (2)   Requirements after taking possession.
         (i)   Before commencing repair work outside the home, a repairer must:
            (A)   give the consumer a written estimate (if one has not already
been given); and
            (B)   get the consumer's signed authorization to do the repairs at
the estimated price.
         (ii)   The written estimate must be as described in the preceding
paragraph (1) of this subdivision (c). Time or distance problems may make it
impractical to deliver a written estimate and to get a signed authorization
before the date agreed upon for repair work to begin. If this is the case, the
repairer may begin work after:
            (A)   giving the consumer an oral estimate of the cost of repairs;
and
            (B)   getting the consumer's oral authorization to proceed; and
            (C)   putting a written estimate to the consumer in the mail.
         (iii)   Return of parts. After repair work is done, the repairer must
give the consumer every part replaced, except for parts which were visibly
defective when the consumer first sought the repair, such as torn auto
upholstery, shattered auto glass or a broken watch crystal. A waiver of the
right to receive replaced parts shall be effective if it is in the consumer's
own handwriting, and states clearly that the consumer is entitled to the parts
but does not want them. For parts in any of the following categories, the
repairer may simply show and offer them to the consumer:
            (A)   parts too large to be easily moved;
            (B)   parts which must be returned to the manufacturer if the
consumer wishes to take advantage of a warranty; and
            (C)   parts which the repairer buys from the consumer to rebuild.
         (iv)   Completion date. The repaired item shall be available on the
promised completion date. If a delay is expected, the consumer must be notified
and given a new completion date. When complete repairs are delayed for an
unreasonable period of time, the consumer has the right to immediate return of
the property.
         (v)   Final bill. When the consumer gets the repaired item back, the
repairer must give the consumer a written final bill which:
            (A)   itemizes each part replaced, clearly identifying it (for
example, by make, model, or serial number) and indicating the price of its
replacement;
            (B)   indicates the labor required for repair, and the charge for
that labor;
            (C)   clearly itemizes any other charges;
         (D)   is signed by the repair person. The final bill may not exceed
the written estimate by more than 20 percent.
   (d)   Repairs made in the home.
      (1)   When repairs are done in the consumer's home, the repairer must
give the consumer an estimate (in writing if the consumer wishes) and get his
or her permission to proceed, before starting repairs. The estimate must
include parts, labor and all other charges which the consumer will have to pay.
      (2)   The repairer must give the consumer a written final bill that
itemizes all charges, in the manner prescribed in 6 RCNY §
5-54(c)(2)(v), and discloses the legal name of the repairer in accordance with
6 RCNY §
5-01 "Legal Name". In addition, the bill must legibly state the name of the
person who actually did the repair. The bill may not exceed the estimate by
more than 20 percent.
      (3)   The repairer must give to the consumer all replaced parts, except
the repairer may simply show and offer to the consumer parts in the following
categories:
         (i)   parts which must be returned to the manufacturer if the consumer
wishes to take advantage of a warranty;
         (ii)   parts which the repairer buys from the consumer to rebuild.
§ 5-55 Meat and Poultry Advertising.
   (a)   A seller who advertises meat or poultry by using a private brand
designation or any language which implies that the meat or poultry is of a
particular grade or quality must disclose the U.S. Department of Agriculture
grade for the food. If the meat or poultry sold by private brand designation
has not been graded by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, that fact must be
disclosed. Examples of grade or quality representations are "A-1," "Best Yet,"
"All Rite," "Oven Rite," "Top Grade," "U.S. Finest," "Top Quality," "Super
Fine," and "Buyer's Choice."
   (b)   Disclosures shall be next to and in print the same size as the
seller's grade or quality representation.
   (c)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   meat or poultry for which the U.S. Department of Agriculture does
not provide a retail grading service;
      (2)   labels attached to meat or poultry packages.
§ 5-56 Window Gates.
   (a)   If a window gate, grille, bar or similar device has not been approved
by the Board of Standards and Appeals of the City of New York for use on fire
escape windows the seller must place a tag or label on it, stating that:
      (1)   it is illegal to use the device on a fire escape window;
      (2)   use of the device on a fire escape window is a serious safety
hazard;
      (3)   use of the device on a fire escape window may subject the user to a
fine by the Department of Buildings.
   (b)   The tag or label required by this section must bear the word "WARNING"
in boldface upper-case type at least one-quarter inch tall. The following
warning complies with this regulation:
 
WARNING
It is illegal to use this gate on a fire escape window. Use of this gate on a
fire escape window is a serious safety hazard and may also subject the user to
a fine by the Department of Buildings.
 
§ 5-57 Utility Bill Payments.
   (a)   A person or business that accepts a consumer's utility bill payment
without authorization from the utility must:
      (1)   stamp the consumer's bill upon presentation with the current date;
and
      (2)   give the consumer a signed receipt containing the date, the amount
paid, the name and address of the individual accepting the payment and the name
and address of the person or entity for whom the individual accepted the
payment, if different; and
      (3)   send the payment by regular mail to the utility within 24 hours of
its receipt.
   (b)   If a payment was not received by an authorized office of the utility
within five days of the date stamped on the bill, it shall be presumed that the
payment has been held for more than 24 hours.
§ 5-58 Food in Damaged Containers.
   (a)   Definitions.
      Container. "Container" means an item which contains food or a food
product, including cans, bottles, cartons, bags, boxes, wrappers and tubes.
      Food or food product. "Food or food product" means food, drink,
confectionery or condiment, used or intended for use by humans or animals,
including all substances or ingredients to be added to food for any purpose.
   (b)   No food product may be offered for sale if contained in:
      (1)   a can with a body seam dent, a top or bottom rim dent, or a sharp
body dent;
      (2)   a can with any bulge other than small bulges due solely to small,
smooth body dents;
      (3)   a can which has leaked or is rusted;
      (4)   a vacuum-sealed container of any sort on which the vacuum has been
broken;
      (5)   a container whose outer surface is punctured in any manner, whether
or not the puncture has been repaired (except where the food or food product is
contained in an inner, sealed container or containers, and the innermost
container has not in any way been punctured or the food contents been in any
other way exposed to the air).
§ 5-59 Restaurant Surcharges.
   (a)   A seller serving food or beverages for consumption on the premises may
not add surcharges to listed prices. For example, a restaurant may not state at
the bottom of its menu that a 10 percent charge or a $1.00 charge will be added
to all menu prices.
   (b)   A seller may impose a bona fide service charge (such as an added
charge for two persons splitting one meal, or a per person minimum charge), if
the charge is conspicuously disclosed to the consumer before the food is
ordered.
   (c)   In this section, the term "surcharge" does not include tax.
§ 5-60 Franchises.
   (a)   Definitions.
      Franchise. "Franchise" means a right to use the franchisor's trademark,
tradename, brand name, or other mark of identity to suggest a substantial
association with the franchisor.
      Franchisee. "Franchisee" means a person receiving a franchise.
      Franchisor. "Franchisor" means a person giving a franchise.
      Subfranchisee. "Subfranchisee" means a person to whom a franchisee gives
the right to use a franchise.
   (b)   Required disclosures.
      (1)   A franchisee or subfranchisee must conspicuously disclose on a sign
and on each sales slip, receipt and contract for more than $50:
         (i)   that the franchisor, franchisee or subfranchisee are separate
business entities; and
         (ii)   the legal name and address of the party given the franchise,
and the legal name of the franchisee and subfranchisee, if any, disclosed in
accordance with 6 RCNY §
5-01 "Legal Name." These disclosures need not be made on credit card receipts
if there is a sign conspicuously disclosing them at all cash registers or at
the place where credit card transactions occur.
      (2)   A franchisor, franchisee or subfranchisee must conspicuously
disclose:
         (i)   that advertised sales, discounts, or other special offers are
available only at participating franchise outlets, if such is the case;
         (ii)   wherever a warranty or guarantee appears, that the terms of the
guarantee or warranty apply only to certain franchise outlets, if such is the
case;
         (iii)   that there has been a change in ownership of the franchise
outlet, if such is the case, unless upon the change of ownership the name of
the franchise was substantially altered. The disclosure required by 6 RCNY §
5-60(b)(2)(iii) need only be made during the first ninety days after the
transfer of ownership.
   (c)   Partial exemption. A franchisee or subfranchisee need not make the
disclosures otherwise required by 6 RCNY §§
5-60(b)(1) and
5-60(b)(2)(iii) if the franchisor is liable to customers of the franchisee or
subfranchisee for items sold by the franchisee or subfranchisee.
§ 5-61 Public Performance Seats.
   (a)   Sellers of seats to performances at any place of public amusement or
sport must conspicuously display a diagram of reserved seat locations by row
and seat number, or must conspicuously display a sign stating that such a
diagram is available upon request. The diagram must also show every area
designated on any ticket.
   (b)   The ticket for any seat which does not allow complete view of all
action must state that the view is obstructed or impaired.
   (c)   The following requirements apply to places of public amusement or
sport with seating capacities of between 900 and 2,000 ("Theatres"):
      (1)   The seating level located immediately above the orchestra level may
be designated "mezzanine." However, if no crossover or structural division
exists in such level, then no part of it may be designated as "front mezzanine"
or "rear mezzanine"
      (2)   If a crossover or structural division exists in such level, then
either:
         (i)   the area in front of the crossover or structural division shall
be designated "front mezzanine" and the area behind the crossover or structural
division shall be designated "rear mezzanine"
         (ii)   the entire level shall be designated "mezzanine."
      (3)   The lettering of rows in each seating area designated as
"mezzanine," "front mezzanine" or "rear mezzanine" shall be alphabetically
consecutive, beginning with row "A."
      (4)   A Theatre shall cause the seating diagram referred to in
subdivision (a) of this section to be conspicuously posted at all locations
where tickets to a performance at such theatre are offered for sale, including
but not limited to the Times Square Theatre Centre and The Lower Manhattan
Theatre Centre.
      (5)   Before a sale of tickets over the telephone is completed, a Theatre
shall cause the following information to be orally communicated to the
consumer;
         (i)   the number of seating levels in the theatre; and
         (ii)   the seating level on which the ticket(s) offered are located.
§ 5-62 Home Heating Oil Credit. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/7/2018, eff. 7/7/2018)
§ 5-63 Catering Contracts.
   (a)   Definition.
      Caterer. "Caterer" means any person or business engaged in serving food
or beverages for private functions in New York City.
   (b)   Cancellation.
      (1)   If a consumer cancels a catering contract and the caterer can re-
book the date, the caterer's cancellation fee may not exceed 5 percent of the
total contract price or $100, whichever is less, plus actual expenses
reasonably incurred.
      (2)   If a consumer cancels a catering contract and the caterer cannot
re-book the date, the caterer's cancellation fee may not exceed the difference
between the total contract price and the cost of performance, plus actual
expenses reasonably incurred. The caterer must be able to show diligent efforts
to re-book and must fairly calculate the cost of performance.
      (3)   It will be presumed that a caterer who receives notice of
cancellation six months or more before the scheduled date of the function will
be able to re-book.
      (4)   Cancellation occurs:
         (i)   when the consumer mails the caterer a notice of intent to
cancel; or
         (ii)   when the caterer has actual notice of the consumer's intent to
cancel.
   (c)   Refunds. As soon as reasonably practicable after cancellation (and
never later than 30 days after re-booking) the caterer must return to the
consumer any sum received which exceeds the permissible cancellation fee.
   (d)   Contract forms. Contract forms must conspicuously disclose the
caterer's cancellation fee.
   (e)   Delegation of performance. A caterer may not delegate performance of
any contract to another caterer without the consumer's consent. This consent
may be obtained only after the caterer advises the consumer of its inability to
perform under the contract.
§ 5-64 Vocational Training.
   (a)   If a vocational school or a paid provider of vocational instruction
advertises or states that people in particular jobs have certain incomes, or
that people who are instructed will earn a stated salary or income "up to" a
stated amount:
      (1)   either the salary or income must be equal to or less than the
average salary or income of persons employed less than five years in the
indicated position in the New York metropolitan area, and the representation
must state the basis for calculation of the average salary or income; or the
representation must state the basis for calculation of the salary stated and
disclose the average salary or income of persons employed less than five years
in the indicated position in New York metropolitan area; and
      (2)   the representation must state any conditions or other requirements
such as union membership or service of an apprenticeship, which must be met to
earn the stated salary or income; and
      (3)   the representation must state that no guarantee is made that a
person will earn the stated salary or income, unless the seller makes such a
guarantee.
   (b)   In a written or printed advertisement, the information required by 6
RCNY §§
5-64(a)(1), (2) and (3) must be disclosed in lettering as large as the numerals
of the stated salary or income.
   (c)   The words "EARN $ .... " or "EARN UP TO $ ...." or words of similar
meaning represent that a person who attends the training course will earn the
stated salary or income within the meaning of 6 RCNY §
5-64(a).
   (d)   If a vocational school or a paid provider of vocational instruction
advertises or states that a training course includes job placement service:
      (1)   the job placement service must be available to all persons who pay
a fee, regardless of whether they complete the course, unless the advertisement
or representation states that it is available only to those who successfully
complete the course and discloses any other conditions or limitations on the
placement service; and
      (2)   the advertisement or representation must state whether job
placement is guaranteed and, where no guarantee is given, the advertiser must
make bona fide attempts to seek potential employers for its students.
   (e)   In a written or printed advertisement, the information required by 6
RCNY §
5-64(d)(1) and (2) must be disclosed in lettering as large as the lettering
indicating the existence of the placement service.
   (f)   Any advertisement or representation that a school or course has been
approved by any government agency must indicate the terms of that approval,
particularly as the approval applies to the quality of instruction and the
truth of the statements contained in the advertisement or representation. For
example, an advertisement or representation shall not state "V.A. Approved,"
but must state, if such is the case: "V.A. education loans may be used for
tuition. V.A. does not review nor guarantee the quality of instruction, nor
does it guarantee the truth of the statements in this advertisement."
   (g)   For purposes of this section, "vocational training school" includes
any business entity offering vocational instruction through a home study or
correspondence plan.
§ 5-65 Out-of-Context Quotes.
   (a)   This section applies to all consumer goods and services which are
reviewed or commented upon, such as movies, books, and theater performances.
   (b)   A seller who uses language from the review or comments of a critic in
an advertisement, including those on theater marquees and billboards, may not
rearrange or abstract the quoted language in a way that alters the critic's
meaning. The seller must disclose that the word or phrase refers only to a
limited aspect of the work, if such is the case.
      Examples: "Beautiful scenery" or "John Jones performs outstandingly"
comply with this section as these statements indicate clearly that they refer
to limited aspects of the reviews. The word "beautiful" taken from a review
which says "the scenery is beautiful" would not comply with this section.
§ 5-66 Tax Preparation.
   (a)   Definitions. 
      Certified public accountant and public accountant. "Certified Public
Accountant" and "Public Accountant" mean any individual who fits within the
definitions set forth in Article 149 of the Education Law.
      Income tax return or tax return. "Income tax return" or "tax return"
means a federal, state or city tax return of a natural person, including joint
returns and all related schedules.
      Tax preparer. "Tax Preparer" means any individual or business that
prepares any income tax return, for a fee, to obtain or retain clients, or in
connection with the sale of items or services. It does not include an
individual employed to prepare tax returns by another individual or business
entity if that individual makes clear that he or she is only an employee and
that his or her employer will sign the taxpayer's return.
   (b)   Prohibited practices. Tax preparers may not:
      (1)   ask a taxpayer to sign a blank or incomplete tax return;
      (2)   misrepresent their qualifications;
      (3)   reveal any information appearing on a tax return or any information
gathered for its preparation, including the fact of preparation and the content
of solicitation lists, to any person or business other than:
         (i)   the taxpayer;
         (ii)   a person designated in writing by the taxpayer; or
         (iii)   anyone authorized to receive such information by court order
or by law;
      (4)   make any deceptive statement designed to persuade taxpayers to use,
or not to use, a tax preparer;
      (5)   induce or attempt to induce a taxpayer to violate any governmental
law, rule or regulation;
      (6)   use the word "accountant" in any advertisement unless at least one
Certified Public Accountant or Public Accountant is present at each tax
preparing location during all business hours, or unless the tax preparer
immediately follows the word "accountant" with a conspicuous and prominent
disclaimer that the tax preparer is not licensed by the state as a Certified
Public Accountant or Public Accountant. If a tax preparer uses the word
"accountant" without the disclaimer, then a Certified Public Accountant or
Public Accountant employed at the tax preparing location must exercise control
over all tax returns prepared at that location;
      (7)   use the term "expert," "master," "consultant," "specialist" or any
similar terms in an advertisement unless the tax preparer's relevant education
or experience is also disclosed in the advertisement. There must be a
reasonable basis for any claims of expertise;
      (8)   alter a tax return after it has been signed by the taxpayer,
without the taxpayer's written consent;
      (9)   charge a fee based upon the amount of tax owed or refund due.
   (c)   Required practices. 
      (1)   Tax preparers that advertise their tax preparation services in a
manner designed to reach the general public must post; in English, prominently
and conspicuously at the public entrance to the tax preparer's business
premises or in the immediate area where consumers arrive and are met for
business by the tax preparer:
         (i)   a price list sign stating exactly how their fees are computed.
The price list must contain:
            (a)   a list of services offered by the tax preparer;
            (b)   the minimum fee charged for each service, including but not
limited to the fee charged for each type of Federal or New York State return;
            (c)   factors which may cause the fee to be higher than the minimum
fee and, for each factor listed, the additional fee and/or the range of
possible additional fees charged when the factor applies.
         (ii)   a disclosure sign or signs stating that:
            (a)   the taxpayer is entitled to receive a written estimate of all
fees before receiving services for which the tax preparer is charging a fee;
            (b)   the taxpayer is entitled to receive a copy of every tax
return prepared, at the time the original is given to the taxpayer for filing;
            (c)   that both the tax preparer and the taxpayer must sign every
tax return;
            (d)   that the tax preparer is not licensed by the State Board for
Public Accounting, or is not a member of the Bar of the State of New York, or
both, if such is true;
            (e)   that the tax preparer or an agent will not represent the
taxpayer at any audit, if such is true. ("Represent" means to appear before any
government tax administering authority as attorney, Certified Public Accountant
or enrolled agent. Failure to make this disclosure shall mean that the tax
preparer, if lawfully authorized, agrees to represent the taxpayer or to
provide representation.)
      (2)   The price list sign required by subparagraph (i) of paragraph (1)
of this subdivision shall also be posted prominently and conspicuously at each
point at which orders are placed and/or payment is made, including at each
counter or desk, except where a tax preparer is doing business at a consumer's
home or business, in which case the tax preparer must give each consumer a hard
copy of the price list prior to any discussion with the consumer. Compliance by
a tax preparer with this requirement shall be deemed to satisfy the
requirements of § 20-750(a) of the Administrative Code and 6 RCNY §
5-70(a).
      (3)   Tax preparers must:
         (i)   sign every tax return prepared;
         (ii)   give a copy of every tax return prepared to the taxpayer, at
the time the original tax return is given to the taxpayer for filing;
         (iii)   provide the taxpayer with a statement of the charges for each
tax return or schedule prepared;
         (iv)   return any of the taxpayer's personal papers upon request, when
the original tax return is given to the taxpayer for filing, unless
specifically permitted to retain such papers under State law.
   (d)   Refunds. Tax preparers may not:
      (1)   guarantee a tax refund, or guarantee that the taxpayer will not be
audited by any government tax agency;
      (2)   request a taxpayer to assign to the preparer any portion of the
refund due;
      (3)   use their addresses on a tax return as the place to which a refund
should be mailed, unless the taxpayer has signed a power of attorney containing
such authorization. A fiduciary with authority to handle a taxpayer's financial
matters is not required to obtain this power of attorney;
      (4)   claim to give taxpayers an "instant tax refund" that is actually an
interest-bearing loan unless that fact is disclosed to the taxpayer in
accordance with Federal and State law.
   (e)   Records. Each tax preparer shall retain a copy of every tax return
prepared for a period of at least three years from the preparation date or the
due date of the return, whichever is later.
   (f)   Disclosure in foreign languages. 
      (1)   In addition to English, all disclosures required by this section
must be made in any other language which the tax preparer uses to attract
customers.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, failure to post each separately
enumerated notice requirement constitutes a separate violation for which a
penalty will be assessed.
   (g)   Exemption. Any individual or business which prepares income tax
returns as an adjunct service to year-round fiduciary activities provided in
the regular course of business for its customers is exempt from this section.
If the business also offers individual tax return preparation services which
are not related to such fiduciary activities, this section applies to those
services.
      Example: A bank trust department offers its services for a fee as trustee
on personal trust accounts. The bank advertises that preparation of the
beneficiaries' personal income tax returns is available to the beneficiaries of
any trust for which it is trustee. This section does not apply to this tax
preparation service. If, however, the bank has an agreement with a tax
preparation service, under which the service would supply tax preparation
services to the public at various branches of the bank, the bank is subject to
this section. If the bank provides the service by its own employees, it is
subject to this section.
(Amended City Record 12/14/2017, eff. 1/13/2018; amended City Record 7/5/2019,
eff. 8/4/2019)
§ 5-67 Item Pricing in Food Stores.
Food stores included within the scope of New York Agriculture and Markets Law
Section 214-i must comply with all the provisions of that law.
§ 5-68 Dealers at Flea Markets.
   (a)   Definition. 
Dealer at a flea market. A "dealer at a flea market" means a person or business
entity that sells or offers for sale or displays new or used merchandise at a
flea market, craft show, antique show, fair, bazaar or any like exhibition that
is open to the general public.
   (b)   Receipts. A dealer at a flea market must provide consumers with
serialized receipts. These receipts must contain:
      (1)   the amount of money paid for each item;
      (2)   the total amount of money paid including a separate statement of
tax;
      (3)   the date of the purchase;
      (4)   the legal name and address of the seller in accordance with 6 RCNY
§
5-01 "Legal Name."
   (c)   Recordkeeping. A dealer at a flea market must retain exact copies of
all receipts issued to consumers for a period of three years after the time a
receipt was issued. Copies of such receipts issued during the previous calendar
month and during the current calendar month must be made available to the
Commissioner or his authorized representative upon request. All other receipts
required to be retained by this subdivision (c) must be produced upon ten days
notice.
§ 5-69 Blood Pressure Reading Services. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 1/6/2023, eff. 2/5/2023)
§ 5-70 Retail Service Establishments.
   (a)   A retail service establishment shall display a price list
conspicuously in a place readily visible to customers at the point at which
orders are placed and/or payment is made. The price list shall include the
following information:
      (1)   a list of the types of services performed;
      (2)   the minimum price charged for each service;
      (3)   a description of the conditions or variations of service that alter
the minimum price charged;
      (4)   the range of additional charges caused by such variations;
      (5)   if the price is directly derived from an hourly labor rate then the
labor rate must appear in a ratio of dollars per hour.
   (b)   Information required by this rule or by §§ 20-749 through 20-753 of
the Administrative Code must be prominently placed and conspicuously written in
comparison with all other words, statements, or designs displayed by the retail
service establishment, and stated in such terms as to render the information
likely to be read and understood by the ordinary individual under customary
conditions of purchase.
§ 5-71 Food Store Cash Register; Item Cost Indicator.
   (a)   A Food store shall not have on its premises any cash register without
an item cost indicator unless a seal, issued by the department indicating that
such cash register was purchased prior to December 20, 1989, the effective date
of Local Law 94 of 1989, which added §§ 20-691 through 20-693 of the
Administrative Code, appears on the machine.
§ 5-72 Commercial Weight Loss Center Practices.
   (a)   A "weight loss provider" is defined as any person or business entity
who or which is primarily engaged in the business of offering services to
consumers to assist them in losing weight.
   (b)   It is a deceptive trade practice for a weight loss provider to quote
to a consumer a fixed or estimated cost for a weight loss program that is being
recommended for the particular consumer without separately stating any
additional charges the consumer may have to pay to purchase products, services,
supplements or laboratory tests which are part of such program.
   (c)   It is a deceptive trade practice for a weight loss provider to
recommend a weight loss program to a particular consumer without also
disclosing the actual or estimated duration of the program.
   (d)   It is a deceptive trade practice for a weight loss provider to make
any oral or written statement, visual description or other representation of
any kind, including in any advertisement, which statement, description or
representation has the capacity, tendency or effect of leading consumers to
believe that the use of a product or treatment, or participation in a program,
will result in weight loss unless the weight loss provider conspicuously posts
the following statement in each of its weight loss establishments:
      (1)   WARNING: Rapid weight loss may cause serious health problems.
(Rapid weight loss is weight loss of more than 1 1/2 pounds to 2 pounds per
week or weight loss of more than 1% of body weight per week after the second
week of participation in a weight loss program.)
      (2)   Consult your personal physician before starting any weight loss
program.
      (3)   Only permanent lifestyle changes – such as making healthful food
choices and increasing physical activity – promote long-term weight loss.
      (4)   Qualifications of this provider's staff are available on request.
      (5)   You have a right to:
         (i)   ask questions about the potential health risks of this program,
its nutritional content, and its psychological-support and educational
components;
         (ii)   know the price of treatment, including the price of any extra
products, services, supplements and laboratory tests; and
         (iii)   know the program duration that is being recommended for you.
   (e)   The above statement must be posted in a notice to the public at every
temporary or permanent location of the weight loss provider. The notice must be
conspicuously posted in every room in which a presentation is made, or in which
a product or treatment is offered for sale, by the weight loss provider. The
notice must be printed in letters at least as large as 36 point bold face type
on a sign at least 22 1/2 inches wide by 17 1/2 inches long. The sign shall be
entitled "Weight Loss Consumer Bill of Rights" which shall be printed in
letters of 60 point bold face type.
   (f)   All the educational and professional experience of the weight loss
provider's staff must be made available upon the request of any person.
   (g)   Every weight loss provider shall produce and distribute to all
consumers who inquire about its weight loss program, a palm-sized card entitled
"Weight Loss Consumer Bill of Rights", which shall contain the same information
contained in the poster described in subdivision (d) above.
   (h)   Every weight loss provider shall post the sign described in
subdivision (d) which shall be provided by the Department of Consumer Affairs,
and shall reproduce and distribute the palm-sized card described in subdivision
(g), in every location in which its program or product is promoted, presented
or sold, and the weight loss provider must cause the posting of such sign and
the distribution of such card by every agent, representative, franchisee and
independent contractor at every location in which such agent, representative,
franchisee or independent contractor promotes, presents or sells the weight
loss provider's program or product.
   (i)   The sign described in subdivision d of this section and the palm-sized
card described in subdivision g of this section must contain the name, address
and telephone number of the Department of Consumer Affairs and the name of the
Commissioner. The weight loss provider may include on the sign and the palm-
sized card its name, address and telephone number, provided such information is
printed in letters which are no larger than the smallest letters on the rest of
the sign or palm-sized card, respectively. The sign shall not contain any
information other than the information required or permitted by the provisions
of this section.
§ 5-73 Sale of Box Cutters.
   (a)   Definitions. 
      Box cutter. "Box cutter" means any knife consisting of a razor blade,
retractable, nonretractable, or detachable in segments, attached to or
contained within a plastic or metal housing, including utility knives, snap-off
knives, and box cart cutters.
   (b)   It is an unconscionable practice for any person to engage in the
illegal conduct of:
      (1)   selling or offering to sell, or causing any person to sell or offer
to sell, a box cutter to any individual under eighteen years of age; or
      (2)   placing box cutters which are being sold or offered for sale on
open display so that such implements are accessible to the public without the
assistance of the seller, or his or her employee or other agent; provided,
however, that the restrictions of this paragraph shall not apply to those box
cutters on open display (i) which are clearly and fully visible from a place of
payment for goods or services or customer information at which such seller or
an employee or other agent of the seller is usually present during hours when
the public is invited, or (ii) which are in a package, box or other container
provided by the manufacturer, importer or packager that is larger than 41
square inches.
§ 5-74 Illegal Sale to Minors.
It shall be an unconscionable trade practice for any person to sell or offer to
sell any goods or services to minors which by law are prohibited from being
sold to minors.
§ 5-75 Used Car Buyer's Guide.
It shall be a deceptive trade practice for purposes of § 20-701 of the
Administrative Code for any seller to sell or offer to sell any used automobile
without posting a Buyer's Guide as required under section 455.2 of title 16 of
the code of federal regulations.
(Added City Record 6/12/2015, eff. 7/12/2015)
Part 6: Debt Collection
§ 5-76 Debt Collection.
Definitions. As used in this part:
   Communication. The term "communication" means the conveying of information
regarding a debt directly or indirectly to any person through any medium.
   Consumer. The term "consumer" means any natural person obligated or
allegedly obligated to pay any debt.
   Creditor. The term "creditor" means any person, firm, corporation or
organization to whom a debt is owed or due or alleged to be owed or due or any
assignee for value of said person, firm, corporation or organization.
   Debt. The term "debt" means any obligation or alleged obligation of a
consumer to pay money arising out of a transaction in which the money,
property, insurance, or services which are the subject of the transaction are
primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, whether or not such
obligation has been reduced to judgment.
   Debt collection procedures. The term "debt collection procedures" means any
attempt by a debt collector to collect a debt after:
      (1)   with respect to accounts for which creditors are required to send
periodic statements, the creditor has ceased sending those statements, or taken
or threatened to take legal action against the consumer;
      (2)   with respect to 30-day accounts for which periodic statements are
not required, the creditor has ceased sending bills for the debt or taken or
threatened to take legal action against the consumer; and
      (3)   with respect to all other types of credit, the creditor has
accelerated the unpaid balance of the debt or demanded the full balance due.
   Debt collector. The term "debt collector" means an individual who, as part
of his or her job, regularly collects or seeks to collect a debt owed or due or
alleged to be owed or due. The term does not include:
      (1)   any officer or employee of the United States, any State or any
political subdivision of any State to the extent that collecting or attempting
to collect any debt owed is in the performance of his or her official duties;
      (2)   any person while engaged in performing an action required by law or
regulation, or required by law or regulation in order to institute or pursue a
legal remedy;
      (3)   any individual employed by a nonprofit organization which, at the
request of consumers, performs bona fide consumer credit counseling and assists
consumers in the liquidation of their debts by receiving payments from such
consumers and distributing such amounts to creditors; or
      (4)   any individual employed by a utility regulated under the provisions
of the Public Service Law, to the extent that New York Public Service Law or
any regulation promulgated thereunder is inconsistent with this part. Where a
provision of this part limits the number of times an action may be taken by the
debt collector, or establishes as a prerequisite to taking an action that the
debt collector has received or done something, or prohibits an action if the
debt collector has knowledge of or reason to know something, the term "debt
collector" includes any debt collector employed by the same employer.
   Location information. The term "location information" means a consumer's
place of abode and his telephone number at such place, or his place of
employment.
   Periodic statement. The term "periodic statement" means the statement of
account certain creditors are required by 12 C.F.R. § 226.7(b) [Regulation Z]
to send at the end of each billing cycle for which there is an outstanding
disputed debit or credit balance in excess of $1 in the account or with respect
to which a finance charge is imposed.
   Reasonable period of time. The term "reasonable period of time" means in the
absence of knowledge of circumstances to the contrary, ten business days.
   30-day account. The term "30-day account" means an account on which the
outstanding balance at the end of a billing period is to be paid in full within
a stated period of time without imposition of any finance charge.
§ 5-77 Unconscionable and Deceptive Trade Practices.
It is an unconscionable and deceptive trade practice for a debt collector to
attempt to collect a debt owed, due, or asserted to be owed or due except in
accordance with the following rules:
   (a)   Acquisition of location information. Any debt collector communicating
with any person other than the consumer for the purpose of acquiring location
information about the consumer in order to collect a debt, after the
institution of debt collection procedures shall:
      (1)   identify himself or herself, state that he or she is confirming or
correcting location information about the consumer and identify his or her
employer when that identification connotes debt collection only if expressly
requested;
      (2)   not state or imply that such consumer owes any debt;
      (3)   not communicate more than once, unless requested to do so by such
person or unless the debt collector reasonably believes that the earlier
response of such person is erroneous or incomplete and that such person now has
correct or complete location information; for the purposes of this paragraph
(3), the debt collector need not count as a communication returned unopened
mail or a message left with a party other than the person the debt collector is
attempting to reach in order to acquire location information about the
consumer, as long as the message is limited to a telephone number, the name of
the debt collector and a request that the person sought telephone the debt
collector;
      (4)   not use any language or symbol on any envelope or in the contents
of any communication effected by the mails or telegram that indicates that the
debt collector is in the debt collection business or that the communication
relates to the collection of a debt; provided that a debt collector may use his
or her business name or the name of a department within his or her organization
as long as any name used does not connote debt collection; and
      (5)   if the debt collector knows the consumer is represented by an
attorney with regard to the subject debt and if the debt collector has
knowledge of the attorney's name and address or can readily ascertain such
attorney's name and address, not communicate with any person other than that
attorney for the purpose of acquiring location information about the consumer
unless the attorney fails to provide the consumer's location within a
reasonable period of time after a request for the consumer's location from the
debt collector and:
         (i)   informs the debt collector that he or she is not authorized to
accept process for the consumer; or
         (ii)   fails to respond to the debt collector's inquiry about the
attorney's authority to accept process within a reasonable period of time after
the inquiry. The employer of a debt collector may not be held liable in any
action brought under 6 RCNY §
5-77(a)(3) or (5) if the employer shows by a preponderance of the evidence that
the violation was not intentional and resulted despite the maintenance or
procedures reasonably adapted to avoid any such violation.
   (b)   Communication in connection with debt collection. A debt collector, in
connection with the collection of a debt, shall not:
      (1)   After institution of debt collection procedures, without the prior
written consent of the consumer given directly to the debt collector after the
institution of debt collection procedures, or without permission of a court of
competent jurisdiction, communicate with the consumer in connection with the
collection of any debt;
         (i)   at any unusual time or place known, or which should be known, to
be inconvenient to the consumer. In the absence of knowledge of circumstances
to the contrary, a debt collector shall assume that the convenient time for
communicating with a consumer is after 8 o'clock ante meridian and before 9
o'clock post meridian time at the consumer's location;
         (ii)   if the debt collector knows the consumer is represented by an
attorney with respect to such debt and if the debt collector has knowledge of
the attorney's name and address or can readily ascertain such attorney's name
and address, unless the attorney fails to respond within a reasonable period of
time to a communication from the debt collector or unless the attorney consents
to direct communication with the consumer, except any communication which is
required by law or chosen from among alternatives of which one is required by
law is not hereby prohibited;
         (iii)   at the consumer's place of employment if the debt collector
knows or has reason to know that the consumer's employer or supervisor
prohibits the consumer from receiving such a communication; or
         (iv)   with excessive frequency. In the absence of knowledge of
circumstances to the contrary, a debt collector shall assume that more than
twice during a seven-calendar-day period is excessively frequent. In making its
calculation, the debt collector need not include any communication between a
consumer and the debt collector which is in response to an oral or written
communication from the consumer, or returned unopened mail, or a message left
with a party other than one who is responsible for the debt as long as the
message is limited to a telephone number, the name of the debt collector and a
request that one who is responsible for the debt telephone the debt collector;
or any communication which is required by law or chosen from among alternatives
of which one is required by law. The employer of a debt collector may not be
held liable in any action brought under 6 RCNY §
5-77(b)(1)(ii)-(iv) if the employer shows by a preponderance of the evidence
that the violation was not intentional and resulted despite maintenance of
procedures reasonably adapted to avoid any such violation.
      (2)   In order to collect a debt, and except as provided by 6 RCNY §
5-77(a), communicate with any person other than the consumer, his or her
attorney, a consumer reporting agency if otherwise permitted by law, the
creditor, the attorney of the creditor, a debt collector to whom or to whose
employer the debt has been assigned for collection, a creditor who assigned the
debt for collection, the attorney of that debt collector, or the attorney for
that debt collector's employer, without the prior written consent of the
consumer given directly to the debt collector after the institution of debt
collection procedures, or without the prior written consent of the consumer's
attorney or without the express permission of a court of competent
jurisdiction, or as reasonably necessary to effectuate a postjudgment judicial
remedy.
      (3)   Communicate with any person other than the consumer's attorney, a
consumer reporting agency if otherwise permitted by law, the creditor, the
attorney of the creditor, a debt collector to whom or to whose employer the
debt has been assigned for collection, a creditor who assigned the debt for
collection, or the attorney of that debt collector or the attorney for that
debt collector's employer in a manner which would violate any provision of this
part if such person were a consumer.
      (4)   After institution of debt collection procedures, communicate with a
consumer with respect to a debt if the consumer has notified the debt collector
in writing that the consumer wishes the debt collector to cease further
communication with the consumer with respect to that debt, except that any
communication which is required by law or chosen from among alternatives of
which one is required by law is not hereby prohibited. The debt collector shall
have a reasonable period of time following receipt by the debt collector of the
notification to comply with a consumer's request, except that any debt
collector who knows or has reason to know of the consumer's notification and
who causes further communication shall have violated this provision. The debt
collector may, however:
         (i)   communicate with the consumer once in writing:
            (A)   to advise the consumer that the debt collector's further
efforts are being terminated or;
            (B)   to notify the consumer that the debt collector or creditor
may invoke specified remedies which are ordinarily invoked by such debt
collector or;
            (C)   where applicable, to notify the consumer that the debt
collector or creditor intends to invoke a specific remedy if that is a remedy
he is legally entitled to invoke and if he actually intends to invoke it; and
         (ii)   respond to each subsequent oral or written communication from
the consumer.
      (5)   For the purpose of 6 RCNY §
5-77(b)(1)-(4), the term "consumer" includes the consumer's parent (if the
consumer is a minor), guardian, executor, administrator, spouse (unless the
debt collector knows or has reason to know that the consumer is legally
separated from or no longer living with his or her spouse), or an individual
authorized by the consumer to make purchases against the account which is the
subject of the collection efforts. A request that the debt collector cease
further communication, provided for under 6 RCNY §
5-77(b)(4), if made by the consumer's spouse or an individual authorized by the
consumer to make purchases against the account, only affects the debt
collector's ability to communicate further with the person making the request.
   (c)   Harassment or abuse. A debt collector, in connection with the
collection of a debt, shall not engage in conduct the natural consequence of
which is to harass, oppress or abuse any person in connection with a debt. Such
conduct includes:
      (1)   the use or threat of use of violence or other criminal means to
harm the physical person, reputation, or property of any person;
      (2)   the use of obscene or profane language or language the natural
consequence of which is to abuse the hearer or reader;
      (3)   the advertisement for sale of any debt to coerce payment of the
debt;
      (4)   causing a telephone to ring or engaging any person in telephone
conversation repeatedly or continuously with intent to annoy, abuse, or harass
any person at the called number;
      (5)   the publication of a list of consumers who allegedly refuse to pay
debts, except to another employee of the debt collector's employer or to a
consumer reporting agency or to persons meeting the requirements of 15 U.S.C. §
1681a(f) or 15 U.S.C. § 1681b(3); or
      (6)   except as provided by 6 RCNY §
5-77(a), the placement of telephone calls without meaningful disclosure of the
caller's identity.
   (d)   False or misleading representations. A debt collector, in connection
with the collection of a debt, shall not make any false, deceptive, or
misleading representation. Such representations include:
      (1)   the false representation or implication that the debt collector is
vouched for, bonded by, or affiliated with the United States or any State,
including the use of any badge, uniform or facsimile thereof;
      (2)   the false representation or implication that any individual is an
attorney or any communication is from an attorney;
      (3)   the representation or implication that nonpayment of any debt will
result in the arrest or imprisonment of any person or the seizure, garnishment,
attachment, or sale of any property or wages of any person unless such action
is lawful and the debt collector or creditor intends to pursue such action;
      (4)   the threat to take any action that cannot legally be taken or that
is not intended to be taken;
      (5)   the false representation or implication that a sale, referral, or
other transfer of any interest in a debt shall cause the consumer to:
         (i)   lose any claim or defense to payment of the debt; or
         (ii)   become subject to any practice prohibited by this part;
      (6)   the false representation of implication made in order to disgrace
the consumer that the consumer committed any crime or other conduct;
      (7)   the false representation or implication that accounts have been
turned over to innocent purchasers for value;
      (8)   the false representation or implication that documents are legal
process;
      (9)   the false representation or implication that documents are not
legal process forms or do not require action by the consumer;
      (10)   the false representation or implication that a debt collector
operates or is employed by a consumer reporting agency as defined by 15 U.S.C.
§ 1681a(f);
      (11)   the use or distribution of any written communication which
simulates or is falsely represented to be a document authorized, issued, or
approved by any court, official, or agency of the United States or any State,
or which creates a false impression as to its source, authorization, or
approval;
      (12)   the use of any false representation or deceptive means to collect
or attempt to collect any debt or to obtain information concerning a consumer;
      (13)   the use of any business, company, or organization name other than
the true name of the debt collector's business, company, or organization,
unless the general public knows the debt collector's business, company or
organization by another name and to use the true name would be confusing;
      (14)   after institution of debt collection procedures, the false
representation of the character, amount or legal status of any debt, or any
services rendered or compensation which may be lawfully received by any debt
collector for the collection of a debt, except that the employer of a debt
collector may not be held liable in any action brought under this provision if
the employer shows by a preponderance of the evidence that the violation was
not intentional and occurred despite the maintenance of procedures reasonably
adapted to avoid any such violation;
      (15)   except as otherwise provided under 6 RCNY §
5-77(a) and except for any communication which is required by law or chosen
from among alternatives of which one is required by law, the failure to
disclose clearly in all communications made to collect a debt or to obtain
information about a consumer, that the debt collector is attempting to collect
a debt and that any information obtained will be used for that purpose;
      (16)   the use of any name that is not the debt collector's actual name;
provided that a debt collector may use a name other than his actual name if he
or she uses only that name in communications with respect to a debt and if the
debt collector's employer has the name on file so that the true identity of the
debt collector can be ascertained;
      (17)   any conduct proscribed by New York General Business Law §§ 601(1),
(3), (5), (7), (8), or (9);
      (18)   the false, inaccurate, or partial translation of any communication
when the debt collector provides translation services; or
      (19)   the false representation or omission of a consumer's language
preference when returning, selling or referring for litigation any consumer
account, where the debt collector is aware of such preference.
   (e)   Unfair practices. A debt collector may not use any unfair or
unconscionable means to collect or attempt to collect a debt. Such conduct
includes:
      (1)   the collection of any amount (including any interest, fee, charge,
or expense incidental to the principal obligation) unless such amount is
expressly authorized by the agreement creating the debt or permitted by law;
      (2)   the solicitation or use by a debt collector of any postdated check
or other postdated payment instrument for the purpose of threatening or
instituting criminal prosecution;
      (3)   causing charges to be made to any person for communications by
misrepresentation of the true purpose of the communication. Such charges
include collect telephone calls and telegram fees;
      (4)   taking or threatening to take any nonjudicial action to effect
dispossession or disablement of property if:
         (i)   there is no present right to possession of the property claimed
as collateral;
         (ii)   there is no present intention to take possession of the
property; or
         (iii)   the property is exempt by law from such dispossession or
disablement;
      (5)   after institution of debt collection procedures, when communicating
with a consumer by use of the mails or telegram, using any language or symbol
other than the debt collector's address on any envelope, or using any language
or symbol that indicates the debt collector is in the debt collection business
or that the communication relates to the collection of a debt on a postcard,
except that a debt collector may use his or her business name or the name of a
department within his or her organization as long as any name used does not
connote debt collection;
      (6)   after institution of debt collection procedures, communicating with
a consumer regarding a debt without identifying himself or herself and his or
her employer or communicating in writing with a consumer regarding a debt
without identifying himself or herself by name and address and in accordance
with 6 RCNY §
5-77(e)(5); or
      (7)   after institution of debt collection procedures, if a consumer owes
multiple debts of which any one or portion of one is disputed, and the consumer
makes a single payment with respect to such debts:
         (i)   applying a payment to a disputed portion of any debt; or
         (ii)   unless otherwise provided by law or contract, failing to apply
such payments in accordance with the consumer's instructions accompanying
payment. If payment is made by mail, the consumer's instructions must be
written. Any communication by a creditor made pursuant to 6 RCNY §
5-77(e)(7)(ii) shall not be deemed communication for the purpose of 6 RCNY §
5-77(b)(1)(iv). The employer of a debt collector may not be held liable in any
action brought under 6 RCNY §
5-77(e)(7) if the employer shows by a preponderance of the evidence that the
violation was not intentional and resulted despite maintenance of procedures
reasonably adapted to avoid any such violation;
      (8)   engaging in any conduct prohibited by New York General Business Law
§§ 601(2) or (4); or
      (9)   after institution of debt collection procedures, collecting or
attempting to collect a debt without first requesting and recording the
language preference of such consumer.
   (f)   Validation of debts.
      (1)   Upon acceleration of the unpaid balance of the debt or demand for
the full balance due, the following validation procedures shall be followed by
debt collectors who are creditors or who are employed by creditors as defined
by 15 U.S.C. § 1602(f) (Truth in Lending Act) but who are not required to
comply with 15 U.S.C. § 1637(a)(8) (Fair Credit Billing Act), and who do not
provide consumers with an opportunity to dispute the debt which is
substantially the same as that outlined in 15 U.S.C. § 1637(a)(8) and
regulations promulgated thereunder: Within five days of any further attempt by
the creditor itself to collect the debt, it shall send the customer a written
notice containing:
         (i)   the amount of the debt;
         (ii)   a statement that unless the consumer, within thirty days after
receipt of the notice, disputes the validity of the debt, or any portion
thereof, the debt will be assumed valid by the debt collector;
         (iii)   a statement that, if the consumer notifies the debt collector
in writing within the thirty-day period at the address designated by the debt
collector in the notice, that the debt, or any portion thereof is disputed, the
debt collector shall either:
            (A)   make appropriate corrections in the account and transmit to
the consumer notification of such corrections and an explanation of any change
and, if the consumer so requests, copies of documentary evidence of the
consumer's indebtedness; or
            (B)   send a written explanation or clarification to the consumer,
after having conducted an investigation, setting forth to the extent applicable
the reason why the creditor believes the account of the consumer was correctly
shown in the written notice required by 6 RCNY §
5-77(f)(1) and, upon the consumer's request, provide copies of documentary
evidence of the consumer's indebtedness. In the case of a billing error where
the consumer alleges that the creditor's billing statement reflects goods not
delivered in accordance with the agreement made at the time of the transaction,
a creditor may not construe such amount to be correctly shown unless it
determines that such goods were actually delivered, mailed, or otherwise sent
to the consumer and provides the consumer with a statement of such
determination.
         (iv)   if the debt collector is not the original creditor, a statement
that, upon the consumer's written request within the thirty-day period, sent to
the address designated by the debt collector in the notice, the debt collector
will provide the consumer with the name and address of the original creditor;
         (v)   an address to which the consumer should send any writing which
disputes the validity of the debt or any portion thereof or any writing
requesting the name and address of the original creditor.
      (2)   Within five days after the initial communication with a consumer in
connection with the collection of any debt, a debt collector who is not a
creditor and not employed by a creditor shall, unless the following information
is contained in an initial written communication, or the consumer has paid the
debt, send the consumer a written notice containing:
         (i)   the amount of the debt;
         (ii)   the name of the creditor to whom the debt is owed;
         (iii)   a statement that unless the consumer, within thirty days after
receipt of the notice, disputes the validity of the debt, or any portion
thereof, the debt will be assumed to be valid by the debt collector;
         (iv)   a statement that if the consumer notifies the debt collector in
writing within the thirty-day period at the address designated by the debt
collector in the notice that the debt, or any portion thereof, is disputed, the
debt collector will obtain verification of the debt or a copy of a judgment
against the consumer and a copy of such verification or judgment will be mailed
to the consumer by the debt collector;
         (v)   a statement that, upon the consumer's written request within the
thirty-day period sent to the address designated by the debt collector in the
notice, the debt collector will provide the consumer with the name and address
of the original creditor, if different from the current creditor;
         (vi)   an address to which the consumer should send any writing which
disputes the validity of the debt or any portion thereof or any writing
requesting the name and address of the original creditor;
         (vii)   a statement informing the consumer of any language access
services available, including whether the consumer may obtain from the debt
collector a translation of any communication into a language other than
English; and
         (viii)   a statement that a translation and description of commonly-
used debt collection terms is available in multiple languages on the
Department's website, www.nyc.gov/dca.
      (3)   If, pursuant to 6 RCNY §§
5-77(f)(1) or
5-77(f)(2) of this Regulation the consumer notifies the debt collector in
writing within the thirty-day period that the debt, or any portion thereof, is
disputed, or that the consumer requests the name and address of the original
creditor, the debt collector shall not attempt to collect the amount in dispute
until the debt collector obtains and mails to the consumer verification of the
debt or a copy of the judgment or the name and address of the original
creditor. The debt collector shall maintain for one year from the date the
notice was mailed, records containing documentation of the date such notice was
mailed, the date the response, if any, was received and any action taken
following such response.
      (4)   The failure of a consumer to dispute the validity of a debt under 6
RCNY §
5-77(f) shall not be construed by any court as an admission of liability by the
consumer.
   (g)   Liability. The employer of a debt collector is liable for the debt
collector's violation of 6 RCNY §
5-77. A debt collector who is employed by another to collect or attempt to
collect debts shall not be held liable for violation of 6 RCNY §
5-77.
   (h)   Public websites. Any debt collector that maintains a website
accessible to the public must clearly and conspicuously disclose on such
website:
      (1)   a statement informing the consumer of any language access services
available, including whether the consumer may obtain from the debt collector a
translation of any communication into a language other than English; and
      (2)   a statement that a translation and description of commonly-used
debt collection terms is available in multiple languages on the Department's
website, www.nyc.gov/dca.
(Amended City Record 5/28/2020, eff. 6/27/2020)
§ 5-78 Deceptive Forms.
It is a deceptive and unconscionable trade practice for any person to design,
compile and furnish any form knowing that such form would be used to create the
false belief in a consumer that a person other than the creditor of such
consumer is participating in the collection of or in an attempt to collect a
debt such consumer allegedly owes such creditor, when in fact such person is
not so participating.
§ 5-79 Severability.
If any provision of this part or the application of such provision to any
person or circumstances shall be held unconstitutional or invalid, the
constitutionality of the remainder of the part and the applicability of such
provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
§ 5-80 Citation Form.
This part may be cited as Consumer Protection Law Regulations Part 6.
 Part 7: 'Sales' and 'Discounts'
§ 5-86 Definitions.
Advertiser. Where the "advertiser" is a chain store, the requirements of this
part shall apply to each branch as if it were a separate store.
Advertiser's bona fide selling price. "Advertiser's bona fide selling price"
shall mean the immediately preceding price at which the same item or service
was actually offered for sale to the public by the advertiser for a reasonably
substantial period of time in the recent regular course of the advertiser's
business, unless an earlier time period is clearly specified, and not a price
charged for the purpose of establishing a fictitious higher price on which a
deceptive comparison might be based.
   (1)   "Recent regular course of business" shall mean the current selling
season on seasonal goods; or, on services or non-seasonal goods, the period of
the current model or twelve months, whichever is shorter.
   (2)   It is prima facie evidence that a selling price for a service or an
item is bona fide if:
      (i)   the item was offered for a reasonably substantial period of time
and a substantial quantity of sales were made at that price, or
      (ii)   if a substantial number of sales was not made at such price, that
the item was openly offered for sale to the public for a reasonably substantial
period of time and that such offering price was reasonable based upon the
manner in which such items were displayed or offered for sale, and such other
factors as the mark-up reflected in such price and the price of comparable
items.
Genuine. "Genuine," when used in this part with such phrases as "open stock
price," "list price," "suggested retail price," and "catalog price" shall mean
that the price is one at which substantial quantities of the identical
merchandise have actually been sold to the public within the recent regular
course of business, by the advertiser or principal retail outlets within the
New York City trading area, or, if identical merchandise is not available in
the New York City trading area, in principal retail outlets in other similar
trading areas provided that the fact is disclosed. During the first two weeks
after a new model or item has been introduced, a "list price," "suggested
retail price" or "catalog price" may be considered "genuine" only if:
   (1)   the list price, suggested retail price or catalog price for the last
previous model was genuine, or,
   (2)   where no previous model existed, the list price, suggested retail
price or catalog price for other similar goods, produced by the same
manufacturer and sold in the preceding selling season or twelve month period,
was genuine. Where no previous model or similar goods existed or where the
manufacturer has not previously made use of list price or suggested retail
price, the list price, suggested retail price or catalog price may be used for
up to thirty days after introduction of the new model or item after which time,
the advertiser must be able to demonstrate that the price is genuine.
In-store. "In-store" representation shall mean any written statement, visual
description, advertisement, or other written representation of any kind, or any
oral statement by a demonstrator which is made inside the interior premises of
the merchant.
Models and types. "Models" and "types" refer to models and types exclusive of
differentiations attributable only to sizes or colors except where sizes or
colors are material, e.g. mattresses, paint.
Out-of-store. "Out-of-store" representations shall mean any oral or written
statement, visual description, advertisement or other representation of any
kind made outside the interior premises of the advertiser, including
representations made in newspapers, magazines, handbills, billboards, direct
mailings, on radio and television and in store windows, storefronts, and other
similar places where the representations can be perceived by the public not yet
inside the premises of the merchant.
Retail market price. "Retail market price" shall mean:
   (1)   the price at which substantial sales of the same article or service
are presently being made in principal retail outlets in the New York City
trading area, or
   (2)   where no substantial sales have been made, the bona fide, usual and
customary selling price of the item or service as offered in principal retail
outlets in the New York City trading area.
§ 5-87 Prohibited Conduct.
It is a deceptive practice in the sale or offering for sale of consumer goods
or services for a person (including any business entity) having a store, place
of business for sales or mailing address for sales in the City of New York, or
otherwise selling in the City of New York to advertise or represent in
connection with sales made in the City of New York or offerings for sales to be
made in the City of New York that such goods or services are being or will be
offered or sold to New York City consumers at a reduction, discount, or savings
in a manner in violation of this part.
§ 5-88 Identification of Merchandise and Services (Out-of-Store
Representations).
An out-of-store representation or advertisement containing words or numbers
indicating a savings, reduction, discount or sale price, must include limiting
language which permits the consumer to identify the merchandise or services
being offered at savings, reductions, discounts or sale price. Identification
simply by former price is not sufficient unless the items so identified
constitute a percentage of the advertised brands, styles, types, models,
classes, or categories of merchandise or services sufficiently large to meet
reasonable consumer expectations created by the advertisement.
   (a)   Such limiting language should be sufficiently precise to permit
consumers to distinguish the applicable merchandise or services. This can be
accomplished only by setting forth the brand, price, style, type, model, class
or category, as appropriate in the context of the out-of-store representation
or advertisement. Vague language such as "percentage off some merchandise" does
not comply with this requirement. An advertisement shall be construed to apply
to every piece of merchandise (or every service) within that category, type,
make, model, (etc.).
   Examples:
      (1)   "Brand X aluminum tennis rackets." Acceptable.
      (2)   "Steel belted radial tires." Acceptable if all steel belted radial
tires are now on sale.
      (3)   "Famous manufacturer's single lens reflex cameras." Acceptable if
all of the particular manufacturer's single lens reflex cameras are on sale.
      (4)   "Men's cashmere sweaters, formerly $40, now $30." This is
acceptable if all men's cashmere sweaters that were formerly $40 are now on
sale, and these sweaters constitute a percentage of the store's total supply of
cashmere sweaters sufficiently large to meet reason able consumer expectations
created by the advertisement.
   (b)   (1)   If the merchandise or services referred to in the out-of-store
representation or advertisement as being offered at a savings, reduction,
discount or sale price cannot be specified with precision because the sale
involves:
         (i)   less than all of the brands, styles, types, models, classes or
categories of merchandise or services identified;
         (ii)   a storewide sale in a broad cross-section of departments; or
         (iii)   one or more established departments, but less than all of the
merchandise or services in such departments, the terms "selected," "many,"
"representative," "assorted," or terms of similar import, may be used as
limiting language to comply with identification requirement of this section,
provided that a meaningful percentage of such merchandise or services is so
offered. "Meaningful percentage" shall mean an amount of merchandise that will
meet reasonable consumer expectations created by the advertisement. For 5 RCNY
§
5-88(b)(1)(i), it shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of the
meaningful percentage requirement if at least 15 percent of such brands,
styles, types, models, classes or categories identified are not on sale,
provided however, that the advertiser shall be permitted to show that under the
particular circumstances involved the amount on sale was not deceptive.
      (2)   In the absence of words of limitation, an advertisement shall be
construed to apply to every piece of merchandise or every service within that
category, type, make, model, etc.
      Examples:
         (i)   "Numerous pottery vases" complies if at least 15 percent of the
pottery vases are on sale, unless the advertiser can demonstrate that under the
particular circumstances involved the amount on sale, in light of the
advertisement itself, is not deceptive.
         (ii)   "Assistant Managers' birthday sale – storewide savings on
selected merchandise" complies if the amount of merchandise on sale meets
reasonable consumer expectations created by the advertisement.
         (iii)   "Representative low-cut tennis sneakers" complies provided 15
per cent of the types of brands, makes or etc., are on sale, unless the
advertiser can demonstrate that under the particular circumstances involved the
amount on sale in light of the advertisement itself was not deceptive.
         (iv)   "Special grouping of Misses' slacks, regularly $20 now $15"
complies if at least 15 percent of all Misses' slacks regularly $20 are now $15
unless the advertiser can demonstrate that under the particular circumstances
involved the amount on sale, in light of the advertisement itself, was not
deceptive.
         (v)   "Reduction on many items in the Sporting Goods and Luggage
Department" complies if the amount of merchandise on sale in each department
meets reasonable consumer expectations created by the advertisement.
   (c)   An out-of-store representation or advertisement concerning a storewide
sale or a sale in a broad cross-section of departments which displays,
pictures, or mentions specific items which are on sale must also disclose
whether the items displayed, pictured or mentioned are the only ones on sale.
If they are not the only ones on sale, the advertisement must disclose the
extent to which items not displayed, pictured or mentioned are on sale.
   Example: "Semi-annual White Sale – These and many other savings" complies if
the complete supply of all pictured items is on sale and a meaningful
percentage of the ether sale items is offered at a savings.
§ 5-89 "Wholesale Price," "Manufacturer's Price," "Factory Price," and Similar
Terms.
If an advertiser states or implies that goods are offered at or below "list,"
"wholesale," "wholesale price," "original wholesale," or other similar terms,
these terms must pertain to the price currently and generally paid for such
goods by retailers in the New York City trading area. If the advertiser states
or implies that goods are offered at or below "manufacturer's wholesale,"
"manufacturer's price," "factory price," or other similar terms indicating
purchase directly from a manufacturer, these terms must pertain to the price
currently and generally paid for such goods by retailers in the New York City
trading area who purchase the category of merchandise directly from the
manufacturer. It is presumptive evidence of compliance with this section if the
advertiser can show that the goods are offered below the price paid by the
advertiser.
§ 5-90 "Less Than Cost," "At a Loss," and Similar Terms.
If the advertiser uses the words:
"less than cost" "at a loss" "below retailer's cost"
or other similar terms implying that the purchaser is paying a lower price than
the advertiser, the price to the consumer must actually be less than the price
paid by the advertiser.
§ 5-91 Reductions Based on Advertiser's Own Price; "Formerly," "Regularly,"
"Reduced," "Percent Off," "Save," and Similar Terms.
   (a)   Immediately preceding price. If an advertiser uses the words:
      "percent off" "formerly ..., now ..." "reduced" "reduced to"
"regularly..., now ..." "now only" "save $ ..." "was ..., now ..., "item now $
..."
      or any similar term implying a reduction from a prior price charged by
the advertiser, the price to which the reduced offering price is being compared
must be the advertiser's bona fide selling price for that item or service
unless the advertiser clearly discloses another basis of comparison or
qualification.
   (b)   Intermediate reductions. If the term "originally," or any similar
term, is used in any advertisement, the price stated as the "original" price
must be the advertiser's bona fide selling price for the same article or
service prior to intermediate reductions, and the price immediately prior to
the current reduction must be disclosed, unless intermediate reductions are
clearly indicated by the language used.
      Example: "Originally $75; then $68; now $65" "Earlier this year $75; now
$65" "Further reduced to $50."
   (c)   Comparison not recent. If a claim is based on a past bona fide selling
price of the advertiser prior to the recent, regular course of business, the
advertiser must clearly disclose that fact.
      Example: "Last year $40, now $20."
§ 5-92 Comparisons Based on Price of Identical Merchandise or Services Sold
Elsewhere: "Value," "Nationally Advertised at," "Usually," "List," and Similar
Terms.
   (a)   "Value," "nationally advertised at," "sold nationally at," "made to
sell for," "woven to sell for," "usually." If the terms:
      "value" "nationally advertised at" "sold nationally at" "made to sell
for" "woven to sell for" "elsewhere"
      or other similar terms implying a generally accepted value or price are
used with regard to any item or service, then the price to which the reduced
offering price is being compared must be the retail market price of the item or
service. Furthermore, the terms "value," "nationally advertised at," or "sold
nationally at" or any similar terms implying a generally accepted value or
price in a national market may be used only
      (1)   in relation to articles or services whose prices have been
nationally advertised to the consuming public and
      (2)   i)   in relation to prices which are retail market prices, or,
         (ii)   if the advertised item or service is not available elsewhere in
the New York City trading area, the prices for which the article or service is
currently selling in principal retail outlets in a substantial number of other
representative communities in the United States.
   (b)   If the term "usually" is used with regard to any item or service, then
the price to which the reduced offering price is being compared must be either
      (1)   the advertiser's own bona fide price for the item or service, or
      (2)   the retail market price.
   (c)   "list," "catalog," "suggested," "manufacturer's suggested," prices.
Any "list" price, "catalog" price, "suggested" price, "manufacturer's
suggested" price, "retailer's suggested" price or a preticketed price displayed
by the advertiser must be genuine, unless, in the case of a price printed by a
supplier of the advertiser, the advertiser has made every reasonable effort to
remove or obliterate totally the printed price, or if removal or obliteration
is impracticable taking into account the cost thereof, has conspicuously
disclaimed that it is genuine. The display of any list price or printed price
accompanied by a lower price constitutes a representation that such price is
genuine and that the merchandise is being offered at a discount from such
genuine price unless in the case of a price printed by a supplier of the
advertiser, the advertiser has made every reasonable effort to remove or
obliterate totally the printed price, or if removal or obliteration is
impracticable taking into account the cost thereof, has conspicuously
disclaimed that it is genuine.
§ 5-93 Claims Based on Price of Comparable Merchandise or Services:"Comparable
Value" and Similar Terms.
If the term:
"comparable value" "compare with" "equal to"
or other similar term implying comparison with non-identical merchandise is
used
   (a)   the advertisement must not imply that the comparison is with the
former or usual price of the advertised merchandise or service itself; and
   (b)   the compared merchandise or service must be of essentially similar
quality in those material respects which affect consumer preferences and
marketability; and
   (c)   the price to which the advertiser's price is compared must be the
retail market price or the genuine list, suggested or catalog price of the
comparable article or service; and
   (d)   the comparable article or service must be generally available in New
York City at the price stated; and
   (e)   the advertisement must clearly and conspicuously disclose that
"comparable value" pertains to similar but not identical merchandise or
services. If an aggregate "open stock" price is used as a comparative price for
an advertised set, the advertisement must disclose this fact and indicate that
the advertised saving is based upon the difference between the price for the
set and the total open stock price for items comprising the set.
§ 5-94 Range Discounts: "% to % Off," "Up to % Off Selected" and Similar Terms.
   (a)   If an advertiser uses terms such as:
      "Savings of ____ % to ____ %" "____ % to ____ % off"
      or other similar terms to indicate a price range, then:
      (1)   the minimum percentage reduction must be stated as conspicuously as
the maximum percentage reduction; and
      (2)   the price from which the discount or reduction is taken must be
either a genuine list, suggested or catalog price, the retail market price or
the advertiser's bona fide selling price, for the same articles or services,
unless another basis is clearly stated; and
      (3)   "out-of-store" advertisements must disclose which of the above
standards was or were used (if a single advertisement relates to merchandise or
services offered at reductions according to different standards, it must
disclose which standards apply to which types of merchandise or services);
         Example: "____ % to ____ % off the manufacturer's price" "____ % to
____ % off last year's price."
      (4)   at least 15 percent of all types, models, or categories of items or
services on sale in the advertised category must in fact be reduced by the
maximum percentage reduction and a representative number of other models or
types or services must be offered at various points in the range significantly
separated and representatively scattered.
         Example: "PORTABLE RADIOS AND TELEVISIONS 10%-50% off our former
prices"
         Complies if at least 15 percent of all models of portable radios and
televisions available are selling at 50 percent off, and a representative
number of the remaining models are offered at various points between 10 and 50
percent representatively scattered throughout that range.
   (b)   If the terms:
      "discounts from ..... %" "up to ...... % off" "as high as" "save up to
..... %"
      or other similar terms are used to advertise a range of reductions with
no specified minimum reduction,
      (1)   the prices used for comparison must be the advertiser's bona fide
selling price, the retail market price, or a genuine list, suggested price for
the same articles or services, unless another basis or a qualification is
clearly stated;
      (2)   "out-of-store" advertisements must disclose which of the above
standards was or were used;
      (3)   at least 15 percent of all the types, models, or services on sale
in the advertised categories must be offered for sale at the stated maximum
percentage reduction; and
      (4)   a representative number of the remaining models or types or
services must be offered at various points representatively scattered
throughout the range from the stated maximum percentage reduction to the bottom
of the range, or the majority of such other models or types or services must be
offered at points in the higher portion of the range.
         Example: "BRAND Y CASSETTE TAPE RECORDERS" "Up to 30 percent off"
         Complies if at least 15 percent of all models of Brand Y Cassette tape
recorders available are selling at 30 percent off and the remaining models are
offered at various points representatively scattered throughout the range below
30 percent or the majority of the remaining models are offered at points in the
higher portion of the range. If the range is 0-30 percent, the majority of the
remaining models would have to be offered above 15 percent; if the range is 10-
30 percent, the majority would have to be offered above 20 percent.
   (c)   If terms such as "formerly $ ..... to $ .....; now $ ....." are used,
the maximum price in the range of advertised former prices must represent the
advertiser's bona fide selling price for at least 15 percent of all the types,
models or services advertised. Bona fide selling prices for the other items or
services must have been at levels representatively scattered through the range
of advertised former prices.
§ 5-95 "Advance Sale" or "Introductory Offer."
   (a)   If an advertiser uses the words "advance sale" or "introductory offer"
or statements such as "if there are any left they will be marked $ .....," or
any other words or statements implying that the goods or services are offered
for sale at a reduced price in relation to a future mark-up, he must also
      (1)   have, in fact, in the case of goods, either a reasonable quantity
of merchandise in stock, or an order to be marked up; or demonstrate his
intention to order such merchandise for future mark-up; and
      (2)   mark up the goods or services within a reasonable period of time
and maintain the mark-up for a reasonable period of time not less than 30 days,
unless he can show that competitive circumstances occurring subsequent to the
advertisement required him to maintain or lower the price in order to maintain
a competitive position.
   (b)   If the words "introductory offer" or words of similar meaning are
used, they must pertain only to merchandise or services not previously sold by
the advertiser nor sold by him for more than six weeks prior to the
advertisement.
§ 5-96 Combination Offers.
   (a)   If the advertiser uses "combination offers," in which he offers his
product in combination with one or more additional articles or services at a
stated price, and claims that the combined articles or services have a "value"
greater than the total advertised selling price of the individual items, the
total "value" claimed must not be greater than the total of the retail market
prices of the articles and services as sold separately.
   (b)   If none of the combination articles is being sold in the New York City
trading area and the comparison is based on comparable merchandise, the phrase
"comparable value" may be used only if it complies with 6 RCNY §
5-93.
   (c)   If one or more of the articles offered in combination is in general
retail distribution, but one or more is not, comparative prices for the
articles may be stated separately, according to the facts.
§ 5-97 "Discount," "Outlet," "Bargain" and "Warehouse" Operations.
If a retailer includes in the name of his store, or in any other "out-of-store"
manner represents the regular retail operation of his entire store by use of
the words "discount," "outlet," "bargain," "warehouse," or any other term
implying that all goods and services are regularly sold at less than genuine
list, catalog, suggested or retail market prices, then 75 percent of the
retailer's dollar volume in the last selling season exclusive of fair-traded
items must have been from items which were in fact sold for at least 5 percent
less than genuine list, catalog, suggested or retail market price.
§ 5-98 Discount Departments.
A retailer may not use the words "discount," "bargain," "warehouse," "bargain
basement," or other similar terms in characterizing a particular department or
section within his regular retail operation unless
   (a)   a substantial percentage of the dollar volume of the last previous
selling season within that department or section was derived from items sold
for less than genuine list, catalogue, suggested or retail market prices. It
shall be presumptive evidence of violation of this section if the advertiser
cannot show that at least 35 percent of the dollar volume in the last previous
selling season within that department or section was derived from items selling
for less than genuine list, catalog, suggested or retail market prices for such
items; or
   (b)   all items not presently being sold for at least 5 percent less than
genuine catalog, list, suggested or retail market price, are clearly and
conspicuously designated as non-discount items. This requirement of designation
may be satisfied by segregation of identified non-discount items, shelf labels,
or other prominent signs, a listing of non-discount items clearly and
conspicuously displayed in the relevant department, or a standardized sticker
or tag with a clear and conspicuous explanation that the item to which it is
affixed is a non-discount item.
      Example: A shoe department in a retail store sells brands X, Y, and Z
shoes. Brand X is sold at less than retail market price, and brands Y and Z are
sold at retail market price. In the last previous selling season, 35 percent of
all shoe sales came from the sale of brand X shoes. The store is in compliance
with this article. But if less than 35 percent of all sales came from sales of
brand X shoes, brands Y and Z must be conspicuously designated as nondiscount
items in order for the department to be called "discount shoe department."
§ 5-99 Meaningful Reductions.
All discounts, sales, reductions or savings must be meaningful, and not merely
nominal or insignificant. All articles and services so advertised must be
offered at a reduction or savings of at least 5 percent from the price to which
the advertiser's is being compared, unless [in the case of items retailing for
over $100] the advertisement clearly sets forth the actual percentage of
reduction or the dollar amount of the reduction.
§ 5-100 Sufficient Quantities.
The retailer either must have in stock or on order, or be prepared to supply
within a reasonable time sufficient quantities of each advertised item or
service to fulfill reasonably anticipated public demand, or clearly
conspicuously disclose in the advertisement any items or services of genuinely
limited availability. A retailer is not "prepared to supply" merchandise unless
he has communicated with suppliers and ascertained, prior to advertising, that
the merchandise is available to him.
§ 5-101 Inherently Misleading Terms.
The following inherently misleading terms are prohibited in retail advertising:
"our list price" below "manufacturer's wholesale cost" "manufacturer's cost"
§ 5-102 Adequacy of Disclosure.
All disclosures and words of limitation or qualification required by this part
shall be written or printed in letters at least one third as high and one third
as broad as the largest words or numbers appearing in the advertisement which
relate to or describe the reduction, discount or savings, but in no event in
less than ten point type. In radio announcements, the disclosure or words of
limitation or qualification shall be clearly spoken, and in television
announcements they shall be part of the radio track and not merely part of the
picture.
§ 5-103 Records Required.
   (a)   Each person who advertises or represents the existence of a discount,
reduction or savings shall for three months maintain records demonstrating
compliance with this part at his principal place of business within the City of
New York or at a location where such records are normally maintained by such
person.
   Example: An advertiser who advertises "20 percent off Brand X cameras" must
maintain records demonstrating that the reduction is from the bona fide selling
price. If the cameras were last sold at such lower price eleven months ago, the
advertiser must retain the records indicating the earlier price. These records
must be kept for a period of three months after the sale is over.
   (b)   Where the Commissioner of Consumer Affairs or her delegate requests a
person to produce by mail information or records to demonstrate compliance with
this part, and the information, or original, carbon, photographic or
electrostatic copies of the records are available in the company's files, the
person shall mail a copy of such information to the person requesting it within
seven business days after receipt of the request unless such time period is
extended by the Chief of the Law Enforcement Division. Where the information is
available to the person but not in his possession, or where the record must be
reconstructed (e.g., where they have been stored in the memory bank of a
computer), the person shall mail a copy of such information to the person
requesting it within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed sixty business
days, after receipt of the request unless such time period is extended by the
Chief of the Law Enforcement Division. In lieu of mailing requested information
or records to the Commissioner, a person may grant access to the files for
purpose of examination and to copy documentary evidence by advising the
Commissioner in writing within 5 business days after receipt of the request
that such access will be granted provided the information or records are kept
in New York City.
   (c)   No action shall be maintained by the Commissioner under Administrative
Code, § 20-703(c) merely for failure to maintain or produce records required by
this section. However, all of the other penalties provided by § 20-703 shall
apply.
§ 5-104 Regulations 6 RCNY §§
5-06 and
5-12 Not Affected.
Nothing in this part repeals or modifies 6 RCNY §§
5-06 and
5-12 or any portion thereof. In the event of any inconsistency, the advertiser
should comply with the requirements of 6 RCNY §§
5-06 or
5-12, as the case may be.
§ 5-105 Exemptions.
   (a)   Except as provided in 6 RCNY §
5-92, this part does not apply to advertisements printed or packaging material
prepared by a manufacturer outside of the City of New York unless such
advertisements were requested or ordered by the advertiser located within the
City of New York.
   (b)   This part does not apply to advertising placed prior to its effective
date, nor, until four months after its effective date, to non-periodical
advertising displays in existence and used by the advertiser prior to the
effective date.
§ 5-106 Citation Form.
This regulation may be cited as Consumer Protection Law Regulations, Part 7.
Subchapter B: Truth-in-Pricing Law
§ 5-111 Definitions.
As used in the following 6 RCNY §§
5-111 -
5-114:
   Retail entity. "Retail entity" shall mean any person, partnership,
corporation or other organization engaged in the sale, display or offering for
sale of consumer commodities at retail from one or more retail establishments.
For the purposes of these regulations, retail establishments owned or
controlled by different persons, partnerships, corporations or other
organizations, but associated together for the purpose of sharing a trade name
or advertising expenses or for joint or cooperative purchase of merchandise or
services, shall not constitute a single retail entity.
   Retail establishment. "Retail establishment" shall mean a single
geographical location in which consumer commodities are sold, displayed or
offered for sale at retail.
   Self service. "Self service" shall mean the offering or display of consumer
commodities for retail sale in such a manner that the consumer may examine and
select commodities for purchase without the assistance of sales personnel.
§ 5-112 Exemptions.
   (a)   § 20-709 of the Administrative Code, "Display of Price per Measure,"
shall apply only to consumer commodities sold, displayed or offered for sale by
self service.
   (b)   § 20-709 of the Administrative Code, "Display of Price per Measure,"
shall not apply to any consumer commodity packaged without a declaration of
volume, weight, quantity or other appropriate size declaration.
   (c)   § 20-709 of the Administrative Code, "Display of Price per Measure,"
shall not apply to any consumer commodity sold in one, two, five, or ten units
of the applicable standard measure designated in 6 RCNY §
5-113(b).
   (d)   § 20-709 of the Administrative Code, "Display of Price per Measure,"
shall not apply to any consumer commodity whose method of sale is governed by §
   (e)   § 20-709 of the Administrative Code, "Display of Price per Measure,"
shall not apply to any retail establishment in which the total dollar volume
sales of consumer commodities constitutes 20 percent or less of the total
dollar volume of sales from such retail establishment.
   (f)   § 20-709 of the Administrative Code, "Display of Price per Measure,"
shall not apply to any retail entity whose gross receipts from retail sales of
merchandise of any sort for the preceding tax year of such retail entity were
less than two million dollars.
§ 5-113 Calculation and Display of Price Per Measure.
   (a)   Price or measure shall be expressed in terms of dollars or cents, as
applicable, carried to three digits. If the price is $1.00 or over, it is to be
stated to the nearest full cent, provided that said price is rounded off from
one-half cent or over to the next higher cent; and, if less than one-half cent,
reduced to the next lower cent.
      Example: "$1.35 per pound." If the price is less than $1.00, it should be
stated to the nearest tenth of a cent.
      Example: "24.8¢ per pound."
   (b)   Price per measure shall be expressed as follows:
      (1)   price per pound for commodities whose net quantity is stated in
units of pounds or ounces or both;
      (2)   price per 100 units for commodities whose net quantity is stated by
numerical count;
      (3)   price per pint or quart for commodities whose net quantity is
stated in fluid ounces, pints, quarts or gallons or a combination thereof;
provided that the same unit of measure is used for the same commodity in all
sizes sold in the retail establishment;
      (4)   price per 50 feet or per 50 square feet, as appropriate, for
commodities whose net quantity is stated in units of inches, feet, yards,
square inches, square feet or square yards, or whose net quantities are stated
in units of length or area and the "ply" count, if any.
   (c)   All price information required by §§ 20-708 and 20-709 of the
Administrative Code shall be clear and conspicuous and shall be on a stamp,
tag, label or sign directly above, below, adjacent to, or on the consumer
commodity to which it relates. Such stamp, tag, label or sign shall:
      (1)   state the total selling price;
      (2)   state the price per measure;
      (3)   identify sufficiently the consumer commodity to which the price
information relates, if not affixed to the consumer commodity;
      (4)   indicate the total selling price on the right side of a horizontal
label or on the upper part of a vertical label;
      (5)   indicate the price per measure on the left side of a horizontal
label or on the lower part of a vertical label;
      (6)   contain the words "Unit Price" above or below the price per
measure;
      (7)   indicate the price per measure and unit of measure on an orange
background, except that packages which are pre-priced by the manufacturer shall
not be required to use an orange background on a label affixed to the consumer
commodity;
      (8)   indicate price per measure in type no smaller than that used for
the total selling price, but in no event smaller than pica type;
      (9)   be submitted to the commissioner for approval prior to its use in
any retail establishment.
   (d)   Every retail establishment required to post price per measure by the
regulations governing Truth-in-Pricing, in those cases where shelf labels are
used, shall conspicuously post a sign for every two thousand square feet of
sales area, but in no event less than two signs nor more than five signs in any
retail establishment, which explains the use of price per measure information
to the consumer. The price per measure, as used in examples on these signs,
shall appear on an orange background in type no smaller than that used for the
selling price.
   (e)   Upon written application to the commissioner, and upon a showing of
exceptional circumstances, a retail establishment or retail entity may be
granted an extension in writing, not to extend beyond December 31, 1972, in
which to comply, in whole or in part, with the requirements of section c above.
§ 5-114 Consumer Commodities Regulated.
The following commodities shall be labelled in accordance with the provisions
of § 20-709 of the Administrative Code, "Display of Price per Measure," and of
the regulations governing Truth-in-Pricing.
   (a)   Canned and bottled vegetables which do not require refrigerated
storage.
   (b)   Canned and bottled fruits which do not require refrigerated storage.
   (c)   Canned and bottled real and imitation vegetable and fruit juices which
do not require refrigerated storage.
   (d)   Canned and bottled tomatoes, tomato sauce, tomato paste, tomato puree
and other related tomato products which do not require refrigerated storage.
   (e)   Canned and bottled baby foods which do not require refrigerated
storage.
   (f)   Cooking and salad oils.
   (g)   Canned and bottled salmon, tuna and sardines which do not require
refrigerated storage.
   (h)   Jams, jellies and preserves.
   (i)   Peanut butter.
   (j)   Carbonated beverages.
   (k)   Coffee, instant and regular.
   (l)   Dog and cat foods.
   (m)   Breakfast cereals (does not include corn meal, rice, maize).
   (n)   Cake, pie crust and other pastry mixes.
   (o)   Macaroni, spaghetti and other dry pasta products (does not include
pre-prepared or pre-flavored convenience pasta foods).
   (p)   Paper towels, napkins, facial tissues, plates, cups and toilet paper.
   (q)   Dishwashing and laundry soaps and detergents.
   (r)   Scouting powders. The above regulations shall be known as Truth-in-
Pricing Regulations 6 RCNY §
5-111 to §
5-114.
§ 5-115 Guidelines on Multiple Pricing.
   (a)   Definitions. Whenever used in these guidelines, the following terms
shall be deemed to mean and include:
      Commissioner. The Commissioner of the Department of Consumer Affairs of
the City of New York.
      Consumer Protection Law. New York City Local Law 83 of 1969, as the same
has, or may hereafter be, amended.
      Department. The Department of Consumer Affairs of the City of New York.
      Identical items of merchandise. "Identical items of merchandise" shall "
mean a single unit of merchandise available for purchase that is of the same
brand and is the same as another unit of merchandise in every other way. For
the purpose of these guidelines, items of merchandise that have different
prices but have no other differences shall be deemed identical.
      Item of merchandise. "Item of merchandise" shall mean a single unit of
merchandise available for purchase.
      Multiple pricing. "Multiple pricing" shall mean the practice of having
identical items of merchandise, as above defined, available for sale at a
particular time for more than one price. For purposes of these guidelines, a
difference in price achieved by the use of discount coupons, quantity purchases
or the like shall not be deemed an instance of multiple pricing.
      Retail food store. "Retail food store" shall mean a store which has as
its principal line of business the sale at retail of a broad range of food
items.
      Truth-In-Pricing Law. "Truth-In-Pricing Law" shall mean New York City
Local Law 14 of 1971, as the same has, or may hereafter be, amended.
   (b)   Consumer Protection Law. It is the enforcement policy of the
Department of Consumer Affairs in interpreting the Consumer Protection Law that
Multiple Pricing is a deceptive trade practice except where each of the
following conditions are complied with:
      (1)   Applicability. The practice is maintained by a retail food store.
      (2)   Information program. The terms of the Multiple Pricing program are
communicated to the retail food store's employees who are to implement the
program and those terms are also clearly explained to its customers m New York
City. The means by which the program is explained to customers shall include
the conspicuous posting of the terms of the retail food store's Multiple
Pricing program which terms shall include a list of any items excluded from the
operation of the Multiple Pricing program and, where applicable, any method of
identifying the location of multiple priced merchandise. Each sign shall cover
an area of not less than 18 inches by 18 inches and shall be printed in legible
type in a manner that shall make it easily readable. There shall be at least
one sign for each two thousand (2,000) square feet of selling area. One such
sign shall be placed near each door through which consumers enter, in such a
place and positioned in such a way as to be readily seen by a consumer upon
entering. No retail food store shall be required to have more signs than the
greater of:
         (i)   the number of consumer entrances to such store, or
         (ii)   five signs. In addition, a smaller sign shall be placed at each
cash register clearly visible to the consumer advising the consumer of the
store's program of Multiple Pricing. At least two (2) weeks prior to
termination of Multiple Pricing, a retail store shall so notify its customers
in New York City. Such notification shall include the conspicuous posting of
signs indicating such intended termination in compliance with the second
paragraph of this 6 RCNY §
5-115(b).
      (3)   Retail food store internal operations. 
         (i)   Identical items of merchandise are not offered for sale at more
than two prices, except that where a store has a policy of not remarking items
marked for sale after the termination of the sale, identical items of
merchandise may be offered for sale at three prices until the items that were
marked for the sale are sold.
         (ii)   Any item of merchandise sold in a retail food store that bears
more than one price, shall be sold at the lowest price shown. Having more than
one price visible on any item of merchandise is a violation of the regulations
of the Department and selling such merchandise at the lowest price appearing on
such merchandise shall not cure any such violation.
         (iii)   Where an item of merchandise is offered for sale at a price
based on a multiple purchase, as for example "2 cans for 35 cents," and an
identical item of merchandise is offered for sale at a different price that is
higher per item than the group price, or at a higher group price, a consumer
who purchases the items of merchandise in the quantity necessary for the group
price, shall be entitled to purchase said quantity at the lowest group price.
By way of illustration, item X was originally priced at 2 cans for 40 cents,
however the new cans of X placed on the shelf are priced at 21 cents each. A
consumer purchasing 2 cans of X, one bearing the old markings and one the new
would pay a total of 40 cents for the two cans.
         (iv)   In any retail food store where Multiple Pricing is in effect
all items sold shall be subject to it and the only products not multiply priced
may be
            (A)   items which prior to the initiation of the program were not
individually marked with a price and price was disclosed by such means as a
price sign at the point of sale,
            (B)   items where the retailer cannot vary the price by the
requirement of any law or regulation of any governmental authority or the
requirements of any fair trade agreement, and
            (C)   items for which the retailer has received the Department's
prior approval to remove them from Multiple Pricing.
         (v)   Multiple priced merchandise shall be placed in such a way that
            (A)   lower priced items are grouped together and
            (B)   lower priced items are placed nearest to the consumer. On a
surface which is parallel to the store floor, such as shelf merchandise, such
lower priced items will be placed towards the front edge of the shelf with
higher priced items behind. Where items are stacked vertically, as in freezer
cabinets, the lower priced items will be stacked on top of the higher priced
items and grouped at the front of the vertical space allocated to such items.
If any type of physical separation of multiple priced merchandise is instituted
this must be applied uniformly throughout the store and must be disclosed on
the store signs referred to in 6 RCNY §
5-115(b)(2) and also at each point of sale of the item. As an example, if items
at a lower price are placed on a different shelf such sign shall be placed
where the higher priced item is and where the lower priced item is.
         (vi)   In all places where multiple priced items are offered for sale
some clear identifying symbol shall be conspicuously displayed at the point of
sale to indicate the availability of merchandise at a lower price. This
requirement shall apply whether or not the retail food store is subject to the
requirements of the Truth-In-Pricing Law. The symbol and the fact that the
symbol designates the presence of lower priced merchandise shall be disclosed
in the signs referred to in 6 RCNY §
5-115(b)(2).
      (4)   Advertising. 
         (i)   The fact that any item may be available at a lower price shall
not be advertised where such lower price is due to Multiple Pricing.
Advertising material may contain a general statement concerning any Multiple
Pricing policy in effect in any store or group of stores.
         (ii)   When a sale is advertised the sale price shall be lower than
the lowest price at which items of the merchandise are then available for sale
in any quantity.
         (iii)   Where, in advertising material, a potential savings to the
consumer is described in such terms as "save 3 cents off regular price by
purchasing X at 75 cents a can" the saving shown must be based on the lower
price of the merchandise.
         (iv)   All advertising material relating to Multiple Pricing shall
contain a list of any items excluded from the operation of multiple pricing.
         (v)   When retail food stores are subject to a common ownership, as in
a chain, or though not commonly owned, participate in an advertising program
under some common name covering more than one store, if one or more stores in
the group is not utilizing Multiple Pricing, each store not using Multiple
Pricing shall be specifically identified. Such statements as "... not available
in certain stores" will not be permissible.
         (vi)   If merchandise is available at a price lower than the
advertised price, it shall be sold at the price shown on the item of
merchandise. Having merchandise available for sale at a price lower than the
sale price is a violation of 6 RCNY §
5-115(b)(4)(ii) hereof and selling such merchandise at such lower price shall
not cure any such violation.
   (c)   Unit pricing. In stores subject to the requirement of the Truth-In-
Pricing Law, unit pricing stickers will be prepared which indicate in all
instances either
      (1)   unit pricing data at each price at which an item is being sold, or
      (2)   unit pricing information at the highest price that an item of
merchandise is being sold and some method of clearly identifying at each place,
where any merchandise is being sold at multiple prices that some of the same
merchandise is available at a lower price. That method of disclosure shall be
set out and explained in the signs referred to in 6 RCNY §
5-115(b)(2).
   (d)   Notification of the department. Any retail food store intending to use
Multiple Pricing shall advise the Department in writing sent certified mail
addressed to the Commissioner at 42 Broadway, New York, N.Y. 10004. Such notice
shall be mailed at least one (1) business day prior to initiating such program.
Such notice shall be accompanied by copies of all instructions given to store
employees concerning procedures which affect Multiple Pricing together with
copies of any and all advertising materials discussing Multiple Pricing to be
used by any retail food store or group of retail food stores. Retail food
stores shall have the duty to notify the Commissioner when they intend to use
any instructions or advertising materials not previously submitted to the
Department. Notification of the Department pursuant to this paragraph shall not
imply review of, or consent to the use of, such material by the Department. Any
retail food store intending to terminate Multiple Pricing shall advise the
Department in writing sent certified mail addressed to the Commissioner at 42
Broadway, New York, N.Y. 10004. Such notice shall be mailed at least two (2)
weeks prior to terminating such program.
   (e)   Powers of the Commissioner.
      (1)   The Commissioner has the power to require such information as he or
she may reasonably require to determine the administration and effect of any
program of Multiple Pricing and such materials shall be supplied promptly and
at no cost and expense to the Department of Consumer Affairs.
      (2)   The Commissioner has the power to require additional steps to be
taken by a retail food store to comply with the intent of these guidelines as
she, in her discretion, may deem appropriate including the further publicizing
of Multiple Pricing.
      (3)   If these guidelines or directions of the Commissioner issued
pursuant to these guidelines are not complied with after passage of sufficient
time to allow for compliance, such failure shall be deemed a violation of the
Consumer Protection Law or the Truth-In-Pricing Law, or both, as the case may
be, and the Commissioner shall thereupon take such steps as shall be necessary
to assure compliance or she may deny the retail food store the opportunity of
operating a Multiple Pricing program. Each violation of a provision of these
guidelines shall be treated as a separate violation under the appropriate law.
   (f)   Amendment. The Commissioner reserves the right at any time and from
time to time to revise, amend, revoke or to otherwise modify or annul the
effect of these guidelines.
   (g)   Other laws. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to interpret,
waive or modify the requirements of any law, rule or regulation of the City of
New York, the State of New York or the Federal Government other than the
Consumer Protection Law and the Truth-In-Pricing Law.
§ 5-116 Requirements for Price Scanners.
   (a)   A retail store that seeks to rely on the exemption set forth in § 20-
708.1(c)(15) of the Administrative Code from the item pricing requirement set
forth in § 20-708.1(b) of the Administrative Code must provide price scanners
for consumer use in accordance with this section.
   (b)   A price scanner for consumer use must be located within 30 feet of any
item sought to be exempted from item pricing in accordance with this section
unless the requirements of subdivision c of this section are met.
   (c)   If a price scanner for consumer use is located more than 30 feet from
an item sought to be exempted from item pricing in accordance with this
section, a prominent and conspicuous sign must be posted within view of such
item stating: "A Price Scanner for Customer Use to Check Prices is Located
(location of price scanner)."
   (d)   To comply with the requirements of this section, a retail store must
have, at minimum, the number of price scanners set forth below, based on the
number of checkout stations in such store. In no event does a retail store need
more than 5 price scanners.
 
Number of          Number of
Checkout Stations Price Scanners
1 - 3             1
4 - 5             2
6 - 7             3
8 - 9             4
10 or more        5
 
(Added City Record 8/26/2022, eff. 9/25/2022)
Subchapter C: Posting of Prescription Drug Prices
§ 5-121 Posting of Prescription Drug Prices. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 5-122 Display of Information Relating to Emergency Contraception.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Not sell" shall mean not to have available for usual and customary
dispensing at any time, except that this shall not include circumstances where
the pharmacy customarily dispenses such drug or drugs that are temporarily not
in stock and such pharmacy will be able to fill prescription within 12 hours
after a customer requests that a prescription for such drug be filled.
      (2)   "Emergency contraception prescription drug" shall mean the named
drugs, Plan B and Preven, and any other drug expressly approved by the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use as emergency contraception drug with
a physician's prescription or when and as specifically authorized by law to be
dispensed for emergency contraception without a prescription.
   (b)   Any pharmacy that does not sell an emergency contraception
prescription drug shall conspicuously post a sign adjacent to each counter
where prescription drugs are sold on which is displayed either the name of each
such drug that is not sold and identified as the "morning after pill," or that
states that "no morning after pills" are sold if all such drugs are not sold at
such pharmacy.
   (c)   Any pharmacy that does not have an emergency contraception
prescription drug available for immediate dispensing, and stocks such drug or
drugs, shall conspicuously post a sign adjacent to each counter where
prescription drugs are sold on which is displayed either the name of such drug
or drugs not immediately available and identified as the "morning after pill"
stating that such drug or drugs are not currently in stock but will be
available within 12 hours after a customer requests that a prescription for
such drug be filled. A pharmacy that cannot fill such prescription within 12
hours from original request shall post the sign identified in subsection (b).
   (d)   The signs required to be posted shall be not less than 8.5 by 14
inches, with letters sufficiently large to fill the entire space with
appropriate borders and spacing between lines.
Subchapter G: Information with Respect to Funeral Costs
§ 5-161 Casket and Outer Interment Receptacle Information.
The retail price, which is required to be prominently displayed on caskets and
outer interment receptacles pursuant to § 20-731 of the Administrative Code,
must be clearly visible regardless of whether such casket or receptacle is open
or closed.
§ 5-162 General Price List to be Furnished by Provider of Funeral Services.
   (a)   Size of print. The presentation sheet required to be furnished by
providers of funeral services pursuant to § 20-732 of the New York City
Administrative Code shall be printed clearly and conspicuously.
   (b)   Form and content.
      (1)   Except as specifically provided otherwise in this subchapter, the
presentation sheet required pursuant to § 20-732 of the New York City
Administrative Code shall conform to and shall contain the information required
to be included in the General Price List as prescribed by the New York State
Sanitary Code (10 NYCRR § 79.4) and the Federal Trade Commission Funeral
Industry Trade Practices Rule (16 C.F.R. Part 453), as such may be amended from
time to time, and shall be known hereinafter as the "General Price List."
      (2)   The following disclosures shall be placed on the General Price List
in addition to and immediately after such disclosures that are required to be
placed immediately above the price information required pursuant to State and
federal law or regulations promulgated pursuant thereto specifying the form and
content of the General Price List:
         (i)   Your authorization is required for a funeral home to obtain
custody of a body, and a body must be released promptly upon your request.
         (ii)   The provider of funeral services is required to give price
information in person and over the telephone.
         (iii)   A provider of funeral services is prohibited from representing
that the deterioration of human remains can be prevented for more than a
limited time by embalming, caskets, vaults or outer interment receptacles.
      (3)   The following statement shall be inserted in the General Price List
in a box immediately after the listing of prices for caskets or the listing of
the price range for caskets: "The Federal Trade Commission prohibits the
provider of funeral services from imposing any additional fee or surcharge to
consumers who obtain a casket elsewhere."
   (c)   Availability and display.
      (1)   The provider of funeral services shall immediately offer a General
Price List to any person who inquires about funeral services at the funeral
service establishment.
      (2)   Copies of the General Price List shall be clearly visible and
easily accessible in all areas of the funeral service establishment where sales
or potential sales of funeral services are discussed and in the area within the
funeral service establishment that is in the immediate vicinity of the main
public entrance to such establishment.
§ 5-163 Display of Merchandise.
   (a)   Caskets must be displayed in the same general manner as required by §
20-734 of the New York City Administrative Code, both in printed material
supplied by a provider of funeral services and in all exhibits shown to
customers and prospective customers. Standards for the same general manner of
display include, but are not limited to, lighting, visibility, accessibility,
and overall condition of caskets, as well as to any representations made about
them.
   (b)   For purposes of § 20-734(b)(2) of the New York City Administrative
Code, defacement shall include, but not be limited to, the failure to provide
the same care and maintenance for all merchandise which results in some
merchandise becoming soiled or damaged.
§ 5-164 Price Information Over Telephone.
   (a)   When a telephone caller makes an inquiry regarding the cost of
funerals, the provider of funeral services shall, during the course of that
telephone conversation, give the caller a price range including:
      (1)   the cost of all items that such provider requires must be purchased
as part of all arrangements for burial or cremation, depending upon which
alternative the caller inquires about; and
      (2)   the average cost of a funeral or the cost of a customarily provided
funeral. The caller shall be informed of which items of service are included in
all prices given.
   (b)   When a telephone caller makes a specific inquiry regarding a category
of item or service which is contained in the General Price List, the caller
shall, during the course of the telephone conversation, be given the price and
description of the most expensive and the least expensive item or service in
that category.
      Example: A caller inquiring about caskets may be told by the provider of
funeral services: "We have caskets ranging in price from $(price) for a
(description, model, brand) to $(price) for a (description, model, brand)."
      If there is no variation in price for an item or service, then the
provider of funeral services must give the caller a specific price.
   (c)   A provider of funeral services need not provide to a telephone caller
price information for items and services on the General Price List under the
heading of "CASH ADVANCES."
§ 5-165 Display of Ownership Information.
   (a)   Every provider of funeral services shall display all of the following
ownership information on a sign that is either located immediately outside the
main entrance to its funeral services establishment or that is located
immediately inside the main entrance to its funeral services establishment. If
such sign is located immediately inside the main entrance to such funeral
establishment, it must be clearly visible to someone standing inside such
entrance and shall not be placed on the back of the door to such main entrance
or in any other location where it would be hidden from view.
      (1)   The name of every licensed funeral director who holds at least a
ten percent ownership interest in the corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, limited liability partnership, association, organization, or other
business entity which operates such funeral services establishment.
      (2)   The names of any and all corporations, limited liability companies,
partnerships, limited liability partnerships, associations, organizations, or
other business entities which directly or indirectly hold an ownership interest
of ten percent or more in the corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, limited liability partnership, association, organization, or other
business entity which operates such funeral services establishment.
      (3)   The lettering on such sign shall be at least one inch high.
   (b)   When an ownership interest of ten percent or more in a funeral
services establishment is held, either directly or indirectly, by one or more
corporations, limited liability companies, partnerships, limited liability
partnerships, associations, organizations, or other business entities, the
name, complete headquarters address and telephone number of each such
corporation, limited liability company, partnership, limited liability
partnership, association, organization, or other business entity shall also be
listed on all advertising material used by such funeral services establishment
and on the "General Price List."
§ 5-166 Sale of Monuments.
   (a)   As used in this section:
      (1)   "Monument" means any memorial, headstone, footstone, plaque, ledger
stone or other marker that is designed or intended to be erected or installed
in or on any cemetery, grave, mausoleum or other appropriate place of burial or
memorialization.
      (2)   "Foundation" means a poured concrete or other permanent base
intended to support the monument and installed at the gravesite in the
appropriate location.
   (b)   Whenever a provider of funeral services sells or offers for sale a
monument as part of or in connection with any funeral arrangements, such
provider shall:
      (1)   Make available to customers a price list of all monuments offered
for sale as part of or in connection with funeral arrangements. Such price list
shall be captioned at the top of the page as a "MONUMENT PRICE LIST" in capital
bold face letters. Such price list shall only contain price information about
monuments.
      (2)   The following statement shall be clearly and conspicuously included
in at least 10 point type on the Monument Price List inside a box set
immediately below the caption for such price list:
         "The purchase of a monument is not required as part of your funeral
arrangements. The cost and arrangements for the purchase of a monument must be
accounted for and set out in a document that is separate from the one under
which you agree to the other funeral arrangements you make."
   (c)   In addition to the disclosures about a monument sale that are required
to be included in the written statement required to be furnished showing the
price of the funeral and including an itemized list of funeral services and
funeral merchandise to be supplied at the listed prices, such sale shall also
be evidenced by a separate written contract which shall be signed by all the
parties to the contract. Such contract shall be captioned at the top of the
page as a "MONUMENT CONTRACT" in capital bold face letters, a full and
completed copy shall be furnished to the consumer by the funeral service
provider at the time of the purchase of such monument, and such contracts shall
be retained by the funeral service provider for at least three years from the
date of the sale. Such contract shall include the following information:
      (1)   the name, address and telephone number of the funeral service
provider and of the purchaser;
      (2)   the full name of the individual to be memorialized and, if known,
the date of such individual's death;
      (3)   a full description of the monument, including the material to be
provided, the dimensions of the finished monument, a sketch or drawing of the
proposed monument, the wording of any inscription on such monument, including
the approximate layout thereof, and the method of engraving of such
inscription;
      (4)   the approximate date when the monument is expected to be completed;
      (5)   the name of the cemetery in which the monument is to be placed,
together with the location of the plot or grave, if known; and
      (6)   a full disclosure of the following: the price of the monument;
applicable sales tax, if any; the charge made by the cemetery for the
foundation; any charges for additional work, provided that such additional work
is clearly described in the contract and such charges are itemized; the total
price as contracted; and the schedule for payment, if any.
Subchapter H: Income Tax Preparers
§ 5-171 Location.
Each tax preparer shall prominently and conspicuously post the statement
required by § 20-740 of the Administrative Code at the public entrance to the
tax preparer's business premises or in the immediate area where consumers
arrive and are met for business purposes by the tax preparer.
§ 5-172 Form and Content.
   (a)   Except as provided in subdivision (b) of this section, the sign shall
be composed of proportionately spaced, upper-case black characters, "sans-
serif," at least one-half inch (1/2") high on a white background. The lines on
the sign shall be spaced at least one-half inch (1/2") apart.
   (b)   The heading "IDENTIFICATION AND QUALIFICATIONS OF TAX PREPARER" shall
appear at the top and center of the sign. Subsequent lines shall begin at the
left-hand margin of the sign. The first line beneath the heading shall state
the full name of the tax preparer. The second and third lines shall state the
address at which the tax preparer may be contacted throughout the year. The
fourth line shall state the telephone number at which the tax preparer may
generally be contacted throughout the year during business hours. The fifth
line shall begin with the caption "QUALIFICATIONS:" and be followed by a
statement of the tax preparer's relevant training and/or experience. Such
statement may consist of characters one-quarter inch (1/4") high. (See
Specimens No. I and II appearing below for sample signs.)
   (c)   A partnership, corporation or other business entity operating as a tax
preparer may satisfy the disclosure requirements of § 20-740 of the
Administrative Code by posting one sign, containing its name, address and phone
number as set forth above, and a statement of the minimum qualifications
possessed by all individuals who prepare or assist in the preparation of tax
returns as an agent or employee of the partnership, corporation or other
business entity. (See Specimen No. II.)
   (d)   The sign shall not contain language which falsely indicates that a tax
preparer is licensed or in any manner approved or authorized to do business by
the City of New York
      Specimen No. I 
      IDENTIFICATION AND QUALIFICATIONS OF TAX PREPARER
      JANE DOE
      1 MAIN ST.
      BRONX, NY 11111
      212-555-5555
      QUALIFICATIONS: DEGREE IN TAX PREPARATION FROM ABC COLLEGE AND FOUR YEARS
EXPERIENCE IN PREPARING TAX RETURNS AT DEF TAX SERVICES.
      Specimen No. II 
      IDENTIFICATION AND QUALIFICATIONS OF TAX PREPARER
      XYZ TAX PREPARERS, INC.
      1 MAIN ST.
      NEW YORK, NY 10000
      212-555-0000
      QUALIFICATIONS: EACH INDIVIDUAL WHO PREPARES TAX RETURNS FOR XYZ TAX
PREPARERS, INC. HAS AT LEAST SIXTY HOURS OF CLASSROOM TRAINING CONDUCTED BY XYZ
TAX PREPARERS, INC.
§ 5-173 Consumer Bill of Rights Regarding Tax Preparers.
   (a)   Each tax preparer must post a sign provided by the Department stating:
"By law, tax preparers must give you a free, current, and legible copy of the
Consumer Bill of Rights Regarding Tax Preparers before beginning any
discussions about tax preparation services. The tax preparer must let you
review that document and answer any questions you have. To file a complaint
about this business, contact 311 or visit DCA's website."
      (1)   The sign must measure at least 17 inches wide by 11 inches tall.
      (2)   The sign must be:
         (i)   posted prominently and conspicuously at the public entrance to
the tax preparer's business premises or in the immediate area where consumers
arrive and are met for business by the tax preparer; and
         (ii)   in English and in any other language which the tax preparer
uses to attract customers, provided that the Department has made available a
translation of such sign into that language.
   (b)   Prior to any discussion with the consumer, each tax preparer must give
to each consumer a free, current, and legible copy of the consumer bill of
rights regarding tax preparers in English and in the primary language spoken by
the consumer, if the Department has made available a translation of such
consumer bill of rights in such language.
(Added City Record 12/14/2017, eff. 1/13/2018)
Subchapter J: Information Regarding Redemption of Beverage Containers
§ 5-191 Size of Sign.
The sign required to be posted pursuant to § 20-746 of the Administrative Code
shall not be smaller than eleven inches in width and seventeen inches in
length.
§ 5-192 Content of Sign.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in subdivision b of this section, every
dealer shall be required to post a sign which contains the following language:
      BOTTLE BILL OF RIGHTS
      IF you buy beer, soda or mineral water in New York State, you pay a
deposit on each can or bottle. That gives you certain rights ...
      THE RIGHT to return your empties for refund to any dealer who sells the
same brand, type and size, whether you bought the beverage from that dealer or
not.
      THE RIGHT to get your deposit refund in cash, without proof of purchase.
      THE RIGHT to return your empties any day, any hour, except the first and
last half-hour of the dealers' business day.
      THE RIGHT to return your containers if they are empty and intact. Washing
containers is not required by law, but it is strongly recommended to maintain
sanitary conditions.
      The regulations of the New York State Returnable Beverage Container Act
are enforced by the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
Report any violation to the NYS Department of Environmental Conservation,
(insert current address of Department)
      THE CITY OF NEW YORK, (insert name of current mayor), MAYOR Department of
Sanitation, (insert name of current commissioner), Com- missioner Department of
Consumer Affairs, (insert name of current commissioner), Commissioner
This notice is required to be posted pursuant to Local Law 25 of the Laws of
1985, enacted by the NYC Council.
   (b)   A sign shall be in compliance with this section if it contains the
language specified in subdivision a except that it still includes the name of a
former mayor or commissioner in lieu of the current mayor or commissioner.
§ 5-193 Signs Provided by the Department.
The Department of Consumer Affairs shall make available to all dealers signs
which comply with the Department's regulations as to size and content. Dealers
may request such signs by contacting the Department.
§ 5-194 Substitute Signs.
Any dealer who wishes to post a sign other than the one supplied by the
Department may do so, provided that the sign so substituted is approved by the
Commissioner prior to its posting. To be approved, substitute signs shall be at
least eleven inches by seventeen inches in size and shall contain language that
is similar in import to that required by 6 RCNY §
5-192. Dealers may expand upon, but may not omit, any of the language required
by 6 RCNY §
5-192. To obtain prior approval for a substitute sign, a dealer shall submit to
the Department a true representation of the sign for which approval is being
sought. The type for the heading on substitute signs shall not be smaller than
three quarters (3/4) of an inch in size. The type for the text on substitute
signs shall not be smaller than one half (l/2) of an inch in size.
§ 5-195 Posting of Signs.
The sign required to be posted pursuant to § 20-745 of the Administrative Code
shall be conspicuously placed within ten feet of the dealer's cash register(s)
and shall be visible to consumers prior to the time they pay for their
merchandise.
§ 5-196 Number of Signs.
Dealers whose stores contain four (4) or less cash registers shall be required
to post at least one (1) sign. Dealers whose stores contain between five (5)
and ten (10) cash registers shall be required to post at least two (2) signs.
Dealers whose stores contain more than ten (10) cash registers shall be
required to post at least three (3) signs.
§ 5-197 Signs in Foreign Languages.
The sign required to be posted pursuant to § 20-745 of the Administrative Code
must be in English and shall also be in any other language which the dealer
uses to attract customers.
Subchapter K: Theatre Tickets [Repealed]
§ 5-211 Definitions. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/7/2018, eff. 7/7/2018)
§ 5-212 Conduct of Ticket Selling Business. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/7/2018, eff. 7/7/2018)
§ 5-213 Financial Records. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/7/2018, eff. 7/7/2018)
§ 5-214 Group Ticket Sales and Theatre Parties. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/7/2018, eff. 7/7/2018)
§ 5-215 Public Posting of Statutory and Regulatory Information. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/7/2018, eff. 7/7/2018)
§ 5-216 License Suspension or Revocation. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/7/2018, eff. 7/7/2018)
Subchapter L: Collateral Loan Brokers
§ 5-221 Fees.
No collateral loan broker shall charge or exact a fee other than that permitted
by § 44 of the General Business Law, except that the collateral loan broker may
charge a reasonable fee for:
   (1)   insuring the articles from injury, fire, theft, burglary, robbery and
other contingencies; and
   (2)   extra care actually given when specifically requested by the customer
and only if such fee does not exceed the following amounts:
      (i)   Storage of furs, fur coats, fragile, delicate or bulky items:
$25.00.
      (ii)   Storage of art objects including paintings, sculptures and all
works in any other medium for sizes not to exceed 36 inches by 36 inches:
$25.00 plus any costs actually incurred for special crating and packaging; and
for sizes exceeding the foregoing: an amount separately agreed to by the
parties.
      (iii)   Vault storage for stamp or coin collection: $20.00.
      (iv)   Vault storage for jewelry: 2 percent of the amount of the loan not
to exceed $20.00; if the loan exceeds $1,000: an amount separately agreed to by
the parties.
      (v)   Transportation of pledged items to and from the vault either by
courier(s) or vehicle(s), together with security therefore: one percent of the
amount loaned.
      (vi)   Special handling or wrapping of cameras and photographic
equipment: $5.00.
      (vii)   Special handling of musical instruments: $5.00 for standard size;
instruments exceeding standard size: by separate agreement of the parties.
      (viii)   Special handling of radios, hi-fi's, VCR's, stereos and
television equipment: $10.00.
      (ix)   Special handling for other electrical apparatus, including
computers: $10.00.
§ 5-222 Caveats on Pawn Tickets.
   (a)   Every ticket issued by a collateral loan broker shall include a
notation in either of the following forms: "Not accountable for loss of goods
by fire or theft" or "Protected against loss by fire or theft." Words having
practically the same meaning as the foregoing may be used.
   (b)   Every collateral loan broker shall, in every possible way, call
attention to the contents of the pawn ticket, including the placing in a
prominent position in his place of business of a sign reading: "Read your
ticket."
   (c)   In every case where a charge is made or a fee exacted for extra care,
the collateral loan broker shall specifically call the pledgor's attention to
the said charge at the time the loan is made, and no such charge or fee shall
be allowed unless the pledgor shall sign an agreement to pay such extra charge
and the fee for such extra charge, as agreed upon, shall be plainly written on
the face of the pawn ticket.
   (d)   Every collateral loan broker shall place in a prominent position in
his or her place of business a reproduction of the application for the pawn
ticket and the front of the pawn ticket which have been enlarged to twice their
normal size, and a reproduction of the back of the pawn ticket which has been
enlarged to three times its normal size.
§ 5-223 Pledgor's Identity Required for Precious Metals. [Repealed]
§ 5-224 Proof of Notice of Intention to Sell Pledged Property.
Upon mailing a notice to the pledgor of an intention to sell for failure to
redeem, the pledgee shall obtain from the postal authorities a receipt for the
letter. This receipt, or in case of failure by the postal authorities to
deliver such notice, the return letter, shall be retained as proof of
compliance with the law.
§ 5-225 Proof of Notice of Surplus Realized for Sale of Pledged Property and
Arrangement for Payment to Pledgor. [Repealed]
§ 5-226 Acceptable Forms of Verification of Pledgor's Identity and Required
Records.
   (a)   It shall be the duty of every collateral loan broker to verify the
identity of every person from whom he accepts any article as a pledge for a
loan and to make and keep a written record of the nature of the evidence
submitted by such person to prove his identity. Only the following shall be
deemed acceptable evidence of identity:
      (1)   Any official document issued by the United States government, any
state, county, municipality or subdivision thereof, any public agency or
department thereof, or any public or private employer, which requires and bears
signature of person to whom issued.
      (2)   Police, fire department and postal department badges containing
numbers.
      (3)   A passport.
   (b)   In addition, and in every case, it shall be the duty of every
collateral loan broker, to require that every person from whom he accepts an
article as a pledge for a loan, sign his name in the presence of the collateral
loan broker, compare the signature with the signature on the identifying
document and retain on his premises the person's signature together with the
number and description of the identifying document.
§ 5-227 Papers in Which Collateral Loan Brokers Can Advertise Auction Sales.
The following is a list of all newspapers published in the City of New York in
which collateral loan brokers may advertise the sale of all unredeemed pawns or
pledges which remain in their possession in excess of the period prescribed by
§ 48 of the General Business Law. To the extent required by § 48 of the General
Business Law, such sale shall be at public auction by a licensed auctioneer, so
long as auctioneers are required to be licensed pursuant to the New York City
Administrative Code.
American Banker
Brooklyn Daily Bulletin
China Daily News
The China Post
China Tribune
Daily News
El Diario – La Prensa
Jewish Daily Forward
National Herald
New York Daily Challenge
The New York Evening Express
New York Post
The New York Times
The News World
Novoye Russkoye Slovo
Nowy-Dziennik
The Peimer News
Il Progresso Italo-Americano
Queens Evening News
Staten Island Advance
Svoboda Ukrainian Daily
United Journal
The Wall Street Journal
Women's Wear Daily
World Journal
Yiddish Zeitung
Subchapter M: Employment Agencies
§ 5-241 Records.
It shall be the duty of each licensed agency to keep its financial records on a
monthly or quarterly basis and such records shall be brought up to date not
later than thirty(30) days after the expiration of such period. All such
records shall be kept at the principal place of business for a period of three
(3) years and shall be made available for inspection during normal business
hours to the Commissioner of Consumer Affairs of the City of New York, or his
duly authorized representatives.
§ 5-242 Applications for License – Corporation.
   (a)   A corporate applicant for a license shall list on the original
application, or a renewal application, the names and addresses of all its
officers and all stockholders holding ten percent (10%) or more of the stock of
said corporation. A true and certified copy of the minutes electing such
officers shall be attached to the application.
   (b)   The licensee shall notify the Department of Consumer Affairs within
thirty (30) days in writing of any change of its officers or principal
stockholders. In the event of a change of officers a true and certified copy of
the minutes shall be attached to such notification.
§ 5-243 Trade Name and Partnership Certificates.
   (a)   If the applicant conducts business under a trade name or if the
applicant is a partnership, then the application for a license must be
accompanied by a copy of the trade name or partnership certificate duly
certified by the Clerk of the County in whose office said certificate is filed.
   (b)   Such trade name shall not be similar or identical to that of any
existing licensed agency.
§ 5-244 Fingerprinting.
   (a)   Every applicant for a license, if he is a natural person, shall be
fingerprinted in the office of the Department and the fingerprints shall be
filed with and made part of the original application.
   (b)   If the applicant is a partnership each member thereof shall be
fingerprinted and the fingerprints shall be filed with and made a part of the
original application. In the event of a change in the members of a partnership,
each new member shall appear at the office of the Department within thirty (30)
days after such change, be fingerprinted, and the fingerprints shall be filed
with and made a part of the application.
   (c)   If the applicant is a corporation, all the officers and all
stockholders holding ten percent (10%) or more of the stock of the corporation
shall be fingerprinted, and the fingerprints shall be filed with and made part
of the original application. In the event of any change of officers or
stockholders of any corporate licensee, such new officers or stockholders shall
appear at the office of the Department within thirty (30) days after such
change, be fingerprinted, and the fingerprints shall be filed and be made part
of the licensee's application.
   (d)   Whenever an applicant for a license does not have the required two
years' experience, then the manager so designated shall be fingerprinted and
the fingerprints shall be filed with and made a part of the original
application.
§ 5-245 Premises.
   (a)   An agency may share premises, provided that the sharing is with an
unrelated entity or with an entity permitted by New York General Business Law §
187(8). The agency shall not directly or indirectly suggest to an applicant
that he or she purchase the services or products of the entity sharing the
premises. For purposes of this section, "unrelated" shall mean that no exchange
of the proceeds or sharing of profits in any form takes place between the
agency and the entity, and that they do not have any officers, directors,
partners, shareholders, principals, managers, executives, administrators,
salespersons, or job-placement counselors in common.
   (b)   Every room of an employment agency shall be properly and adequately
lighted and ventilated.
   (c)   The premises of every licensed agency shall be kept in a suitable and
sanitary condition.
   (d)   Every employment agency shall be provided with running water and
suitable and adequate washing facilities. Where both males and females are
employed or dealt with in such agency, separate facilities shall be provided
for each sex.
§ 5-246 Referral Cards.
   (a)   Whenever a licensed agency refers an applicant for a position to an
employer where it reasonably knows or should have known that a labor dispute is
in progress, then it shall be the duty of the licensee to deliver to the
applicant a statement in large and bold lettering, to the effect that the
employees in such place of employment are engaged or involved in a labor
dispute.
   (b)   Whenever a licensed agency shall refer an applicant for employment to
an employer who has agreed to pay to the agency the fee for the employee, or
where the agency has agreed not to charge said applicant a fee for such
referral, then the referral card shall clearly set forth the terms under which
the employer has agreed to pay the fee for the applicant or the terms under
which the applicant shall not be required to pay the fee.
§ 5-247 Recruitment of Domestic or Household Employees from Without the State.
   (a)   No employment agency shall recruit domestic or household employees
outside the State of New York as provided in § 184 of the General Business Law
without notifying the Commissioner of Consumer Affairs of the City of New York
in writing.
   (b)   Every employment agency engaged in such recruitment shall keep on file
in its principal place of business for a period of three (3) years a written
record indicating or setting forth the name and address of the premises where
such applicant is lodged and a receipt, signed by the applicant, setting forth
the number of meals and the date and place where such meals were served to the
applicant.
§ 5-248 Prohibited Practices.
   (a)   No employment agency shall discriminate against any individual because
of his age, race, creed, color, national origin, religion, sexual orientation,
or sex, in receiving, classifying, disposing or otherwise acting upon
applications for its services, in referring an applicant or applicants to an
employer or employers or with respect to any guidance, training or
apprenticeship program.
   (b)   No employment agency shall:
      (1)   print or circulate or cause to be printed or circulated any
statement, advertisement or publication, or
      (2)   use any form of application for employment, or
      (3)   use any business name, trade name or display name, or
      (4)   make any inquiry in connection with prospective employment, which
expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification or
discrimination as to age, race, creed, color, national origin, religion, sexual
orientation, or sex, or any intent to make any such limitation, specification
or discrimination, unless based upon a bona fide occupational qualification.
   (c)   No employment agency engaged in securing or obtaining positions for
applicants in the modeling field shall directly or indirectly refer any
applicant to a particular school or course for modeling, nor induce, suggest,
or encourage choice of such school or course.
(Amended City Record 2/27/2019, eff. 3/29/2019)
§ 5-249 Definitions of GBL § 171 Terms.
As used in § 171 of GBL Art. 11, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
   Applicant. "Applicant" means a person seeking employment.
   Employment agency. 
      (1)   "Employment agency" shall include all persons who, for a fee,
render vocational guidance or counseling services, and who directly or
indirectly represent, by any means, that:
         (i)   they obtain or attempt to obtain employment for an applicant; or
         (ii)   they will or may arrange interviews with employers for an
applicant; or
         (iii)   they have or may make contacts with employers which may
improve an applicant's chances to obtain employment; or
         (iv)   they have knowledge of job openings or positions which is not
available to the public; or
         (v)   they have knowledge of job openings or positions which cannot be
obtained with reasonable effort from other sources; or
         (vi)   they maintain or sell a list or lists of job openings or
positions unless all of the information contained in the list or lists appears
in, and is part of, a newspaper or other publication in general circulation,
and this fact is disclosed to consumers.
      (2)   "Employment agency" also shall include all persons who, for a fee,
render vocational guidance or counseling services, and who directly or
indirectly represent, by any means, that:
         (i)   they provide information about job search techniques or job
search strategies; or
         (ii)   they assist an applicant in any attempt to present to employers
the availability or qualifications, or both, of the applicant for a position or
class of positions. Such representations include, but are not limited to,
representations that they "market" or "promote" applicants.
   Person. "Person" means any individual, company, society, association,
corporation, manager, contractor, subcontractor, partnership, bureau, agency,
service, office, or the agent or employee of the foregoing.
   Vocational guidance or counseling services. "Vocational guidance or
counseling services" means services which consist of one or more oral
presentations and which:
      (1)   provide information concerning the qualifications generally
required for one or more positions or class of positions; or
      (2)   assess, or attempt to assess, the suitability of a person seeking
employment for one or more positions or class of positions; or
      (3)   provide information concerning the availability of one or more
positions or class of positions.
§ 5-250 Display of Sign.
   (a)   Every licensed employment agency must post conspicuously at his or her
place of business a sign, at least 12 inches by 18 inches in dimension with
letters at least 1-inch high, which includes the name that appears on his or
her license(s), the license number(s), and instructions on contacting the
Department to file a complaint.
   (b)   Every licensed employment agency must post conspicuously in the main
room of his or her place of business a sign, at least 12 inches by 18 inches in
dimension, containing sections one hundred seventy-eight, one hundred eighty-
one, one hundred eighty-five, and one hundred eighty-six, of Article 11 of the
general business law. The sign must be posted in all languages in which the
employment agency does business, provided the commissioner has made signs
available in such language(s).
   (c)   Every licensed employment agency must post conspicuously in the main
room of his or her place of business a sign, at least 8.5 inches by 11 inches
in dimension, containing the rights of job seekers. The sign must be posted in
all languages in which the employment agency does business, provided the
commissioner has made signs available in such language(s).
   (d)   For the purposes of this section, "main room" means the main reception
or waiting area or, where no reception or waiting area exists, the main
entrance to the agency.
(Amended City Record 2/27/2019, eff. 3/29/2019)
§ 5-251 Display of License.
Every licensee must post conspicuously his or her license at the licensee's
place of business. A licensee may post a copy of the license at the licensee's
place of business only if the original is available at such place of business
for inspection by any person.
§ 5-252 Notice of Hearing and Subpoena Duces Tecum.
A licensee must appear in person at the Department to answer a notice of
hearing or a subpoena duces tecum served upon that licensee. If the licensee is
an individual, he or she must appear; if a partnership, one of its general
partners must appear; and if a corporation, one of its officers must appear. A
notice of hearing or subpoena duces tecum may be served by ordinary mail
addressed to the licensee's place of business. They may also be served by
ordinary mail addressed to the residence of an individual licensee; the
residence of a general partner of a partnership licensee; or the residence of
an officer or principal stockholder of a corporate licensee.
§ 5-253 Change of Address.
A licensee shall notify the Department in writing of any change of address
within 10 days of the change. This requirement applies to the address of the
licensed business, and to the resident addresses of: individual licensees; all
partners of partnership licensees; and the officers and principal stockholders
of corporate licensees.
§ 5-254 Judgments.
A licensee or license applicant must satisfy any outstanding judgment against
him or her that has been obtained by a consumer and that relates to activities
for which a license is required:
   (a)   within thirty (30) days from the date of entry of the judgment; or
   (b)   if the judgment has been stayed or appealed, within thirty (30) days
from the date the stay is lifted or the appeal decided; or
   (c)   according to a payment schedule the parties agree upon.
§ 5-255 Response to Consumer Complaints.
A licensee or license applicant must respond in writing to the Department about
any consumer complaint sent to the licensee or applicant by the Department. The
response must be made within 20 days of the date the complaint is sent to the
licensee or applicant and must set forth the licensee's or applicant's position
regarding the transaction which is the subject of the complaint, including the
facts which the licensee or applicant believes justify its position. The
licensee or applicant must respond to subsequent communications from the
Department concerning the complaint within 10 days after receiving a
communication.
§ 5-256 Proof of Surety Bond.
No license or renewal shall be issued unless the licensee or applicant submits
proof that every bond required by the Department for the license is in effect
and does not expire prior to the end of the licensing period. Except where
otherwise provided, all such bonds must allow any person aggrieved by the
bondholder's breach of the conditions of the bond to proceed against the bond.
§ 5-257 Lost or Mutilated Licenses.
   (a)   Lost license. A licensee shall immediately report, in an affidavit,
the loss of a license issued to him or her by the Department, requesting the
issuance of a new license. Replacement licenses are issued at the discretion of
the Department.
   (b)   Mutilated license. Should a license issued by the Department to any
licensee become mutilated or otherwise illegible, the holder of the license
shall promptly surrender it to the Department and request the issuance of a new
license. The request shall be made upon a form provided by the Department.
   (c)   Fee. A fee of fifteen dollars ($15) shall be charged for the issuance
of a replacement license. This fee shall be paid when the affidavit for a lost
license is filed or when a mutilated or otherwise illegible license is
surrendered and a request for the issuance of a new license is filed. This fee
will be refunded should the Department decide not to issue the replacement
license.
§ 5-258 Late Renewal Fee.
Any licensee who files for a license renewal more than one (1) month, but less
than three (3) months, after the expiration date of the license must pay to the
Department, in addition to any other fees or penalties provided by law, the sum
of $20 or 20 percent of the license fee, whichever is greater. Any licensee who
files for a license renewal more than three (3) months after the expiration
date of the license must pay to the Department, in addition to any other fees
or penalties provided by law, the sum of $50 or 30 percent of the license fee,
whichever is greater.
§ 5-259 Statement of Terms and Conditions.
   (a)   All employment agencies must provide to each applicant a document
accompanying each contract entitled "Terms and Conditions," except when
offering an applicant a contract for Class "C" theatrical employment.
   (b)   Each "Terms and Conditions" document provided to an applicant must
conform to the template made available by the commissioner.
   (c)   The "Terms and Conditions" document must be provided to each applicant
in the language in which their contract was negotiated, provided the
commissioner has made a template available in such language.
[Click_here_to_open_a_PDF_copy_of_the_terms_and_conditions_form]
(Added City Record 2/27/2019, eff. 3/29/2019)
Subchapter N: Immigration Consultants
§ 5-260 Location and Availability of Records.
All records required to be retained shall be kept at the provider's principal
place of business and shall be made available for inspection during normal
business hours to the Commissioner or his or her duly authorized
representative.
§ 5-261 Requirements for Written Agreements.
The statements required to be included in written agreements pursuant to
subdivisions one through seven and nine through twelve of § 20-777 of the New
York City Administrative Code shall all be included together in a box that is
set off from the rest of the text of the written agreement. The text of the
required statements shall be in at least twelve (12) point font. The box
containing the required statements shall appear immediately above the place for
the consumer's signature.
(Amended City Record 8/7/2018, eff. 9/6/2018)
§ 5-262 Completing Form Preparation Declaration.
Every immigration assistance service provider shall complete and sign the form
preparation declaration contained on any form that was directly or indirectly
prepared by such provider as part of the service for which the consumer is
charged a fee under the written agreement required by § 20-777.
(Amended City Record 8/7/2018, eff. 9/6/2018)
§ 5-263 Exemption Obtained by Fraud or Misrepresentation.
Any person or organization that obtained by fraud or misrepresentation any
status set forth in § 20-775(b)(1) - (7) of the New York City Administrative
Code, which otherwise would have entitled such person or organization to an
exemption from regulation as a provider of immigration assistance services
pursuant to Subchapter 14-A of Chapter 5 of Title 20 of the New York City
Administrative Code, shall be deemed to have been a provider of immigration
services and never exempt from such regulation.
(Amended City Record 8/7/2018, eff. 9/6/2018)
§ 5-264 Disclosure of Surety Maintained by Provider.
   (a)   Every immigration assistance service provider shall post a sign that
shall be not less than eleven (11) inches by seventeen (17) inches in dimension
stating that the provider is by law required to maintain in full force and
effect, for the entire period during which the provider provides immigration
assistance service and for one year after the provider ceases to do business as
an immigration assistance service provider, a surety bond, contract of
indemnity, or irrevocable letter of credit, payable to the people of the City
of New York, in the principal amount of $50,000.00. The sign must also include
the name, address and telephone number where a claim against such surety bond,
contract of indemnity, or irrevocable letter of credit is required to be filed.
Such sign shall be conspicuously displayed in the area where it will be clearly
visible to consumers entering and leaving the premises.
   (b)   Every immigration assistance service provider shall also furnish to
each consumer, upon signing a contract, the same information required to be
posted on such sign. The information shall be furnished to each consumer on a
separate sheet of paper in at least twelve (12) point bold faced font and in a
color that contrasts sharply with the color of the paper.
(Amended City Record 8/7/2018, eff. 9/6/2018)
Subchapter O: Tenant Screening Report Signs
§ 5-265 Requirements Concerning the Posting of Signs About Tenant Screening
Reports.
   (a)   The sign required to be posted pursuant to § 20-809 of the
Administrative Code of the City of New York at any location at which the
principal purpose is to conduct business transactions pertaining to the rental
of residential real estate properties shall include text printed in the
specified size type and shall contain the required information in the order
listed below, except that italicized text included below is not part of the
text for the sign:
      (1)   The words "NOTICE ABOUT TENANT SCREENING REPORTS" shall be printed
at the top of the sign in one and one half-inch high capital letters.
      (2)   If application information is or may be used to screen tenants
through a report from a consumer reporting agency, the sign shall state in 24-
point type as follows: "Tenant screening reports from consumer reporting
agencies are sometimes used to assist landlords in making rental decisions. In
regard to such reports (Check the applicable box):
         ____ We do not use such reports.
         ____ We may use such reports by contacting the following:
         •   (Insert name and address of each consumer reporting agency that
may be contacted, and identify any that are a nationwide specialty consumer
reporting agency).
         •   (Use additional lines for each listed agency).
         "The law requires us to notify you if we do not lease or rent to you
based on information in that report. You also have the right to dispute the
accuracy of the information in the report directly with the reporting agency
and to obtain a free report from such agency if we do not lease or rent to you
based on such report.
         "You also are entitled to receive one free report every 12 months from
any nationwide specialty consumer reporting agency used by us, as well as a
free credit report every 12 months from each of the nationwide consumer credit
reporting companies: Equifax, Experian and TransUnion. You can request this
free credit report through the website www.annualcreditreport.com. You may
dispute the accuracy of any information about you that is contained in such
report directly with the credit reporting agency."
   (b)   The color of the text of the notice required in paragraph (1) of
subdivision (a) shall contrast sharply with the color of the remaining text,
and the colors of the printed text shall contrast sharply with the background
color of the sign.
   (c)   All the required information shall be included on one sign that shall
be posted at the location at a place where it is conspicuously visible to a
consumer who is seated while the transaction is conducted at such location.
Subchapter P: Pregnancy Services Centers
§ 5-266 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
   Directly provide. The term "directly provide" means that the licensed
medical provider provides the service.
   Directly supervise. The term "directly supervise" means that the licensed
medical provider is on site and directly overseeing the provision of the
service from beginning to end.
   Services. The term "services" means abortion, emergency contraception,
obstetric ultrasounds, obstetric sonograms, prenatal care, pregnancy testing,
pregnancy diagnosis, and other medical and/or pharmaceutical services.
   Social media site or social network site. The term "social media site" or
"social network site" means a form of electronic communication, such as a
website for social networking or microblogging, which allows users to interact
or through which users create online communities to share information, ideas,
personal messages, and other content, and includes, but is not limited to,
Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Flickr, LinkedIn, Tumblr and Myspace.
(Added City Record 3/28/2016, eff. 5/27/2016)
§ 5-267 Exemption.
A pregnancy services center shall not include a facility:
   (a)   that is licensed by the state of New York or the United States
government to provide medical or pharmaceutical services; or
   (b)   where a licensed medical provider is present to directly provide or
directly supervise the provision of all services defined in 6 RCNY §
5-266 that are provided at the facility.
(Added City Record 3/28/2016, eff. 5/27/2016)
§ 5-268 Display of Sign for Required Disclosure.
   (a)   Every pregnancy services center must display at its facility,
including a mobile facility, a sign provided by the Department stating in
English and Spanish: "This facility does not have a licensed medical provider
on site to provide or supervise all services." The Department will provide both
signs on its website for downloading by pregnancy services centers. The sign
will measure eleven (11) inches by seventeen (17) inches and the lettering will
be one inch high.
   (b)   Every pregnancy services center must post the sign at every public
entrance. If the pregnancy services center is located in an office building or
other structure containing two or more independent units, the sign must be
posted at each entrance used exclusively for entry to the pregnancy services
center. The sign must be: (1) posted on the outside of the entrance door and so
that the distance from the top of the sign to the floor is between sixty-six
(66) and seventy (70) inches and the distance between the frame of the door and
the closest edge of the sign is not more than twelve (12) inches; (2) clearly
and conspicuously visible to the client as she or he enters the pregnancy
services center; and (3) laminated or protected by a clear sheeting or other
suitable material so that the text will not be destroyed, soiled, distorted, or
rendered illegible.
   (c)   Every pregnancy services center must post at least one sign in every
area where clients wait to receive services. If the waiting area contains a
reception desk, the sign must be posted on the reception desk or on a wall at a
location not greater than 12 inches from the reception desk. If the sign is
posted on a wall, it must be posted so that the distance from the top of the
sign to the floor is between sixty-six (66) and seventy (70) inches.
(Added City Record 3/28/2016, eff. 5/27/2016)
§ 5-269 Disclosures in Advertising.
   (a)   "Advertisement promoting the services of a pregnancy services center"
includes all promotional materials, statements, visual descriptions, or other
visual representations of any kind disseminated in print or electronically,
including, but not limited to, mailings, postcards, signs, business cards,
flyers, hand-outs, brochures, banners, billboards, subway or bus signs, window
signs, store-front signs, newspaper print advertisements and listings,
telephone directory listings, television advertisements, internet
advertisements, social media or social network sites and radio advertisements.
"Advertisement promoting the services of a pregnancy services center" does not
include communications or statements made by a center in the course of its
operations that do not promote the center's services to clients or the general
public, and that are directed exclusively to the center's non-client directors,
employees, past financial donors, and interns.
   (b)   Every advertisement promoting the services of a pregnancy services
center must include in English and Spanish the statement: "This facility does
not have a licensed medical provider on site to provide or supervise all
services." The lettering of such statements in printed materials must be clear,
legible, and in the same color and darkness, and in a type size at least one-
third as high and one-third as broad, as the largest print in the
advertisement. The lettering of such statement in television and internet
advertisements must be clear and legible and in close proximity to the
description of services provided at the pregnancy services center. The
lettering of such statement on business cards may be printed on the back of the
cards.
   (c)   Every pregnancy services center must also post the statement provided
in Subsection (b) of this Section on its website and social media or social
network sites. The lettering of such statement must be clear, legible, in the
same color and darkness, and in a type size at least one-third as high and one-
third as broad, as the largest print on the website or on the social media or
social network site. The statement must be posted on every page of the website
and social media or social network site. Where a page of the website or social
media or social network site contains the description of services provided by
such pregnancy services center, the statement must also be contained on that
page, in close proximity to the services description.
   (d)   In addition to the disclosure requirements provided in subsection (c),
the statement provided in subsection (b) must be included in the text of each
post made on a social media or social network site. In the event a social media
or social network site, such as Twitter, limits the number of characters that
may be used in a post, the statement may be attached as a photo image to each
post rather than included in the text of each post. Where the statement is
included in a photo image, the lettering of such statement shall be consistent
with the requirements described in subsection (c). Where a post contains the
description of services provided by such pregnancy services center, the
statement must also be in close proximity to the services description. Each
post that does not comply with this requirement shall constitute a single
violation, except that for the purpose of imposing a sealing order pursuant to
section 20-818(b)(1) of the Administrative Code, each day of noncompliance
shall be treated as a separate occasion.
(Added City Record 3/28/2016, eff. 5/27/2016)
§ 5-270 Oral Disclosure.
Upon a client or prospective client request for an abortion, emergency
contraception and/or prenatal care service, a pregnancy services center shall
orally disclose in English and Spanish the statement: "This facility does not
have a licensed medical provider on site to provide or supervise all services."
(Added City Record 3/28/2016, eff. 5/27/2016)
§ 5-271 Evidence.
   (a)   It shall be prima facie evidence that a facility has the appearance of
a licensed medical facility if it has two or more of the factors listed in
subparagraphs (a) through (f) of Title 20, Subchapter 17, § 20-815(g)(2) of the
New York City Administrative Code.
   (b)   A facility's distribution of a pregnancy test kit shall not, by
itself, be sufficient to establish that it has the "appearance of a licensed
medical facility," provided that the test is self-administered, self-diagnosed,
and self-interpreted. Notwithstanding, a facility's distribution of a pregnancy
test kit – even if the pregnancy test kit was exclusively self-administered,
self-interpreted, and self-diagnosed – may be relied upon, in combination with
another legally permissible factor, to establish the "appearance of a licensed
medical facility."
(Added City Record 3/28/2016, eff. 5/27/2016)
Subchapter Q: Bail Bond Agents
§ 5-272 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
   Bail bond agent. The term "bail bond agent" has the same definition as that
term is defined in § 20-830 of the Administrative Code.
   Designated citywide language. The term "designated citywide language" has
the same definition as that term is defined in § 20-830 of the Administrative
Code.
(Added City Record 4/11/2019, eff. 5/11/2019)
§ 5-273 Disclosures.
   (a)   To comply with § 20-831(b) of the Administrative Code, a bail bond
agent must post in a conspicuous manner at its business and where transactions
are executed a sign, produced and made available by the Department, no less
than 8.5 inches by 11 inches in dimension that contains the following
information:
      (1)   The name of the bail bond agent as registered with the New York
State Department of Financial Services;
      (2)   The New York State Department of Financial Services license number
of the bail bond agent;
      (3)   All addresses and phone numbers registered under the license; and
      (4)   The name of any sublicensee registered under the license.
   (b)   To comply with § 20-831(c) of the Administrative Code, before entering
into a contract with a consumer, a bail bond agent must produce and distribute
to every consumer a flier no less than 8.5 inches by 11 inches in dimension,
containing the information described in Subdivision (a) of this section.
   (c)   To comply with § 20-831(c) of the Administrative Code, before entering
into a contract with a consumer, a bail bond agent must produce and distribute
to every consumer, the consumer bill of rights shown below on paper no less
than 8.5 by 11 inches in dimension. The consumer must sign and date a copy of
the consumer bill of rights produced and distributed by the bail bond agent.
The bail bond agent must produce the consumer bill of rights in English and in
a designated citywide language if the consumer is a limited English proficient
individual who speaks a designated citywide language and the bail bond agent
knows or reasonably should know that the consumer is such an individual.
_______________________________________________________________________________________
Bail Bond Consumer Bill of Rights
By law, bail bond agents must give you a copy of this document before you sign
a contract. It outlines your rights, how the process works, and maximum fees
that a bail bond agent can charge. Take the time to read and understand it
before you sign it. The bail bond agent must give you a copy of any signed
document, including a contract, to keep.
Know Your Rights
It's illegal for a bail bond agent to:
   •   Charge a fee (also called a premium) for the bail bond that is more than
the maximum fee allowed by law. See the Maximum Fees Chart. The fees charged by
the bail bond agent are not refundable, which means you will not get back your
money.
   •   Charge extra for services if the charges, combined with other fees,
exceed the maximum fees allowed. Services might have names like "courier fee"
or "check-in fee."
   •   Require someone to pay more fees for a bail bond if the maximum fees
have been paid already.
You have the right to:
   •   Know the name and license number of the bail bond agent and receive this
information in writing.
   •   Negotiate the contract with the bail bond agent.
   •   Take documents off the premises to review them before signing them.
   •   Get a contract that tells you when the bail bond agent will return your
collateral and under what conditions. Collateral can be cash, property, such as
the deed to a home, or something with value that the bail bond agent keeps
until a case is over. Collateral is refundable, so you get it back when the
case is over. However, the bail bond agent may be able to keep the collateral
if the defendant violates the court's orders; for example, if the defendant
does not show up for a scheduled court appearance.
   •   Get back the collateral you provided if the judge decides that the
defendant followed all of the court's directions. It does not matter if the
defendant is convicted or acquitted.
How the Process Works
Someone close to you is arrested and charged with a crime.
The court sets bail. If you cannot pay cash bail directly to the court, you can
go to a bail bond agent to arrange a bail bond. Know your rights when using a
bail bond agent! See Know Your Rights.
You pay the bail bond agent, possibly provide collateral, and sign a contract.
The bail bond agent secures the bail bond.
The defendant is released from jail.
While the case is open, the defendant must obey all court orders and attend all
scheduled court appearances. If not, the court may revoke bail, which means the
bond is forfeited and you lose your collateral.
If the judge "exonerates" the bond (either at the end of the case or while the
case is still open), then the bail bond agent must return the collateral. The
court has exoneration paperwork, often called the "disposition," which says
whether the bail was exonerated, and you can take this to the bail bond agent
as proof.
The bail bond agent either gives you the collateral immediately or mails it to
you.
Maximum Fees Chart
The formula to determine the maximum fees that a bail bond agent can charge for
a bail bond is:
   •   If the bond is $200 or less, the maximum fee is $10.
   •   If the bond is more than $200, the maximum fee is:
      o   10% of the amount up to $3,000
      o   An additional 8% for any amount between $3,000 and $10,000
      o   An additional 6% for any amount above $10,000
The maximum fees are set based on the size of the bond, not the number of
people signing for it. If the maximum fee for a bond is $100 and two or more
people sign for the bond, the bail bond agent may still only charge $100 total.
Bail Bond Amount Calculation of Fees Maximum Fees
Bail Bond Amount Calculation of Fees                          Maximum Fees
$1 to $200       $10                                          $10
$1,000           10% of $1,000                                $100
$5,000           10% of $3,000 + 8% of $2,000                 $460
$7,500           10% of $3,000 + 8% of $4,500                 $660
$10,000          10% of $3,000 + 8% of $7,000                 $860
$20,000          10% of $3,000 + 8% of $7,000 + 6% of $10,000 $1,460
$50,000          10% of $3,000 + 8% of $7,000 + 6% of $40,000 $3,260
 
An online tool to calculate maximum fees is available at: https://
nybondcalculator.org/
What to Do if a Bail Bond Agent Breaks the Law
To report an unlicensed bail bond agent, or a bail bond agent charging illegal
fees or failing to return or refund collateral, contact the New York State
Department of Financial Services (DFS) at (800) 342-3736 or dfs.ny.gov.
To report other illegal business practices, contact the New York City
Department of Consumer Affairs (DCA) by calling 311 or visiting nyc.gov/dca.
Illegal business practices may include refusing to provide copies of documents;
failing to provide a complete receipt or providing an illegal receipt; or false
advertising.
For Consumer to Complete:
The bail bond agent must give you this document in your preferred language if
it is one of the six designated citywide languages (Spanish, Bengali, Chinese,
Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian).
___________________         ___________________
Signature            Date
___________________
Print Name
_______________________________________________________________________________________
 
   (d)   To comply with § 20-832 of the Administrative Code, a bail bond agent
must post a copy of the sign shown below on a paper no less than 17 inches by
28 inches in a conspicuous manner at the location where transactions are
executed.
_______________________________________________________________________________________
Bail Bond Fees
The formula to determine the maximum fees that a bail bond agent can charge for
a bail bond is:
   •   If the bond is $200 or less, the maximum fee is $10.
   •   If the bond is more than $200, the maximum fee is:
      o   10% of the amount up to $3,000
      o   An additional 8% for any amount between $3,000 and $10,000
      o   An additional 6% for any amount above $10,000
The maximum fees are set based on the size of the bond, not the number of
people signing for it. If the maximum fee for a bond is $100 and two or more
people sign for the bond, the bail bond agent may still only charge $100 total.
Bail Bond Amount Calculation of Fees Maximum Fees
Bail Bond Amount Calculation of Fees                          Maximum Fees
$1 to $200       $10                                          $10
$1,000           10% of $1,000                                $100
$5,000           10% of $3,000 + 8% of $2,000                 $460
$7,500           10% of $3,000 + 8% of $4,500                 $660
$10,000          10% of $3,000 + 8% of $7,000                 $860
$20,000          10% of $3,000 + 8% of $7,000 + 6% of $10,000 $1,460
$50,000          10% of $3,000 + 8% of $7,000 + 6% of $40,000 $3,260
 
An online tool to calculate maximum fees is available at: https://
nybondcalculator.org/
Consumer Bill of Rights
You are entitled to receive a Consumer Bill of Rights and you must sign it
before entering into a contract with the bail bond agent.
File a Complaint
If you think the bail bond agent broke the law by charging excessive fees, you
should file a complaint.
To report an unlicensed bail bond agent, or a bail bond agent charging illegal
fees or failing to return or refund collateral, contact the New York State
Department of Financial Services (DFS) at (800) 342-3736 or dfs.ny.gov.
To report other illegal business practices, contact the New York City
Department of Consumer Affairs (DCA) by calling 311 or visiting nyc.gov/dca.
Illegal business practices may include refusing to provide copies of documents;
failing to provide a complete receipt or providing an illegal receipt; or false
advertising.
_______________________________________________________________________________________
(Added City Record 4/11/2019, eff. 5/11/2019)
Subchapter R: Cashless Establishments
§ 5-280 Presumption of a Cashless Establishment.
   (a)   There is a presumption that a food store or retail establishment is in
violation of subdivision b of § 20-840 of the Administrative Code of the City
of New York if such food store or retail establishment displays a sign
representing that it refuses to accept payment in cash from consumers, or if
any employee or agent of such food store or retail establishment represents
that it refuses to accept payment in cash from consumers.
   (b)   There is a presumption that a food store or retail establishment is in
violation of subdivision c of § 20-840 of the Administrative Code of the City
of New York if such food store or retail establishment displays a sign
representing that it charges a higher price for the same consumer commodity to
a consumer who pays in cash than to a consumer who pays for such commodity
through a cashless transaction, or if any employee or agent of such food store
or retail establishment represents that it charges a higher price for the same
consumer commodity to a consumer who pays in cash than to a consumer who pays
for such commodity through a cashless transaction.
(Added City Record 9/8/2020, eff. 10/8/2020)
Subchapter S: Car Rentals
§ 5-290 Car Rental.
   (a)   Reservations. A motor vehicle rental business which reserves vehicles
for consumers must make available either the vehicles reserved, or one which
seats at least as many passengers as the one reserved and is suitable for the
consumer's purposes, within one-half hour of the reserved time, either at the
reserved location or at another location to which the consumer is transported
without charge. This subdivision (a) does not apply if the consumer is told
when the reservation is made that the reservation is not guaranteed. The
business must fulfill all other terms of the reservation.
   (b)   Deceptive advertising. A motor vehicle rental business which rents to
consumers may not advertise or represent that reservations can be made, unless
it maintains procedures to comply with this Regulation.
   (c)   Records. A business which reserves vehicles for consumers must
maintain procedures reasonably calculated to fulfill those reservations. This
includes maintaining records of all reservations, and of the scheduled return
times of all rented vehicles. These records must be preserved for at least 6
months, and shall be made available for inspection and copying by the
Department of Consumer and Worker Protection.
   (d)   Required sign. A motor vehicle rental business which rents vehicles to
consumers must conspicuously display on the business premises a sign or notice
entitled "Department of Consumer and Worker Protection Car Rental Law." The
sign shall be not less than twelve (12) inches by eighteen (18) inches in
dimension, with letters thereon to be not less than one (1) inch high. The sign
must inform consumers of their rights under 6 RCNY §
5-290(a) and it must contain the following words:
"To report complaints, contact the New York City Department of Consumer and
Worker Protection, (Insert the Department's current address), Complaint Phone:
(Insert the Department's current complaint telephone number)."
The following statement complies with this requirement:
If you have made a reservation for a car (or truck), that reservation must be
honored at the price originally promised, within one-half hour of the time
originally promised, unless you are told when you make the reservation that it
is not guaranteed. To report complaints, contact the New York City Department
of Consumer and Worker Protection, (Insert the Department's current address),
Complaint Phone: (Insert the Department's current complaint telephone number).
(Added City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021)
Subchapter T: Automated Employment Decision Tools
§ 5-300 Definitions.
As used in this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
   Automated Employment Decision Tool. "Automated employment decision tool" or
"AEDT" means "Automated employment decision tool" as defined by § 20-870 of the
Code where the phrase "to substantially assist or replace discretionary
decision making" means:
      i.   to rely solely on a simplified output (score, tag, classification,
ranking, etc.), with no other factors considered; or
      ii.   to use a simplified output as one of a set of criteria where the
simplified output is weighted more than any other criterion in the set; or
      iii.   to use a simplified output to overrule conclusions derived from
other factors including human decision-making.
   Bias Audit. "Bias audit" means "Bias audit" as defined by § 20-870 of the
Code.
   Candidate for Employment. "Candidate for employment" means a person who has
applied for a specific employment position by submitting the necessary
information or items in the format required by the employer or employment
agency.
   Category. "Category" means any component 1 category required to be reported
by employers pursuant to subsection (c) of section 2000e-8 of title 42 of the
United States Code as specified in part 1602.7 of title 29 of the Code of
Federal Regulations, as designated on the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission Employer Information Report EEO-1.
   Code. "Code" means the Administrative Code of the City of New York.
   Distribution Date. "Distribution date" means the date the employer or
employment agency began using a specific AEDT.
   Employment Decision. "Employment decision" means "Employment decision" as
defined by § 20-870  of the Code.
   Employment Agency. "Employment agency" means "Employment agency" as defined
by 6 RCNY §
5-249 .
   Historical data. "Historical data" means data collected during an employer
or employment agency's use of an AEDT to assess candidates for employment or
employees for promotion.
   Independent Auditor. "Independent auditor" means a person or group that is
capable of exercising objective and impartial judgment on all issues within the
scope of a bias audit of an AEDT. An auditor is not an independent auditor of
an AEDT if the auditor:
      i.   is or was involved in using, developing, or distributing the AEDT;
      ii.   at any point during the bias audit, has an employment relationship
with an employer or employment agency that seeks to use or continue to use the
AEDT or with a vendor that developed or distributes the AEDT; or
      iii.   at any point during the bias audit, has a direct financial
interest or a material indirect financial interest in an employer or employment
agency that seeks to use or continue to use the AEDT or in a vendor that
developed or distributed the AEDT.
   Impact Ratio. "Impact ratio" means either (1) the selection rate for a
category divided by the selection rate of the most selected category or (2) the
scoring rate for a category divided by the scoring rate for the highest scoring
category.
 
Impact Ratio = selection rate for a category
               selection rate of the most selected category
OR
Impact Ratio = scoring rate for a category
               scoring rate of the highest scoring category
 
   Machine learning, statistical modeling, data analytics, or artificial
intelligence. "Machine learning, statistical modeling, data analytics, or
artificial intelligence" means a group of mathematical, computer-based
techniques:
      i.   that generate a prediction, meaning an expected outcome for an
observation, such as an assessment of a candidate's fit or likelihood of
success, or that generate a classification, meaning an assignment of an
observation to a group, such as categorizations based on skill sets or
aptitude; and
      ii.   for which a computer at least in part identifies the inputs, the
relative importance placed on those inputs, and, if applicable, other
parameters for the models in order to improve the accuracy of the prediction or
classification.
   Scoring Rate. "Scoring Rate" means the rate at which individuals in a
category receive a score above the sample's median score, where the score has
been calculated by an AEDT.
   Screen. "Screen" means to make a determination about whether a candidate for
employment or employee being considered for promotion should be selected or
advanced in the hiring or promotion process.
   Selection Rate. "Selection rate" means the rate at which individuals in a
category are either selected to move forward in the hiring process or assigned
a classification by an AEDT. Such rate may be calculated by dividing the number
of individuals in the category moving forward or assigned a classification by
the total number of individuals in the category who applied for a position or
were considered for promotion.
      Example: If 100 Hispanic women apply for a position and 40 are selected
for an interview after use of an AEDT, the selection rate for Hispanic women is
40/100 or 40%.
   Simplified output. "Simplified output" means a prediction or classification
as specified in the definition for "machine learning, statistical modelling,
data analytics, or artificial intelligence." A simplified output may take the
form of a score (e.g., rating a candidate's estimated technical skills), tag or
categorization (e.g., categorizing a candidate's resume based on key words,
assigning a skill or trait to a candidate), recommendation (e.g., whether a
candidate should be given an interview), or ranking (e.g., arranging a list of
candidates based on how well their cover letters match the job description). It
does not refer to the output from analytical tools that translate or transcribe
existing text, e.g., convert a resume from a PDF or transcribe a video or audio
interview.
   Test data. "Test data" means data used to conduct a bias audit that is not
historical data.
(Added City Record 4/6/2023, eff. 5/6/2023)
§ 5-301 Bias Audit.
   (a)   An employer or employment agency may not use or continue to use an
AEDT if more than one year has passed since the most recent bias audit of the
AEDT.
   (b)   Where an AEDT selects candidates for employment or employees being
considered for promotion to move forward in the hiring process or classifies
them into groups, a bias audit must, at a minimum:
      (1)   Calculate the selection rate for each category;
      (2)   Calculate the impact ratio for each category;
      (3)   Ensure that the calculations required in paragraphs (1) and (2) of
this subdivision separately calculate the impact of the AEDT on:
         i.   Sex categories (e.g., impact ratio for selection of male
candidates vs female candidates),
         ii.   Race/Ethnicity categories (e.g., impact ratio for selection of
Hispanic or Latino candidates vs Black or African American [Not Hispanic or
Latino] candidates), and
         iii.   intersectional categories of sex, ethnicity, and race (e.g.,
impact ratio for selection of Hispanic or Latino male candidates vs. Not
Hispanic or Latino Black or African American female candidates).
      (4)   Ensure that the calculations in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of
this subdivision are performed for each group, if an AEDT classifies candidates
for employment or employees being considered for promotion into specified
groups (e.g., leadership styles); and
      (5)   Indicate the number of individuals the AEDT assessed that are not
included in the required calculations because they fall within an unknown
category.
Example: An employer wants to use an AEDT to screen resumes and schedule
interviews for a job posting. To do so, the employer must ensure that a bias
audit of the AEDT was conducted no more than a year before the planned use of
the AEDT. This bias audit is necessary even though the employer is not using
the AEDT to make the final hiring decision, but only to screen at an early
point in the application process. The employer asks the vendor for a bias
audit. The vendor provides historical data regarding applicant selection that
the vendor has collected from multiple employers to an independent auditor who
will conduct a bias audit as follows:
 
Sex Categories
      # of Applicants # Selected Selection Rate Impact Ratio
Male   1390            667        48%            1.00
Female 1181            555        47%            0.979
 
Race/Ethnicity Categories
 # of Applicants # Selected Selection Rate Impact Ratio
Race/Ethnicity Categories
                       # of Applicants # Selected Selection Rate Impact Ratio
Hispanic or Latino     408             204        50%            0.97
White (Not Hispanic or 797             412        52%            1.00
Latino)
Black or African
American (Not Hispanic 390             170        44%            0.84
or Latino)
Native Hawaiian or
Pacific Islander (Not  119             52         44%            0.85
Hispanic or Latino)
Asian (Not Hispanic or 616             302        49%            0.95
Latino)
Native American or
Alaska Native (Not     41              18         44%            0.85
Hispanic or Latino)
Two or More Races (Not 213             96         45%            0.87
Hispanic or Latino)
 
Intersectional Categories
   # of Applicants # Selected Selection Rate Impact Ratio
Intersectional Categories
                                  # of       # Selected Selection Impact Ratio
                                  Applicants            Rate
Hispanic or Latino  Male          205        90         43.9%     0.841
                    Female        190        82         0.827     43.2%
                    White         412        215        52.2%     1.000
                    Black or
                    African       226        95         42.0%     0.806
                    American
                    Native
                    Hawaiian or   87         37         42.5%     0.815
             Male   Pacific
                    Islander
                    Asian         321        167        52.0%     0.997
                    Native
                    American or   24         11         45.8%     0.878
                    Alaska Native
                    Two or More   115        52         45.2%     0.866
Non/Hispanic        Races
or Latino           White         385        197        51.2%     0.981
                    Black or
                    African       164        75         45.7%     0.876
                    American
                    Native
                    Hawaiian or   32         15         46.9%     0.898
             Female Pacific
                    Islander
                    Asian         295        135        45.8%     0.877
                    Native
                    American or   17         7          41.2%     0.789
                    Alaska Native
                    Two or More   98         44         44.9%     0.860
                    Races
 
Note: The AEDT was also used to assess 250 individuals with an unknown sex or
race/ethnicity category. Data on those individuals was not included in the
calculations above.
   (c)   Where an AEDT scores candidates for employment or employees being
considered for promotion, a bias audit must, at a minimum:
      (1)   Calculate the median score for the full sample of applicants;
      (2)   Calculate the scoring rate for individuals in each category;
      (3)   Calculate the impact ratio for each category;
      (4)   Ensure that the calculations required in paragraphs (1), (2), and
(3) of this subdivision separately calculate the impact of the AEDT on:
         i.   Sex categories (i.e., impact ratio for selection of male
candidates vs female candidates),
         ii.   Race/Ethnicity categories (e.g., impact ratio for selection of
Hispanic or Latino candidates vs Black or African American [Not Hispanic or
Latino] candidates), and
         iii.   intersectional categories of sex, ethnicity, and race (e.g.,
impact ratio for selection of Hispanic or Latino male candidates vs. Not
Hispanic or Latino Black or African American female candidates); and
      (5)   Indicate the number of individuals the AEDT assessed that are not
included in the required calculations because they fall within an unknown
category.
   (d)   Notwithstanding the requirements of paragraphs (2) and (3) of
subdivision (b) and paragraphs (3) and (4) of subdivision (c), an independent
auditor may exclude a category that represents less than 2% of the data being
used for the bias audit from the required calculations for impact ratio. Where
such a category is excluded, the summary of results must include the
independent auditor's justification for the exclusion, as well as the number of
applicants and scoring rate or selection rate for the excluded category.
Example: An employer uses an AEDT to score applicants for "culture fit." To do
so, the employer must ensure that a bias audit of the AEDT was conducted no
more than a year before the use of the AEDT. The employer provides historical
data on "culture fit" score of applicants for each category to an independent
auditor to conduct a bias audit as follows:
 
Sex Categories
      # of Applicants Scoring Rate Impact Ratio
Male   92              54.3%        1.00
Female 76              44.7%        0.82
 
Race/Ethnicity Categories
 # of Applicants Scoring Rate Impact Ratio
Race/Ethnicity Categories
                                     # of Applicants Scoring Rate Impact Ratio
Hispanic or Latino                    28              64.2%        1.00
White (Not Hispanic or Latino)        40              37.5%        0.58
Black or African American (Not        32              50.0%        0.78
Hispanic or Latino)
Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander   8               62.5%        0.97
(Not Hispanic or Latino)
Asian (Not Hispanic or Latino)        24              41.7%        0.65
Native American or Alaska Native (Not 16              62.5%        0.97
Hispanic or Latino)
Two or More Races (Not Hispanic or    20              50.0%        0.78
Latino)
Intersectional Categories
   # of Applicants Scoring Rate Impact Ratio
Intersectional Categories
                                    # of Applicants Scoring Rate Impact Ratio
Hispanic or Latino  Male            16              75%          1.00
                    Female          12              50%          0.67
                    White           20              35%          0.47
                    Black or
                    African         20              50%          0.67
                    American
                    Native Hawaiian
                    or Pacific      4               75%          1.00
             Male   Islander
                    Asian           12              58.3%        0.78
                    Native American
                    or Alaska       8               62.5         0.83
                    Native
                    Two or More     12              50%          0.67
Non/Hispanic        Races
or Latino           White           20              40%          0.53
                    Black or
                    African         12              50%          .67
                    American
                    Native Hawaiian
                    or Pacific      4               50%          0.67
             Female Islander
                    Asian           12              25%          0.33
                    Native American
                    or Alaska       8               62.5%        0.83
                    Native
                    Two or More     8               50%          0.67
                    Races
 
Note: The AEDT was used to assess 15 individuals with an unknown sex or race/
ethnicity category. Data on these individuals was not included in the
calculations above.
(Added City Record 4/6/2023, eff. 5/6/2023)
§ 5-302 Data Requirements.
   (a)   Historical Data. A bias audit conducted pursuant to 6 RCNY §
5-301 must use historical data of the AEDT. The historical data used to conduct
a bias audit may be from one or more employers or employment agencies that use
the AEDT. However, an individual employer or employment agency may rely on a
bias audit of an AEDT that uses the historical data of other employers or
employment agencies only in the following circumstances: if such employer or
employment agency provided historical data from its own use of the AEDT to the
independent auditor conducting the bias audit or if such employer or employment
agency has never used the AEDT.
   (b)   Test Data. Notwithstanding the requirements of subdivision (a) of this
section, an employer or employment agency may rely on a bias audit that uses
test data if insufficient historical data is available to conduct a
statistically significant bias audit. If a bias audit uses test data, the
summary of results of the bias audit must explain why historical data was not
used and describe how the test data used was generated and obtained.
Example 1: An employer is planning to use an AEDT for the first time. The
employer may rely on a bias audit conducted using the historical data of other
employers or employment agencies, or on a bias audit conducted using test data.
Example 2: An employment agency has been using an AEDT for 6 months. The bias
audit the employment agency relied on before its first use of the AEDT was
conducted 10 months ago using test data. The employment agency will need an
updated bias audit if it will continue to use the AEDT once 12 months have
passed since the bias audit it first relied on was conducted. The employment
agency's data from 6 months of use of the AEDT is not sufficient on its own to
conduct a statistically significant bias audit. The employment agency may rely
on a bias audit using the historical data of other employers and employment
agencies if it provides its 6 months of historical data to the independent
auditor for use and consideration. The employment agency may also rely on a
bias audit that uses test data.
Example 3: An employer has been using an AEDT for 3 years and will soon need an
updated bias audit. The employer has statistically significant data from its 3
years of use of the AEDT. The employer may rely on a bias audit conducted using
historical data from multiple employers if it provides its 3 years of
historical data to the independent auditor for use and consideration. The
employer may also rely on a bias audit conducted using historical data from its
own use of the AEDT, without any data from other employers or employment
agencies. The employer may not rely on a bias audit conducted using test data.
(Added City Record 4/6/2023, eff. 5/6/2023)
§ 5-303 Published Results.
   (a)   Before the use of an AEDT, an employer or employment agency in the
city must make the following publicly available on the employment section of
their website in a clear and conspicuous manner:
      (1)   The date of the most recent bias audit of the AEDT and a summary of
the results, which shall include the source and explanation of the data used to
conduct the bias audit, the number of individuals the AEDT assessed that fall
within an unknown category, and the number of applicants or candidates, the
selection or scoring rates, as applicable, and the impact ratios for all
categories; and,
      (2)   The distribution date of the AEDT.
   (b)   The requirements of subdivision (a) of this section may be met with an
active hyperlink to a website containing the required summary of results and
distribution date, provided that the link is clearly identified as a link to
results of the bias audit.
   (c)   An employer or employment agency must keep the summary of results and
distribution date posted for at least 6 months after its latest use of the AEDT
for an employment decision.
(Added City Record 4/6/2023, eff. 5/6/2023)
§ 5-304 Notice to Candidates and Employees.
   (a)   The notice required by § 20-871(b)(1) of the Code must include
instructions for how an individual can request an alternative selection process
or a reasonable accommodation under other laws, if available. Nothing in this
subchapter requires an employer or employment agency to provide an alternative
selection process.
   (b)   To comply with § 20-871(b)(1) and (2) of the Code, an employer or
employment agency may provide notice to a candidate for employment who resides
in the city by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Provide notice on the employment section of its website in a clear
and conspicuous manner at least 10 business days before use of an AEDT;
      (2)   Provide notice in a job posting at least 10 business days before
use of an AEDT; or,
      (3)   Provide notice to candidates for employment via U.S. mail or e-mail
at least 10 business days before use of an AEDT.
   (c)   To comply with § 20-871(b)(1) and (2) of the Code, an employer or
employment agency may provide notice to an employee being considered for
promotion who resides in the city by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Provide notice in a written policy or procedure that is provided to
employees at least 10 business days before use of an AEDT;
      (2)   Provide notice in a job posting at least 10 business days before
use of an AEDT; or,
      (3)   Provide notice via U.S. mail or e-mail at least 10 business days
before use of an AEDT.
   (d)   To comply with § 20-871(b)(3) of the Code, an employer or employment
agency must:
      (1)   Provide information on the employment section of its website in a
clear and conspicuous manner about its AEDT data retention policy, the type of
data collected for the AEDT, and the source of the data;
      (2)   Post instructions on the employment section of its website in a
clear and conspicuous manner for how to make a written request for such
information, and if a written request is received, provide such information
within 30 days; and
      (3)   Provide an explanation to a candidate for employment or employee
being considered for promotion why disclosure of such information would violate
local, state, or federal law, or interfere with a law enforcement
investigation.
(Added City Record 4/6/2023, eff. 5/6/2023)
Chapter 6: Administrative Hearings
Editor's note: Pursuant to City Record 8/22/2016, effective 8/22/2016, the
Department of Consumer Affairs repealed and replaced 6 RCNY
Chapter 6 in its entirety.
Subchapter A: Adjudicatory Proceedings
§ 6-01 Delegation of Authority.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, the adjudicatory
powers granted to the Commissioner of the Department of Consumer Affairs
("Commissioner") under the New York City Charter, the Administrative Code of
the City of New York ("Administrative Code") and New York State law to conduct
hearings, issue decisions, impose fines and civil penalties, and order any
other relief are hereby delegated to the Office of Administrative Trials and
Hearings ("OATH").
   (b)   Nothing in this rule shall prohibit the Commissioner from exercising
powers conferred upon the Commissioner, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   the power to suspend a license, without an adjudication, pursuant
to Administrative Code § 20-104(e)(3);
      (2)   the powers with respect to unlicensed activities pursuant to
Subdivisions (b)(2), (b)(3), and (b)(4) of Administrative Code § 20-105; and
      (3)   the power to order that a premises be sealed under the
Administrative Code or any other City, State or Federal law conferring such
power upon the Commissioner.
   (c)   The Department will file the following cases with the adjudicatory
body authorized to conduct trials at OATH pursuant to 48 RCNY
Chapter 1:
      (1)   all proceedings commenced to enforce a law within the Department's
jurisdiction that regulates relationships in the workplace or that confers
rights or benefits on workers, including, but not limited to, the Earned Safe
and Sick Time Act set forth in Chapter 8 of Title 20 of the Administrative
Code, provisions related to Fair Work Practices set forth in Chapter 12 of
Title 20 of the Administrative Code, provisions related to mass transit
benefits set forth in Chapter 9 of Title 20 of the Administrative Code,
provisions related to displaced grocery workers set forth in § 22-507 of the
Administrative Code, provisions related to a prevailing wage for building
service employees in city leased or financially assisted facilities set forth
in § 6-130 of the Administrative Code, or provisions related to a living wage
for employees in city financially assisted workplaces set forth in § 6-134 of
the Administrative Code, except where such law licenses persons under chapter 2
of title 20 of the Administrative Code;
      (2)   all proceedings in which the Department seeks discretionary
revocation, suspension, or denial of a license;
      (3)   all proceedings in which the Department seeks more than one hundred
thousand dollars in civil penalties, consumer restitution, other monetary
relief, or any combination thereof;
      (4)   all proceedings involving four or more consumers against the same
respondent; and
      (5)   all proceedings in which four or more witnesses testify and the
Department seeks more than fifty thousand dollars in civil penalties, consumer
restitution, other monetary relief, or any combination thereof.
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 8/22/2017,
eff. 9/21/2017; amended City Record 2/10/2021, eff. 3/12/2021; amended City
Record 3/3/2023, eff. 4/2/2023)
§ 6-02 Recommended Decisions.
   (a)   OATH shall issue a recommended decision in the following cases:
      (1)   all proceedings heard by the adjudicatory body authorized to
conduct trials at OATH pursuant to 48 RCNY
Chapter 1; and
      (2)   all violations of the following statutes and of rules or
regulations promulgated pursuant to such statutes: Article 13-F of the New York
State Public Health Law; Article 11 of the New York State General Business Law;
Article 5 of the New York State General Business Law; and Sections 192, 192-a,
192-b, and 192-c of Article 16 of the New York State Agriculture and Markets
Law.
   (b)   Upon issuance of OATH's recommended decision in the matter, the
Commissioner or the Commissioner's authorized designee may adopt, reverse, or
modify that recommended decision. Where the Commissioner or the Commissioner's
authorized designee determines that the record in the underlying proceeding has
not, in whole or in part, been fully developed, he or she may send the case or
claim back for development of a complete record. If the Commissioner or
Commissioner's authorized designee sends back a case or claim to OATH, OATH
shall issue a recommended decision at the conclusion of the additional
proceedings.
   (c)   For all cases requiring a recommended decision pursuant to subdivision
a of this section, the petition or summons must include a statement notifying
the respondent that OATH will issue a recommended decision that the
Commissioner or the Commissioner's authorized designee may adopt, reverse,
modify, or send back to OATH in whole or in part for further proceedings.
   (d)   Within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the recommended decision,
any party to the proceeding may submit to the Commissioner by regular mail,
email, or delivery to the Department at its main office, a written argument
setting forth the reasons why the Commissioner should adopt, reverse, or modify
the decision, or send the decision, in whole or in part, back to OATH for
additional proceedings. The Commissioner may prescribe one or more forms to be
used for submission of such argument, which may include a specific email and
office address. The Commissioner or the Commissioner's authorized designee will
consider any challenge made by any party provided that the party timely made
its objection known to OATH and that the grounds for such challenge are limited
to those set forth to OATH.
   (e)   Not less than seventy-five (75) days after the issuance of the
recommended decision, the Commissioner or the Commissioner's authorized
designee will issue a written decision affirming, reversing or modifying the
recommended decision, or remanding the matter back to OATH for further
proceedings. Except as provided in subdivision f of this section, or with
respect to written decisions that send back any part of a matter to OATH for
additional proceedings, the Commissioner's decision adopting, reversing, or
modifying the recommended decision shall constitute a final agency
determination. The written decision from the Commissioner or the Commissioner's
authorized designee will be based on a review of the recommended decision and
may consider the trial record from OATH, written arguments submitted to the
Department pursuant to subdivision d of this section, any motion papers or
other written submissions filed at OATH, and any other OATH decisions bearing
on the merits of the case.
   (f)   If the Commissioner or the Commissioner's authorized designee adopts a
recommended decision issued by OATH for a finding of default, and thereafter
OATH finds sufficient grounds to vacate the default, the default and the
Commissioner's original decision shall be vacated and a new hearing shall be
allowed on all of the charges in the original notice of violation. The
recommended decision resulting from such hearing will be subject to the
provisions of this section.
   (g)   Whenever the interests of justice so require, the Commissioner or the
Commissioner's authorized designee may reopen, vacate, or modify any final
determination, provided that such action may only be taken prior to the
commencement of a judicial proceeding to review such determination.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence of this subdivision, after the
commencement of a judicial proceeding to review such determination, the
Commissioner or the Commissioner's authorized designee may reopen, vacate, or
modify any final determination upon the consent of the parties or judicial
order.
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 2/10/2021,
eff. 3/12/2021; amended City Record 3/3/2023, eff. 4/2/2023)
§ 6-03 Pre-Hearing Disposition of Violations.
   Any person who receives a notice of violation and a pleading letter from the
Department may respond in the following ways:
   (a)   Payment of the fine prior to the hearing. Any person who receives an
Offer of Settlement prior to the hearing date may plead guilty and pay the fine
listed in the letter either by mail, online, or in person.
      (1)   By Mail. Any person may pay the fine as shown on the Offer of
Settlement by sending a check or money order (not cash) payable to the
"Department of Consumer Affairs" in the amount of the fine specified in the
letter. The payment must be received by the Department prior to the hearing
date.
      (2)   In person. Any person may pay the fine in person at the Department
of Consumer Affairs during the Department's normal business hours.
   (b)   Opportunity to Cure. 
      (1)   Any person charged with a first-time violation of any of the
mandates set forth in paragraphs (5) or (6) of this subsection will not be
subject to a civil penalty if such person proves to the satisfaction of the
Department, within thirty days of the issuance of the notice of violation and
prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the
violation has been cured.
      (2)   A person seeking to submit proof of a cure must submit a
certification in a form approved by the Department. The Department may require
submission of such other information, including documentary evidence,
reasonably necessary to prove that the violation was cured within thirty days
of the issuance of the notice of violation.
      (3)   The submission of proof of a cure will constitute an admission of
liability for all purposes.
      (4)   If the proof that a violation has been cured is not satisfactory,
the Department will provide the person who presented the proof with a written
notice within five days of receipt that the proof was not satisfactory. A
person may seek review of this determination at OATH within fifteen days of
receiving written notification that the submitted proof is not satisfactory.
      (5)   The Department has made available on its website a list of
provisions of the Administrative Code for which the opportunity to cure a
first-time violation is available. The following provisions of
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York constitute the mandates for which
the opportunity to cure a first-time violation is available:
 
Citation Description 
Citation   Description 
6 RCNY §   requiring the posting of a sign that includes instructions on contacting the
1-03(a)     Department to file a complaint about a licensed business
6 RCNY §   requiring a licensee to include such licensee's license number in
1-05        advertisements and other printed and electronic matters
6 RCNY §   requiring newsstands to comply with display restrictions
2-66(a)
6 RCNY §   requiring newsstands to comply with advertising restrictions
2-66(b)
6 RCNY §   Sale or offer of improper items in a stoop line stand
2-70.2(g)
6 RCNY §   requiring that parking lots and garages have separate entrances and exits,
2-161(g)(1) with the main entrance clearly designated with illuminated signs marked
            "entrance" and "exit"
6 RCNY §
2-161(g)(2) requiring parking lots and garages to post a rate sign
(i)
6 RCNY §   requiring parking lots and garages to post a rate sign at the location for
2-161(g)(2) payment of charges
(iv)
6 RCNY §   requiring that parking lot and garage auxiliary signs contain equally sized
2-161(g)(2) letters and numbers
(v)
6 RCNY §   requiring that parking lots and garages post a sign stating: the business
2-161(g)(2) hours; the licensed capacity; and the minimum number of bicycle parking
(vi)        spaces
6 RCNY §
2-161(g)(2) requiring parking lots and garages to post a rate sign about bicycle parking
(viii)
6 RCNY §   requiring that the parking garage and lot sign required by 6 RCNY §
2-161(g)(3) 2-161(g)(2) is illuminated, clearly visible and readable
(i)
6 RCNY §
2-161(g)(3) requiring parking lots and garages to post a Manhattan residents sign
(ii)
6 RCNY §   requiring the posting of a sign that the garage is at full capacity for car
2-161(h)(1) parking
6 RCNY §   requiring the posting of a sign that the garage is at full capacity for
2-161(h)(2) bicycle parking
6 RCNY §   requiring that parking lots and garages with waivers under § 20-327.1 of
2-161(u)    Subchapter 17 of Chapter 2 of Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City
            of New York post a sign that bicycle parking is not required by law
6 RCNY §   requiring that a sightseeing bus post a sign on the windshield and near the
2-211(h)    entrance door of such bus that designates the departure time and destination
            of such bus
6 RCNY §   requiring that electronic or home appliance service dealers post sign stating
2-253       the service dealer identity, the cash policy, and written estimates
6 RCNY §   requiring dealers of products for the disabled to post a sign summarizing
2-275(c)    provisions of the New York City Products for the Disabled Law
6 RCNY §   requiring pedicabs to follow certain restrictions on advertisements
2-424
6 RCNY §   requiring certain signage on pedicabs
2-425
6 RCNY §   requiring that car washes maintain a log documenting complaints of damage to
2-433       vehicles
6 RCNY §   requiring labeling declarations required by Subchapter A of 6 RCNY
3-12        Chapter 3 to be written in English
6 RCNY §   scale is not located between the buyer and seller
3-24(c)
6 RCNY §   requiring stores with weighing and measuring devices for customer use to post
3-24(f)(2)  a sign informing customers that they may reweigh products using such weighing
            or measuring device or devices
6 RCNY §   requiring certain signage for selling prepackaged meats
3-60
6 RCNY §   requiring display of signs for out of order petroleum pumps
4-55
6 RCNY §   requiring display of signs for petroleum pumps
4-63
6 RCNY §   business fails to prominently and conspicuously display price list sign, or
4-131(a)(1) price list sign is not displayed at point at which orders are placed or
            payment is made, or lettering on sign is less than 1 inch
6 RCNY §   requiring retail laundries to post a notice giving the name and contact
4-131(a)(4) information of the person or persons to whom complaints and claims for
(i)         refunds may be made
6 RCNY §   requiring retail laundries to post an out-of-order sign on non-functioning
4-131(a)(4) machines
(ii)
6 RCNY §   requiring amusement arcades and gaming cafes to post a sign describing age
4-142       restrictions during certain hours of operation
            requiring that a business that accepts credit cards post a list of
6 RCNY §   limitations that such business puts on credit card usage at or near the
5-24        entrance of the business and in all advertising indicating that credit cards
            are accepted
6 RCNY §   requiring the posting of refund policies
5-37
6 RCNY §   prohibiting a sign stating that a business is not liable for its negligence
5-40(e)     if such a statement is invalid under law
            requiring that tax preparers post a sign: stating his or her name, address,
            telephone number and qualifications; stating that the preparer and taxpayer
6 RCNY §   must sign every tax return; stating how fees are calculated; stating that the
5-66(c)     tax preparer or their agency will not represent the taxpayer in an audit, if
            true; and stating that the tax preparer is not licensed by the state board of
            public accounting or the New York state bar, or both, if true
6 RCNY §   requirements for retail service establishments
5-70
6 RCNY §   calculation and Display of Price Per Measure
5-113
6 RCNY §   requiring certain consumer commodities to be labeled
5-114
6 RCNY §   requirements for multiple pricing
5-115
6 RCNY §   sign size requirements for redemption of beverage containers
5-191
6 RCNY §   content of sign for redemption of beverage containers
5-192
6 RCNY §   substitute signs for redemption of beverage containers
5-194
            requiring signage at businesses that sell beverages for off-premises
6 RCNY §   consumption in beverage containers that are covered by title ten of article
5-195       twenty-seven of the Environmental Conservation Law of the State of New York
            to be placed within a certain distance of cash registers or to be visible to
            consumers from any specific vantage point
6 RCNY §   requiring collateral loan brokers to place signage relating to pawn tickets
5-222(b)
6 RCNY §   requiring collateral loan brokers to place certain signage with a
5-222(d)    reproduction of the pawn ticket
6 RCNY §   requiring the posting of signs by employment agencies
5-250
6 RCNY §   requiring the display of a license by an employment agency
5-251
6 RCNY §   requiring the posting of signs about tenant screening reports, pursuant to §
5-265       20-809 of the Administrative Code of the City of New York
6 RCNY §   requiring car rental businesses to comply with reservation requirements
5-290(a)
6 RCNY §   requiring car rental businesses to post a sign about certain rights
5-290(d)
24 RCNY §  requiring posting of a letter grade on mobile food vending cart.
6-19
 
      (6)   The following provisions of New York State law constitute the
mandates for which the opportunity to cure a first-time violation is available:
         (i)   Section 188 of Article 11 of the New York General Business Law,
requiring the posting of copies of certain provisions of law.
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 4/26/2018,
eff. 5/26/2018; amended City Record 6/20/2018, eff. 7/20/2018; amended City
Record 2/27/2019, eff. 3/29/2019; amended City Record 2/24/2020, eff. 3/25/
2020; amended City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021; amended City Record 12/
20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022; amended City Record 3/11/2022, eff. 4/10/2022; amended
City Record 1/6/2023, eff. 2/5/2023; amended City Record 5/24/2024, eff. 6/23/
2024; amended City Record 10/9/2024, eff. 11/8/2024)
§ 6-04 Settlement Agreements.
   (a)   Any respondent entering into a settlement agreement with the
Department must comply with the terms of the settlement agreement.
   (b)   Unless the terms of a settlement agreement provide otherwise, a
settlement agreement shall constitute a plea of guilty to the charges in the
notice of violation. A settlement agreement shall have the force of a final
order of the Commissioner. In addition to any penalties for a breach set forth
in the settlement agreement, failure of a respondent to comply with the terms
of a settlement agreement, in whole or in part, will subject the respondent to
a civil penalty of up to five hundred dollars.
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016)
§ 6-05 Orders of the Commissioner.
   Failure of a respondent to comply with an order of the Commissioner will
subject the respondent to sanctions, including a civil penalty of up to five
hundred dollars and suspension or revocation of any and all licenses held by
respondent.
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016)
§ 6-06 Assigning and Docketing Final Decisions or Orders.
If a final decision or order authorizes restitution, imposes an award of
monetary damages, or provides equitable relief to a consumer or worker, the
consumer or worker may request that the Department assign the final decision or
order, or the portion of it that awards such restitution, monetary damages, or
equitable relief, to the consumer or worker. To make such a request, the
consumer or worker must complete the form available on the Department's website
and submit the form to the Department by mail or email within 180 days of the
date on which the final decision or order was issued; provided, however, that
the deadline to submit such a request shall be tolled while a judicial
proceeding challenging the final decision or order is pending.
(Added City Record 7/13/2021, eff. 8/12/2021)
§ 6-07 Default Judgments.
A Respondent may, within 30 days of receiving notice from the Department that a
final default judgment has been issued against the Respondent and that the
Department intends to enter and docket that judgment, both (a) request a stay
of the default judgment for good cause shown, and (b) either request a new
hearing at OATH or plead guilty to the charges in the default judgment. To make
such a request, the Respondent must complete the form available on the
Department's website and submit the form to the Department by mail or email.
Before submitting such a request, however, the Respondent must first move to
vacate the default judgment at OATH pursuant to 48 RCNY §
1-45 or 48 RCNY §
6-21, or any successor rule thereto.
(Added City Record 7/13/2021, eff. 8/12/2021)
Subchapter B: Penalties
§ 6-10 Compliance with New York City Charter.
   (a)   Pursuant to Section 2203(h)(2) of the Charter, as used in this
chapter, the term "notice of violation" means any notice commencing a
proceeding, including a summons or any other form as prescribed by the
Commissioner.
   (b)   Pursuant to Section 2203(h)(1) of the Charter, except to the extent
that dollar limits are otherwise specifically provided, civil penalties shall
not exceed five hundred dollars for each violation of any law or rule the
enforcement of which is within the jurisdiction of the Department pursuant to
the New York City Charter, Administrative Code or any other general, special or
local law. The remedies and penalties provided for in this subchapter shall be
applied per violation and shall be in addition to any other remedies or
penalties provided for the enforcement of such provisions under any other law
including, but not limited to, civil or criminal actions or proceedings. Such
remedies and the maximum penalties authorized by a law or rule shall apply to a
respondent who fails to appear to answer a notice of violation.
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 8/22/2017,
eff. 9/21/2017)
§ 6-11 License Enforcement Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   For the fine amounts marked by a single asterisk, if the respondent timely
submits the appropriate proof of having cured a first-time violation, the
respondent will not be subject to a civil penalty pursuant to Local_Law_153_of
2013.
   In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or
revocation, as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of
multiple provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods
shall run concurrently.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
   For violations of § 20-105, each day of unlicensed activity constitutes a
distinct and independent violation. Except as otherwise expressly provided,
fines imposed for § 20-105 violations shall be in addition to, and shall not be
offset or modified by, any fines or civil penalties prescribed by Chapter 2 of
Title 20 of the Administrative Code or provisions of state law governing
businesses licensed by the department.
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
          Violation        First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation  Description      Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                               Violation  Default
Admin.    Unlicensed       $100 per  $100    $100 per  $100    $100 per   $100 per
Code      Activities       day       per day day       per day day        day
§ 20-105
Admin.    Improper license
Code      transfer         $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-109
          Failure to
          obtain
Admin.    Department
Code      approval of      $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-110 change of
          corporate
          ownership
          Failure to
Admin.    obtain
Code      Department       $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-111 approval of
          change in a
          partnership
Admin.    Failure to
Code      comply with      $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-112 licensee address
          requirements
Admin.    Failure to
Code      comply with      $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-113 trade name
          requirements
          Failure to
Admin.    comply with
Code      inspection and   $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-114 license display
          requirements
Admin.    Failure to
Code      comply with bond $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-115 requirement
6 RCNY    Failure to
§        provide truthful $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
1-01.1    information on
          application
6 RCNY    Failure to post
§        the license sign $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
1-03(a)
          Making false
          representations
          and altering or
6 RCNY    falsifying
§        Department       $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
1-04      documents or
          providing or
          using falsified
          documents
          Failure to
          contain license
6 RCNY    number in
§        advertisements   $175*     $175*   $300      $300    $500       $500
1-05      and other
          printed and
          electronic
          matter
          Failure to
          comply with
6 RCNY    requirements
§        related to       $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
1-13      responding to a
          consumer's
          complaint
          Failure to
          appear for or
          respond to a
6 RCNY    request for
§        documents,       $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
1-14      subpoena,
          request for
          interrogatories,
          or notice of
          deposition
6 RCNY    Failure to
§        satisfy judgment $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
1-15
          Failure to
6 RCNY    comply with
§        record and       $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
1-16      business premise
          inspection
          requirements
6 RCNY    Improper wearing
§        of badge         $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
1-17
          Failure to
6 RCNY    destroy
§        identification   $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
1-18      documents issued
          by the
          department
6 RCNY    Injurious
§        conduct          $500      $500    $500      $500    $500       $500
1-21      committed by a
          licensee
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 8/22/2017,
eff. 9/21/2017; amended City Record 2/15/2019, eff. 3/17/2019; amended City
Record 2/24/2020, eff. 3/25/2020; amended City Record 2/22/2021, eff. 3/24/
2021; amended City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021; amended City Record 12/
20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022; amended City Record 10/9/2024, eff. 11/8/2024)
§ 6-12 Tobacco Retail Dealer Penalty Schedule.
All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York, Title 17 of the Administrative Code of the City of New York,
Title 24 of the Rules of the City of New York, or the New York Public Health
Law.
Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law or
rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs, clauses,
items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision, paragraph,
subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice of
Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
Unless otherwise specified by law, for violations of Title 20 of the
Administrative Code, a second or third or subsequent violation means a
violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being found
guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for violating the
same provision of law or rule, within three years of the prior violation(s).
Unless otherwise specified by law, for violations of § 17-176.1 of Title 17 of
the Administrative Code or of 24 RCNY §
13-03, a second or third or subsequent violation means a violation by the same
respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being found guilty in a decision, or
entering into a settlement agreement for violating the same provision of law or
rule, within five years of the prior violation(s).
For sections of law marked by a single asterisk (*), a second, third or
subsequent violation means a violation of § 17-703, § 17-703.2, § 17-704,
Subdivision (a) of § 17-704.1, § 17-705, or subdivisions (a) or (b) of § 17-706
of Title 17 of the Administrative Code, or any combination of such provisions,
whether by pleading guilty, being found guilty in a decision, or entering into
a settlement agreement, at the same place of business within a three-year
period.
Unless otherwise specified by law, for violations of § 17-715 of Title 17 of
the Administrative Code, a second or third or subsequent violation means a
violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being found
guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for violating the
same provision of law or rule, within three years of the prior violation(s).
At a hearing, points assigned to a respondent's New York State tobacco
registration record may be reduced, pursuant to New York Public Health Law §
1399-ee(3)(a).
In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension, revocation, or
sealing as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of
multiple provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods
shall run concurrently.
The parties shall be authorized to present evidence to mitigate the license
revocation or suspension period within the date range marked by two asterisks
(**).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
                            Violation      First         First         Second        Second        Third and     Third and
Citation                    Description    Violation     Default       Violation     Default       Subsequent    Subsequent
                                                                                                   Violation     Default
                            Engaging in
Admin. Code                 unlicensed     $2,000, plus  $2,000, plus  $2,000, plus  $2,000, plus  $2,000, plus  $2,000, plus
§ 20-202(a)(1)             tobacco retail $100 per day  $100 per day  $100 per day  $100 per day  $100 per day  $100 per day
                            dealer
                            activity
                            Permitting
                            premises to be
Admin. Code                 used for
§ 20-202(a)(2)             unlicensed     $1,500        $2,000        $1,800        $2,000        $2,000        $2,000
                            tobacco retail
                            dealer
                            activity
                            Failure to
Admin. Code                 display        $1,500        $2,000        $1,800        $2,000        $2,000        $2,000
§ 20-202(d)(2)             license
                            conspicuously
                            Failure to
Admin. Code                 comply with
§ 20-203                   recordkeeping  $1,500        $2,000        $1,800        $2,000        $2,000        $2,000
                            and inspection
                            requirements
                            Engaged in
Admin. Code                 prohibited     $1,500        $2,000        $1,800        $2,000        $2,000        $2,000
§ 20-205                   sales or
                            purchases
Admin. Code                 Selling
§ 17-176.1(b)              discounted     $1,000        $1,000        $2,000        $2,000        $5,000        $5,000
                            cigarettes
                            Selling
Admin. Code                 discounted     $1,000        $1,000        $2,000        $2,000        $5,000        $5,000
§ 17-176.1(c)              tobacco
                            products
                            Selling
                            cigarettes or
Admin. Code                 tobacco        $1,000        $1,000        $2,000        $2,000        $5,000        $5,000
§ 17-176.1(d)              products below
                            the price
                            floor
                            Operating as a
Admin. Code                 wholesale      $5,000        $5,000        $10,000 (plus $10,000 (plus $10,000 (plus $10,000 (plus
§ 17-703*                  dealer without                             revocation)   revocation)   revocation)   revocation)
                            a license
                            Failure of
                            retail dealer
                            to post sign
                            in conspicuous
Admin. Code                 place that     $500          $500          $500          $500          $500          $500
§ 17-703.1                 cigarettes
                            must be in
                            packages
                            bearing valid
                            tax stamps
                            Selling or
                            offering for
                            sale
                            cigarettes or
Admin. Code                 tobacco                                    $2,000 (plus  $2,000 (plus  $2,000 (plus  $2,000 (plus
§ 17-704(a)*               products that  $1,000        $1,000        revocation)   revocation)   revocation)   revocation)
                            have been
                            removed from
                            packaging that
                            bears a health
                            warning
                            Violation of
                            minimum
Admin. Code                 package sizes  $1,000        $1,000        $2,000        $2,000        $2,000        $2,000
§ 17-704(a-1) through (f)* for cigarettes
                            or tobacco
                            products
                            Unlawful
Admin. Code                 delivery of                                $2,000 (plus  $2,000 (plus  $2,000 (plus  $2,000 (plus
§ 17-704.1(a)*             cigarettes or  $1,000        $1,000        revocation)   revocation)   revocation)   revocation)
                            tobacco
                            products
                            Failure to
Admin. Code                 comply with                                $2,000 (plus  $2,000 (plus  $2,000 (plus  $2,000 (plus
§ 17-705*                  age            $1,000        $1,000        revocation)   revocation)   revocation)   revocation)
                            restrictions
                            on handling
                            Unlawful sale
                            of cigarettes,
                            tobacco
Admin. Code                 products, or   $1,000        $1,000        $2,000 (plus  $2,000 (plus  $2,000 (plus  $2,000 (plus
§ 17-706(a)*               liquid                                     revocation)   revocation)   revocation)   revocation)
                            nicotine to an
                            individual
                            under 21
                            Unlawful sale
                            of non-tobacco
Admin. Code                 smoking        $1,000        $1,000        $2,000 (plus  $2,000 (plus  $2,000 (plus  $2,000 (plus
§ 17-706(b)*               products to an                             revocation)   revocation)   revocation)   revocation)
                            individual
                            under 18
                            No minimum age
                            sign
Admin. Code                 violation/     $500          $500          $500          $500          $500          $500
§ 17-706(c)                missing
                            information on
                            sign
Admin. Code                 Unlawful sale                                                          $5,000 (plus  $5,000 (plus
§ 17-715                   of flavored    $1,000        $1,000        $2,000        $2,000        1 to 90 day   one year
                            tobacco                                                                suspension)** suspension)
                            Distribution
                            of tobacco
NY Pub Health               products or    $1,500        $1,500        $2,500        $2,500        $2,500        $2,500
§ 1399-BB                  herbal
                            cigarettes
                            without charge
                            Failure to
NY Pub Health               conspicuously
§ 1399-CC(2) (sign)        post the       $1,500        $1,500        $2,500        $2,500        $2,500        $2,500
                            required
                            tobacco sign
                            Unlawful sale
                            of tobacco
                            products,
                            herbal
                            cigarettes,
                            liquid         $1,500 (plus  $1,500 (plus  $2,500 (plus  $2,500 (plus  $2,500 (plus  $2,500 (plus
NY Pub Health               nicotine,      2 points on   2 points on   2 points on   2 points on   2 points on   2 points on
§ 1399-CC(2) (sale)        shisha or      NYS           NYS           NYS           NYS           NYS           NYS
                            electronic     registration) registration) registration) registration) registration) registration)
                            cigarettes to
                            an individual
                            under twenty-
                            one years of
                            age
                            Failure to
NY Pub Health               obtain proper  $1,500        $1,500        $2,500        $2,500        $2,500        $2,500
§ 1399-CC(3)               identification
                            from purchaser
                            Improper use
NY Pub Health               of the
§ 1399-CC(5)               electronic     $1,000        $1,000        $1,000        $1,000        $1,000        $1,000
                            transaction
                            information
                            Failure to
                            store tobacco
                            products or
                            herbal
                            cigarettes
NY Pub Health               behind a       $1,500        $1,500        $2,500        $2,500        $2,500        $2,500
§ 1399-CC(7)               counter
                            accessible
                            only to store
                            personnel or
                            in a locked
                            container
                            Unlawful sale
                            of tobacco
                            products,
NY Pub Health               herbal
§ 1399-DD                  cigarettes, or $1,500        $1,500        $2,500        $2,500        $2,500        $2,500
                            electronic
                            cigarettes in
                            vending
                            machines
                            Unlawful
                            display of
                            tobacco
NY Pub Health               product or
§ 1399-DD-1                electronic     $500          $500          $1,000        $1,000        $1,000        $1,000
                            cigarette
                            advertising or
                            smoking
                            paraphernalia
                            Unlawful sale
                            of tobacco
                            products or
                            herbal
NY Pub Health               cigarettes     $2,500        $2,500        $2,500        $2,500        $2,500        $2,500
§ 1399-EE(2)               with a
                            suspended or
                            revoked NYS
                            tobacco
                            registration
                            Unlawful out-
NY Pub Health               of-package
§ 1399-GG                  sales or       $1,500        $1,500        $2,500        $2,500        $2,500        $2,500
                            minimum
                            package size
                            Failure to
                            comply with
NY Pub Health               regulations    $500          $500          $500          $500          $500          $500
§ 1399-LL                  prohibiting
                            the sale of
                            bidis
                            Failure to
                            comply with
NY Pub Health               the
§ 1399-MM                  regulations    $500          $500          $500          $500          $500          $500
                            prohibiting
                            the sale of
                            gutka
                            Failure to
                            comply with
                            price floors
                            for little
24 RCNY                     cigars,
§                          cigars,        $1,000        $1,000        $2,000        $2,000        $5,000        $5,000
13-03                       smokeless
                            tobacco, snus,
                            shisha, non-
                            tobacco
                            shisha, or
                            loose tobacco
                            Unlawful sale
                            of tobacco
                            product or
                            non- tobacco
24 RCNY                     product
§                          designed for   $1,000        $1,000        $1,000        $1,000        $1,000        $1,000
28-06                       consumption
                            through the
                            inhalation of
                            smoke not in
                            original
                            packaging
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 7/6/2018,
eff. 8/5/2018; amended City Record 1/14/2019, eff. 2/13/2019; amended City
Record 11/4/2020, eff. 12/4/2020; amended City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/
2021; amended City Record 3/11/2022, eff. 4/10/2022)
§ 6-12.1 Electronic Cigarette Retail Dealer Penalty Schedule.
All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York, Title 17 of the Administrative Code of the City of New York, or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law or
rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs, clauses,
items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision, paragraph,
subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice of
Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
shall mean a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty,
being found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within three years of the prior
violation(s).
For sections of law marked by a single asterisk (*), a second, third or
subsequent violation means a violation of Subdivision (b) of § 17-704.1 or
Subdivision (a-1) of § 17-706 of Title 17 of the Administrative Code, or any
combination of such provisions, whether by admitting to the violation, being
found in violation in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the provision of law or rule, at the same place of business within a
three-year period.
In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or revocation,
as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of multiple
provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods shall run
concurrently.
The parties shall be authorized to present evidence to mitigate the license
revocation or suspension period within the date range marked by two asterisks
(**).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
                Violation     First     First   Second      Second      Third and     Third and
Citation        Description   Violation Default Violation   Default     Subsequent    Subsequent
                                                                        Violation     Default
                Unlicensed
Admin. Code     electronic    $100 per  $100    $100 per    $100 per    $100 per day  $100 per
§ 20-561(a)(1) cigarette     day       per day day         day                       day
                retail dealer
                Permitting
                premises
                under
                person's
Admin. Code     control to be $100 per  $100    $100 per    $100 per    $100 per day  $100 per
§ 20-561(a)(2) used as       day       per day day         day                       day
                unlicensed
                electronic
                cigarette
                retail dealer
                Unlawful                        $2,000      $2,000                    $2,000
Admin. Code     delivery of   $1,000    $1,000  (plus       (plus       $2,000 (plus  (plus
§ 17-704.1(b)* electronic                      revocation) revocation) revocation)   revocation)
                cigarettes
                Unlawful sale
Admin. Code     of electronic                   $2,000      $2,000      $2,000 (plus  $2,000
§ 17-706(a-1)* cigarettes to $1,000    $1,000  (plus       (plus       revocation)   (plus
                an individual                   revocation) revocation)               revocation)
                under 21
                No minimum
                age sign
Admin. Code     violation or  $500      $500    $500        $500        $500          $500
§ 17-706(c)    missing
                information
                on sign
                Unlawful sale
                of flavored                                             $5,000 (plus  $5,000
Admin. Code     electronic    $1,000    $1,000  $2,000      $2,000      1 to 90 day   (plus one
§ 17-715(b)    cigarettes or                                           suspension)** year
                flavored e-                                                           suspension)
                liquids
                Distribution
NY Pub Health   of vapor
§ 1399-BB      products      $1,500    $1,500  $2,500      $2,500      $2,500        $2,500
                without
                charge
                Unlawful
                display of
                tobacco
NY Pub Health   product or
§ 1399-DD-1    electronic    $500      $500    $1,000      $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
                cigarette
                advertising
                or smoking
                paraphernalia
                Selling or
                offering for
                sale a
                flavored
                vapor product           $100
NY Pub Health   intended or   $75 per   per     $90 per     $100 per    $100 per      $100 per
§ 1399-MM-1(2) reasonably    package   package package     package     package       package
                expected to
                be used for
                the
                consumption
                of nicotine
 
(Added City Record 7/6/2018, eff. 8/5/2018; amended City Record 4/21/2020, eff.
5/21/2020; amended City Record 11/4/2020, eff. 12/4/2020; amended City Record
11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 6-13 Amusement Devices, Amusement Arcades, Amusement Operators, and Gaming
Cafes Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
                    Violation    First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation            Description  Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                     Violation  Default
                    Failure to
                    comply with
Admin. Code         requirements $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-627(a)(1)-(3) for
                    amusement
                    devices
                    Failure to
Admin. Code         comply with
§ 20-627(a)(4)     notification $500      $500    $500      $500    $500       $500
                    of accidents
                    requirement
                    Failure to
                    comply with
Admin. Code         requirements
§ 20-627(b)        for          $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
                    amusement
                    arcades and
                    gaming cafes
                    Failure to
                    comply with
Admin. Code         requirements
§ 20-627(c)        for          $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
                    placement of
                    amusement
                    devices
                    Failure to
                    comply with
Admin. Code         gambling and $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-628           gambling
                    device
                    requirements
                    Improper
                    location of
Admin. Code         player-      $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-629(a)        operated
                    amusement
                    devices
                    Failure to
                    prohibit
Admin. Code         minors from  $0        $0      $175      $175    $300       $300
§ 20-629(c)        entering
                    certain
                    premises
                    Failure to
                    prominently
Admin. Code         display
§ 20-629(d)        required     $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
                    sign about
                    minors on
                    premises
                    Failure to
6 RCNY              comply with
§                  requirements $500      $500    $500      $500    $500       $500
4-141               for
                    notification
                    of accidents
6 RCNY              Failure to
§                  comply with  $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
4-142               signage
                    requirements
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 3/11/2022,
eff. 4/10/2022)
§ 6-14 Billiard and Pocket Billiard Tables and Billiard and Pocket Billiard
Rooms Penalty Schedule. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; repealed City Record 2/22/2021,
eff. 3/24/2021)
§ 6-15 Sidewalk Cafes Penalty Schedule. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 4/26/2018,
eff. 5/26/2018; amended City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021; repealed City
Record 10/9/2024, eff. 11/8/2024)
§ 6-16 Sidewalk Stands Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   For the fine amounts marked by a single asterisk, if the respondent timely
submits the appropriate proof of having cured a first-time violation, the
respondent will not be subject to a civil penalty pursuant to Local Law 153 of
2013.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
   In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or
revocation, as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of
multiple provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods
shall run concurrently.
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
                              Violation    First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation                      Description  Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                               Violation  Default
Admin. Code                   Operating an $100 per  $100    $100 per  $100    $100 per   $100 per
§ 20-229                     unlicensed   day       per day day       per day day        day
                              newsstand
                              Failure to
Admin. Code                   comply with
§ 20-231(a), (c) through (k) restrictions $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
                              and size
                              requirements
                              Failure to
Admin. Code                   comply with
§ 20-231(b)                  restrictions $0        $0      $175      $175    $300       $300
                              on items
                              sold
                              Operating an
Admin. Code                   unlicensed   $100 per  $100    $100 per  $100    $100 per   $100 per
§ 20-233(a)                  stoop line   day       per day day       per day day        day
                              stand
Admin. Code                   Improper use
§ 20-233(b)                  of a stoop   $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
                              line stand
                              Failure to
                              comply with
                              stoop line
                              height,
Admin. Code                   location and $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-237(a) (food items)     size
                              restrictions
                              displaying
                              any food
                              items
                              Failure to
                              comply with
                              specific
                              stoop line
Admin. Code                   stand length
§ 20-237(b) (food items)     and width    $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
                              restrictions
                              on stands
                              displaying
                              any food
                              items
                              Failure to
                              comply with
                              stoop line
                              stand
Admin. Code                   location and
§ 20-237(a) (non-food items) size         $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
                              restrictions
                              on stands
                              displaying
                              only non-
                              food items
                              Failure to
                              comply with
                              specific
                              stoop line
Admin. Code                   stand length
§ 20-237(b) (non-food items) and width    $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
                              restrictions
                              on stands
                              displaying
                              only non-
                              food items
                              Unlawfully
                              leasing to
                              or
                              permitting
                              another
Admin. Code                   person to    $100 per  $100    $100 per  $100    $100 per   $100 per
§ 20-237(c)                  use adjacent day       per day day       per day day        day
                              sidewalk
                              space to
                              display or
                              sell
                              merchandise
                              Unlawfully
Admin. Code                   sleeping in  $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-240                     stoop line
                              stand
                              Failure to
Admin. Code                   comply with
§ 20-241.1                   newsstand    $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
                              franchise
                              requirements
                              Improper
6 RCNY                        alteration
§                            or           $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
2-64(d)                       enlargement
                              of newsstand
                              Failure to
6 RCNY                        comply with
§                            newsstand    $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
2-65                          site
                              requirements
6 RCNY                        Improper
§                            operation of $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
2-66                          a newsstand
                              Failure to
                              comply with
                              procedures
6 RCNY                        for review,
§                            approval,    $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
2-68                          replacement
                              or
                              relocation
                              of newsstand
6 RCNY                        Failure to
§                            comply with  $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
2-69                          newsstand
                              obligations
                              Failure to
6 RCNY                        comply with
§                            stoop line   $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
2-70.2                        stand
                              requirements
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 4/21/2020,
eff. 5/21/2020; amended City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 6-17 Sightseeing Guides Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or
revocation, as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of
multiple provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods
shall run concurrently.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
 
          Violation     First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation  Description   Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                            Violation  Default
Admin.    Operating as
Code      an unlicensed $100 per  $100    $100 per  $100    $100 per   $100 per
§ 20-243 sightseeing   day       per day day       per day day        day
          guide
          Failure to
Admin.    comply with
Code      sightseeing   $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-247 guide
          regulations
6 RCNY    Improper
§        documentation $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
2-71      on receipts
6 RCNY    Improperly
§        charged       $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
2-72      additional
          fees
6 RCNY    Improperly
§        offered tie-  $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
2-73      in services
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 11/26/2021,
eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 6-18 Pedicabs Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or
revocation, as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of
multiple provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods
shall run concurrently.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within one year of the prior
violation(s).
   The parties shall be authorized to present evidence to mitigate the license
revocation or suspension period within the date range marked by two asterisks
(**).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
                Violation      First         First       Second        Second      Third and     Third and
Citation        Description    Violation     Default     Violation     Default     Subsequent    Subsequent
                                                                                   Violation     Default
                Operating
Admin. Code     without DCWP   $200, plus    $200, plus  $500, plus    $500, plus  $1,000, plus  $1,000,
§ 20-250(a)    pedicab        $100 per day  $100 per    $100 per day  $100 per    $100 per day  plus $100
                business                     day                       day                       per day
                license
                Failure to     $500 (plus 0  $500 (plus  $1,000 (plus  $1,000                    $4,000
Admin. Code     comply with    to 15 day     15 day      0 to 30 day   (plus 30    $4,000 (plus  (plus
§ 20-253       DCWP insurance suspension)** suspension) suspension)** day         revocation)** revocation)
                requirements                                           suspension)
                Operating
Admin. Code     without
§ 20-254       required       $200          $200        $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000
                equipment in
                pedicabs
                Failure to
                comply with                              $900 (plus 30 $1,000      $4,000 (plus  $4,000
Admin. Code     inspection or  $375          $500        to 60 day     (plus 60    one year to   (plus 18
§ 20-255       registration                             suspension)** day         18 month      month
                plate                                                  suspension) suspension)** suspension)
                requirements
                Failure to
Admin. Code     comply with    $200          $200        $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000
§ 20-256       recordkeeping
                requirements
                Operating
Admin. Code     without DCWP   $200          $200        $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000
§ 20-257(a)    pedicab driver
                license
                Failure to
Admin. Code     comply with
§ 20-257       pedicab driver $200          $200        $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000
                license
                requirements
                Failure to
                wear or
Admin. Code     display        $200          $200        $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000
§ 20-258(b)    visible photo
                identification
                card
                Failure to
                comply with
Admin. Code     restrictions   $200          $200        $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000
§ 20-259       on the
                operation of
                pedicabs
                Driver         $500 (plus 0  $500 (plus  $1,000 (plus  $1,000                    $4,000
Admin. Code     impaired or    to 15 day     15 day      0 to 30 day   (plus 30    $4,000 (plus  (plus
§ 20-259(b)(6) intoxicated by suspension)** suspension) suspension)** day         revocation)** revocation)
                alcohol                                                suspension)
                Operating a
                pedicab
                without a
Admin. Code     driver's
§ 20-259(b)(7) license or     $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000      $4,000        $4,000
                with a
                suspended or
                revoked
                license
                Failure to
Admin. Code     comply with
§ 20-259(d)    accident       $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000      $4,000        $4,000
                report
                requirement
                Failure to
Admin. Code     comply with an
§ 20-259(e)    exigent        $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000      $4,000        $4,000
                circumstances
                directive
Admin. Code     Violated
§ 20-260       pedicab rate   $200          $200        $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000
                requirements
                Failure to
                display
Admin. Code     pedicab
§ 20-262       registration   $200          $200        $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000
                or pedicab
                driver's
                license
6 RCNY          Failure to
§              notify DCWP of $200          $200        $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000
2-420           accident
6 RCNY          Improper
§              advertisements $200          $200        $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000
2-424           placed on
                pedicab
6 RCNY          Failure to
§              comply with    $200          $200        $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000
2-425           signage
                requirements
6 RCNY          Failure to
§              comply with    $200          $200        $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000
2-428           recordkeeping
                requirements
                Failure to
6 RCNY          comply with
§              Pedicab        $200          $200        $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000
2-429           Information
                Card
                requirements
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 11/26/2021,
eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 6-19 Dealers in Second-Hand Articles Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   For the fine amounts marked by a single asterisk, if the respondent timely
submits the appropriate proof of having cured a first-time violation, the
respondent will not be subject to a civil penalty pursuant to Local Law 153 of
2013.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
   In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or
revocation, as permitted by statute. In determining whether a violation is a
second, third, or subsequent violation for purposes of suspension or revocation
pursuant to Section 20-275(d) of Title 20 of the New York City Administrative
Code, any violations of the following provisions must be considered: §§ 20-
268.1, 20-268.2, 20-268.3, 20-268.4, 20-268.5, 20-268.7 and 20-271 of the New
York City Administrative Code, and 6 RCNY §§
2-105,
2-106,
2-107,
2-108, and
2-109. If a respondent is found in violation of multiple provisions that
require a suspension period, the suspension periods shall run concurrently.
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
             Violation         First     First   Second    Second  Third and   Third and
Citation     Description       Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent  Subsequent
                                                                   Violation   Default
             Operating as a
Admin. Code  second hand       $100 per  $100    $100 per  $100    $100 per    $100 per
§ 20-265    dealer without a  day       per day day       per day day         day
             license
             Failure to report
Admin. Code  required records  $175      $175    $300      $300    $500        $500
§ 20-267    to police
             commissioner
             Failure to comply
             with specified
Admin. Code  restrictions      $175      $175    $300      $300    $500        $500
§ 20-268    pertaining to
             second hand
             dealers
             Failure to comply                                     $1,000      $1,000
             with requirements                                     (plus       (plus
Admin. Code  related to sale   $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  suspension  suspension
§ 20-268.1  and financing of                                      or          or
             second-hand                                           revocation) revocation)
             automobiles
             Failure to comply
             with requirements                                     $1,000      $1,000
Admin. Code  related to                                            (plus       (plus
§ 20-268.2  automobile        $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  suspension  suspension
             contract                                              or          or
             cancellation                                          revocation) revocation)
             option
             Failure to
             provide certain                                       $1,000      $1,000
Admin. Code  second-hand                                           (plus       (plus
§ 20-268.3  automobile        $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  suspension  suspension
             contract                                              or          or
             documents in                                          revocation) revocation)
             advance
             Failure by a                                          $1,000      $1,000
Admin. Code  second-hand                                           (plus       (plus
§ 20-268.4  automobile dealer $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  suspension  suspension
             to post consumer                                      or          or
             bill of rights                                        revocation) revocation)
             Failure to comply
             with requirements                                     $1,000      $1,000
Admin. Code  related to                                            (plus       (plus
§ 20-268.5  secondhand        $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  suspension  suspension
             automobile                                            or          or
             records and                                           revocation) revocation)
             reports
             Failure to comply
             with requirements
             related to the                                        $500 (plus  $500 (plus
Admin. Code  purchase of                                           suspension  suspension
§ 20-268.7  second-hand       $175      $175    $300      $300    or          or
             catalytic                                             revocation) revocation)
             converters and
             maintenance of
             records
Admin. Code  Failure to comply
§ 20-270    with signage      $175*     $175*   $300      $300    $500        $500
             requirements
             Failure to label                                      $500 (plus  $500 (plus
Admin. Code  second-hand       $175*     $175*   $300      $300    suspension  suspension
§ 20-271(a) articles as not                                       or          or
             new                                                   revocation) revocation)
             Failure of dealer
             in second-hand
             automobiles to                                        $1,000      $1,000
             clearly and                                           (plus       (plus
Admin. Code  conspicuously     $500*     $500*   $750      $750    suspension  suspension
§ 20-271(b) post price of                                         or          or
             second-hand                                           revocation) revocation)
             automobile or
             prices for add-on
             products
             Failure to comply
Admin. Code  with requirements
§ 20-272    pertaining to     $175      $175    $300      $300    $500        $500
             lost or stolen
             property
             Failure to comply
             with requirements
Admin. Code  pertaining to     $175      $175    $300      $300    $500        $500
§ 20-273    record of
             purchases and
             sales
             Failure to verify
6 RCNY       and record
§           identity of       $175      $175    $300      $300    $500        $500
2-101        persons who sell
             to second-hand
             dealers
             Failure to comply
6 RCNY       with requirements
§           pertaining to     $175      $175    $300      $300    $500        $500
2-102        sale of second-
             hand furniture
             Failure to
             maintain
6 RCNY       documents
§           recording         $175      $175    $300      $300    $500        $500
2-103(a)     transfer of title
             in sale of
             second-hand
             automobile
             Failure to comply
             with requirements
             pertaining to
6 RCNY       deferred payment,
§           collateral and    $175      $175    $300      $300    $500        $500
2-103(b)     financing terms
             in sale of
             second-hand
             automobile
             Covering or
             concealing of
6 RCNY       motor or serial
§           number in sale of $175      $175    $300      $300    $500        $500
2-103(c)     second-hand
             automobile or
             motorcycle
             Failure of dealer
             in second-hand
             automobiles to
6 RCNY       meet deferred
§           payment           $175      $175    $300      $300    $500        $500
2-103(d)     commitments in
             purchase of
             second-hand
             automobile from
             private person
             Improper
             statements,
6 RCNY       representations,
§           promises or acts  $175      $175    $300      $300    $500        $500
2-103(e)     by dealer in
             second-hand
             automobiles or
             agents
             Failure of dealer
             in second-hand
6 RCNY       automobiles to
§           disclose all      $175      $175    $300      $300    $500        $500
2-103(f)     terms of
             undertaking or
             agreement with
             purchaser
             Sale of second-
6 RCNY       hand automobile
§           not inspected and
2-103(g)(1)  certified in      $175      $175    $300      $300    $500        $500
(i)          accordance with
             Vehicle and
             Traffic Law
             Failure to
6 RCNY       provide required
§           Notice to Buyer   $175      $175    $300      $300    $500        $500
2-103(g)(1)  with contract for
(ii)         sale of second-
             hand automobile
             Contract for sale
6 RCNY       of second-hand
§           automobile        $175      $175    $300      $300    $500        $500
2-103(g)(1)  containing
(iii)        prohibited
             limitations
             Failure of dealer
6 RCNY       in second-hand
§           automobiles to
2-103(g)(1)  submit form       $175      $175    $300      $300    $500        $500
(iv)         contracts with
             license
             application
             Failure of dealer
6 RCNY       in second-hand
§           automobiles to    $175      $175    $300      $300    $500        $500
2-103(g)(1)  display required
(v)          sign at place of
             business
6 RCNY       Misrepresentation
§           of vehicle        $175      $175    $300      $300    $500        $500
2-103(g)(2)  mileage
             Failure of dealer
             in second hand
             automobiles to
6 RCNY       investigate
§           previous use of   $175      $175    $300      $300    $500        $500
2-103(h)     vehicle or to
             maintain record
             of vehicle's
             previous use and
             odometer reading
6 RCNY       Sale of second-
§           hand automobile   $175      $175    $300      $300    $500        $500
2-103(i)     at price other
             than advertised
             Sale of second-
             hand automobile
             from licensed
6 RCNY       place of business
§           by any person     $175      $175    $300      $300    $500        $500
2-103(j)     other than
             licensed dealer
             in second-hand
             automobiles
6 RCNY       Improperly
§           accepting deposit $175      $175    $300      $300    $500        $500
2-103(k)(1)  in sale of second
             hand automobile
6 RCNY       Deposit receipt
§           fails to contain  $175      $175    $300      $300    $500        $500
2-103(k)(2)  required
             information
             Failure to keep
6 RCNY       proper record of
§           deposits in sales $175      $175    $300      $300    $500        $500
2-103(k)(3)  of second hand
             automobiles
             Failure of dealer
6 RCNY       in second hand
§           automobiles to    $175      $175    $300      $300    $500        $500
2-103(l)(1)  keep proper
             records of income
             and expenses
             Failure of dealer
             in second hand
6 RCNY       automobiles to
§           maintain proper   $175      $175    $300      $300    $500        $500
2-103(l)(2)  record of cash
             receipts sand
             cash
             disbursements
             Dealer in second-
             hand automobiles
6 RCNY       parking or
§           allowing          $175      $175    $300      $300    $500        $500
2-103(m)(2)  automobiles to
             encroach on a
             sidewalk or other
             public space
6 RCNY       Failure to label                                      $500 (plus  $500 (plus
§           second-hand       $175*     $175*   $300      $300    suspension  suspension
2-105(a)     articles as not                                       or          or
             new                                                   revocation) revocation)
             Failure of dealer
             in second-hand
             automobiles to                                        $1,000      $1,000
6 RCNY       post price of                                         (plus       (plus
§           second-hand       $375*     $500*   $675      $750    suspension  suspension
2-105(b)     automobile                                            or          or
             according to                                          revocation) revocation)
             required
             specifications
             Failure of dealer
             in second-hand                                        $1,000      $1,000
6 RCNY       automobiles to                                        (plus       (plus
§           post price of     $375*     $500*   $675      $750    suspension  suspension
2-105(c)     add-on products                                       or          or
             according to                                          revocation) revocation)
             required
             specifications
             Failure to comply
             with requirements                                     $1,000      $1,000
6 RCNY       related to                                            (plus       (plus
§           financing         $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  suspension  suspension
2-106        disclosures for                                       or          or
             second-hand                                           revocation) revocation)
             automobiles
             Failure to comply
             with requirements                                     $1,000      $1,000
6 RCNY       related to                                            (plus       (plus
§           secondhand        $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  suspension  suspension
2-107        automobile                                            or          or
             contract                                              revocation) revocation)
             cancellation
             option
             Failure to comply
             with requirements                                     $1,000      $1,000
6 RCNY       related to                                            (plus       (plus
§           secondhand        $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  suspension  suspension
2-108        automobile                                            or          or
             consumer bill of                                      revocation) revocation)
             rights
             Failure of
             second-hand                                           $1,000      $1,000
6 RCNY       automobile dealer                                     (plus       (plus
§           to comply with    $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  suspension  suspension
2-109        records and                                           or          or
             reports                                               revocation) revocation)
             requirements
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 8/22/2017,
eff. 9/21/2017; amended City Record 6/29/2018, eff. 7/29/2018; amended City
Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021; amended, City Record 6/6/2023, eff. 7/6/
2023)
§ 6-20 Pawnbrokers Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or
revocation, as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of
multiple provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods
shall run concurrently.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
            Violation     First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation    Description   Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                              Violation  Default
            Employed
Admin. Code clerk(s)      $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-276   under 16
            years old
            Failure to
Admin. Code comply with
§ 20-277   reports and   $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
            recordkeeping
            requirements
            Failure to
            comply with
Admin. Code requirements  $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-277.1 related to
            pawnbroker
            tickets
6 RCNY      Improper
§          caveats on    $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
5-222       pawn tickets
            Improper
6 RCNY      proof of
§          notice of     $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
5-224       intention to
            sell pledged
            property
            Failure to
            meet
            requirements
6 RCNY      of acceptable
§          forms of      $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
5-226       verification
            of pledgor's
            identity and
            required
            records
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 11/26/2021,
eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 6-21 Auctioneers Penalty Schedule. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; repealed City Record 3/11/2022,
eff. 4/10/2022)
§ 6-22 Laundries Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   For the fine amounts marked by a single asterisk, if the respondent timely
submits the appropriate proof of having cured a first-time violation, the
respondent will not be subject to a civil penalty pursuant to Local Law 153 of
2013.
   In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or
revocation, as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of
multiple provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods
shall run concurrently.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
   The parties shall be authorized to present evidence to mitigate the license
revocation or suspension period within the date range marked by two asterisks
(**).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
                          Violation    First         First       Second        Second      Third and     Third and
Citation                  Description  Violation     Default     Violation     Default     Subsequent    Subsequent
                                                                                           Violation     Default
                          Operating an
                          industrial
                          laundry or
Admin. Code               industrial   $100 per day  $100 per    $100 per day  $100 per    $100 per day  $100 per
§ 20-297.2               laundry                    day                       day                       day
                          delivery
                          without a
                          license
                          Failure to
                          comply with
                          industrial
                          laundry or
Admin. Code               industrial
§ 20-297.3               laundry      $375          $500        $450          $500        $500          $500
                          delivery
                          application
                          and
                          licensing
                          requirements
                          Failure to
                          comply with
                          industrial
Admin. Code               laundry or
§ 20-297.4               industrial   $375          $500        $450          $500        $500          $500
                          laundry
                          delivery
                          bond
                          requirements
                          Failure to
                          comply with
                          industrial
Admin. Code               laundry or
§ 20-297.5               industrial   $375          $500        $450          $500        $500          $500
                          laundry
                          delivery
                          general
                          provisions
                          Failure to
                          comply with
                          additional
                          provisions
Admin. Code               for
§ 20-297.6               industrial   $375          $500        $450          $500        $500          $500
                          laundries
                          and
                          industrial
                          laundry
                          delivery
                          Failure to
                          comply with
Admin. Code               general      $175          $175        $300          $300        $500          $500
§ 20-632(a), (c) and (d) provisions
                          for retail
                          laundries
                          Failure of
                          retail
                          laundry to
Admin. Code               accurately   $0            $0          $175          $175        $300          $300
§ 20-632(b)              and clearly
                          state
                          computation
                          of charges
                          Failure to
                          comply with
                          requirements
6 RCNY                    pertaining
§                        to           $375          $500        $450          $500        $500          $500
2-133(a)                  industrial
                          laundry
                          delivery
                          vehicles
                          Failure to
6 RCNY                    comply with  $375 (plus 0  $500 (plus  $450 (plus 0  $500 (plus
§                        requirements to 15 day     15 day      to 30 day     30 day      $500 (plus    $500 (plus
2-133(b)                  pertaining   suspension)** suspension) suspension)** suspension) revocation)** revocation)
                          to liability
                          insurance
                          Failure to
                          comply with
6 RCNY                    requirements $375 (plus 0  $500 (plus  $450 (plus 0  $500 (plus  $500 (plus    $500 (plus
§                        pertaining   to 15 day     15 day      to 30 day     30 day      revocation)** revocation)
2-133(c)                  to workers'  suspension)** suspension) suspension)** suspension)
                          compensation
                          insurance
                          Failure to
                          comply with
6 RCNY                    requirements $375 (plus 0  $500 (plus  $450 (plus 0  $500 (plus
§                        pertaining   to 15 day     15 day      to 30 day     30 day      $500 (plus    $500 (plus
2-133(d)                  to           suspension)** suspension) suspension)** suspension) revocation)** revocation)
                          disability
                          benefits
                          insurance
                          Failure to
                          comply with
                          additional
                          provisions
6 RCNY                    for
§                        industrial   $375          $500        $450          $500        $500          $500
2-135                     laundries
                          and
                          industrial
                          laundry
                          delivery
6 RCNY                    Engaged in
§                        prohibited   $375          $500        $450          $500        $500          $500
 2-136                    conduct
                          Failure to
6 RCNY                    comply with
§                        general      $175          $175        $300          $300        $500          $500
4-131                     provisions
                          for retail
                          laundries
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 6/20/2018,
eff. 7/20/2018; amended City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022)
§ 6-23 Locksmiths Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or
revocation, as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of
multiple provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods
shall run concurrently.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
             Violation    First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation     Description  Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                              Violation  Default
             Operating
Admin. Code  without a    $100 per  $100    $100 per  $100    $100 per   $100 per
§ 20-299    locksmith    day       per day day       per day day        day
             license
             Failure to
Admin. Code  comply with  $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
§ 20-301    locksmith
             regulations
             Failure to
Admin. Code  comply with
§ 20-302    equipment    $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
             listing
             requirements
             Failure to
Admin. Code  comply with  $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
§ 20-303    key marking
             requirement
             Failure to
Admin. Code  display
§ 20-304    license in   $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
             required
             form
             Failure to
             comply with
Admin. Code  prohibition  $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
§ 20-305    for
             itinerant
             locksmith
             Failure to
Admin. Code  comply with  $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
§ 20-307(b) apprentice
             requirements
             Improper
6 RCNY       posting of
§           locksmith    $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
2-140        license
             information
             Failure of
             locksmith to
6 RCNY       comply with
§           obtaining    $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
2-141        and
             recording
             information
             requirements
             Failure to
6 RCNY       provide
§           customer     $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
2-142        copy of
             completed
             form
6 RCNY       Failure to
§           retain       $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
2-143        required
             forms
             Failure to
6 RCNY       make forms
§           available    $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
2-144        for
             inspection
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016)
§ 6-24 Sales Penalty Schedule. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; repealed City Record 11/26/2021,
eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 6-25 Garages and Parking Lots Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   For the fine amounts marked by a single asterisk, if the respondent timely
submits the appropriate proof of having cured a first-time violation, the
respondent will not be subject to a civil penalty pursuant to Local Law 153 of
2013.
   In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or
revocation, as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of
multiple provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods
shall run concurrently.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
                                                Violation    First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation                                        Description  Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                                                 Violation  Default
                                                Failure to
Admin. Code                                     have garage  $100 per  $100    $100 per  $100    $100 per   $100 per
§ 20-321                                       or parking   day       per day day       per day day        day
                                                lot license
                                                from DCWP
                                                Failure to
                                                meet
Admin. Code                                     requirements
§ 20-324                                       of rate      $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
                                                schedule(s)
                                                or change of
                                                rates
                                                Failure to
Admin. Code                                     post the     $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-324(b)                                    required
                                                rates sign
                                                Failure by
                                                transferring
                                                license to
Admin. Code                                     another or   $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-325                                       using
                                                license at
                                                another
                                                location
                                                Failure to
Admin. Code                                     meet the
§ 20-326                                       requirement  $0        $0      $175      $175    $300       $300
                                                (s) of claim
                                                check(s)
                                                Failure to
                                                meet the
                                                requirement
                                                (s) for the
Admin. Code                                     number of    $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-327                                       vehicles,
                                                maximum
                                                capacity or
                                                the manner
                                                of storage
                                                Failure to
Admin. Code                                     meet bicycle $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-327.1(a), (b)(1), (b)(3), (c) through (i) parking
                                                requirements
                                                Failure to
                                                park
Admin. Code                                     bicycles at
§ 20-327.1(b)(2)                               least 2 feet $0        $0      $175      $175    $300       $300
                                                away from
                                                motor
                                                vehicles
                                                Unauthorized
Admin. Code                                     use of       $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-328                                       customer's
                                                vehicle
                                                Failure to
                                                meet the
6 RCNY                                          requirement
§                                              (s) for the  $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
2-161                                           operation of
                                                garages and
                                                parking
                                                lots.
                                                Failure to
                                                post the
6 RCNY                                          required
§                                              signs for    $175*     $175*   $300      $300    $500       $500
2-161(g)(1)                                     separate
                                                entrances
                                                and exits
                                                Failure to
                                                post the
                                                required
6 RCNY                                          signage
§                                              regarding    $175*     $175*   $300      $300    $500       $500
2-161(g)(2)(vi)                                 business
                                                hours,
                                                capacity, or
                                                bicycle
                                                parking
                                                Failure to
6 RCNY                                          post the
§                                              required     $175*     $175*   $300      $300    $500       $500
2-161(g)(2)(v)                                  auxiliary
                                                signs
                                                Failure to
6 RCNY                                          illuminate
§                                              the parking  $175*     $175*   $300      $300    $500       $500
2-161(g)(3)(1)                                  garage and
                                                lot sign
                                                Failure to
6 RCNY                                          post the
§                                              bicycle      $175*     $175*   $300      $300    $500       $500
2-161(u)                                        parking
                                                waiver sign
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 11/26/2021,
eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 6-26 Bingo Licensing Law Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
   In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or
revocation, as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of
multiple provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods
shall run concurrently.
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
          Violation     First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation  Description   Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                            Violation  Default
          Conducting
Admin.    games by
Code      organization  $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-341 other than an
          authorized
          organization
          Failure to
Admin.    comply with
Code      restrictions  $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-342 upon conduct
          of bingo
          games
Admin.    Improper
Code      form, content $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-346 or display of
          license
          Admission of
Admin.    or
Code      participation $0        $0      $175      $175    $300       $300
§ 20-349 by persons
          under
          eighteen
          Conducting
          games in
Admin.    excess of
Code      permitted     $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-350 frequency or
          sale of
          alcohol
          beverages
          Operating or
          conducting
          games by
Admin.    improper
Code      persons or    $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-351 with improper
          equipment or
          improper
          expenditures
          Improper
          charge for
          admission,
Admin.    participation
Code      or game       $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-352 cards;
          improper
          award of
          prizes
Admin.    Improper
Code      advertising   $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-353
          Improper
          filing or
          failure to
          file
Admin.    statements
Code      and receipts; $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-354 failure to
          maintain
          records or to
          pay fee based
          on proceeds
          Failure to
Admin.    comply with
Code      other         $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-358 specified
          requirements
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 11/26/2021,
eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 6-27 Public Dance Halls, Cabarets and Catering Establishment Penalty
Schedule. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; repealed City Record 12/20/2021,
eff. 1/19/2022)
§ 6-28 Sight-seeing Buses, Horse-drawn Cabs and Drivers Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   For the fine amounts marked by a single asterisk, if the respondent timely
submits the appropriate proof of having cured a first-time violation, the
respondent will not be subject to a civil penalty pursuant to Local Law 153 of
2013.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
   In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or
revocation, as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of
multiple provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods
shall run concurrently.
   The parties shall be authorized to present evidence to mitigate the license
revocation or suspension period within the date range marked by two asterisks
(**).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
               Violation     First         First       Second        Second      Third and     Third and
Citation       Description   Violation     Default     Violation     Default     Subsequent    Subsequent
                                                                                 Violation     Default
               Operating
               sight-seeing
Admin. Code    bus or horse- $100 per day  $100 per    $100 per day  $100 per    $100 per day  $100 per
§ 20-373      drawn cab                   day                       day                       day
               without a
               license
               Improper
               transfer of
               license for
               operation of
Admin. Code    sight-seeing
§ 20-374      bus; improper $375          $500        $450          $500        $500          $500
               transfer of
               license for
               operation of
               horse-drawn
               cab
               Failure to
               display
               license plate
Admin. Code    or
§ 20-375      replaceable   $375          $500        $450          $500        $500          $500
               date tag on
               sight-seeing
               bus or horse-
               drawn cab
               Failure to
Admin. Code    submit sight- $500 (plus    $500 (plus  $500 (plus    $500 (plus  $500 (plus    $500 (plus
§ 20-376      seeing bus    revocation)** revocation) revocation)** revocation) revocation)** revocation)
               for
               inspection
               Failure to
               equip sight-
               seeing bus    $550 per day  $750 per    $675 per day  $750 per    $750 per day  $750 per
Admin. Code    with          (plus         day (plus   (plus         day (plus   (plus         day (plus
§ 20-376.1    headphone-    revocation)** revocation) revocation)** revocation) revocation)** revocation)
               limited sound
               reproduction
               system
               Failure of
               horse-drawn
               cab licensee
               to report
               modification,
Admin. Code    amendment,    $375          $500        $450          $500        $500          $500
§ 20-377.1(b) cancellation
               or
               substitution
               of required
               insurance
               policy
               Collection of
               fare for use
Admin. Code    of horse-
§ 20-380      drawn cab in  $375          $500        $450          $500        $500          $500
               excess of
               specified
               amounts
               Unlicensed
Admin. Code    operation of  $100 per day  $100 per    $100 per day  $100 per    $100 per day  $100 per
§ 20-381(a)   horse-drawn                 day                       day                       day
               cab
               Operation of
               horse-drawn
               cab by person
               who is not
Admin. Code    licensed      $375          $500        $450          $500        $500          $500
§ 20-381(e)   driver or
               apprentice or
               holder of
               probationary
               license
               Operating
               horse-drawn
Admin. Code    cab at        $375          $500        $450          $500        $500          $500
§ 20-381.1    prohibited
               time or
               location
               Operating
               horse-drawn
               cab in
Admin. Code    violation of  $500 (plus    $500 (plus  $500 (plus    $500 (plus  $500 (plus    $500 (plus
§ 20-381.1(d) notice given  revocation)   revocation) revocation)   revocation) revocation)   revocation)
               by authorized
               enforcement
               officer
               Failure to
               equip horse
Admin. Code    drawn cab     $500 (plus    $500 (plus  $500 (plus    $500 (plus  $500 (plus    $500 (plus
§ 20-381.2(b) with          revocation)** revocation) revocation)** revocation) revocation)** revocation)
               emergency
               brake system
               Unlawful
               agreement
               between owner
               of horse-
Admin. Code    drawn cab and $375          $500        $450          $500        $500          $500
§ 20-382      any hotel,
               apartment
               house,
               restaurant or
               cafe
               Violation of
               requirements
6 RCNY         applicable to
§             owners and    $375          $500        $450          $500        $500          $500
2-211          drivers of
               sightseeing
               buses
               Failure to
               post schedule
6 RCNY         of rates
§             charged for   $375*         $500*       $450          $500        $500          $500
2-211(c)       each
               sightseeing
               bus trip
               Operation of
               sightseeing
6 RCNY         bus by single
§             driver for    $500 (plus    $500 (plus  $500 (plus    $500 (plus  $500 (plus    $500 (plus
2-211(m)       more than 12  revocation)** revocation) revocation)** revocation) revocation)** revocation)
               hours in any
               24 hour
               period
               Failure to
               comply with
6 RCNY         recordkeeping
§             requirements  $375          $500        $450          $500        $500          $500
2-211.1        applicable to
               owners of
               sightseeing
               buses
               Violation of
               requirements
6 RCNY         applicable to
§             owners and    $375          $500        $450          $500        $500          $500
2-212          drivers of
               horse-drawn
               cabs
               Operation of
               horse-drawn
6 RCNY         cab by single
§             driver for    $500 (plus    $500 (plus  $500 (plus    $500 (plus  $500 (plus    $500 (plus
2-212(q)(3)    more than 12  revocation)** revocation) revocation)** revocation) revocation)** revocation)
               hours in any
               20 hour
               period
               Operating
               horse-drawn
6 RCNY         cab under     $500 (plus    $500 (plus  $500 (plus    $500 (plus  $500 (plus    $500 (plus
§             influence of  revocation)** revocation) revocation)** revocation) revocation)** revocation)
2-212(q)(6)    intoxicating
               liquor or
               drugs
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016)
§ 6-29 Home Improvement Business Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
   In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or
revocation, as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of
multiple provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods
shall run concurrently.
   The parties shall be authorized to present evidence to mitigate the license
revocation or suspension period within the date range marked by two asterisks
(**).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
                Violation          First         First       Second        Second      Third and     Third and
Citation        Description        Violation     Default     Violation     Default     Subsequent    Subsequent
                                                                                       Violation     Default
                Unlicensed
Admin. Code     solicitation or    $1,000, plus  $1,000,     $1,000, plus  $1,000,     $1,000, plus  $1,000,
§ 20-387       performance of     $100 per day  plus $100   $100 per day  plus $100   $100 per day  plus $100
                home improvement                 per day                   per day                   per day
                contract
                Unauthorized
                assignment or
Admin. Code     transfer of        $500          $1,000      $750          $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
§ 20-389       license; improper
                posting of
                license.
                Fraud,                           $1,000                    $1,000                    $1,000
Admin. Code     misrepresentation, $1,000 (plus  (plus       $1,000 (plus  (plus       $1,000 (plus  (plus
§ 20-392(a)(1) or bribery in      revocation)** revocation) revocation)** revocation) revocation)** revocation)
                securing a license
                False statement
Admin. Code     regarding a
§ 20-392(a)(2) material matter in $500          $1,000      $750          $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
                license
                application
                Management
Admin. Code     personnel
§ 20-392(a)(3) untrustworthy or   $500          $1,000      $750          $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
                not of good
                character
                Failure to timely
                perform or
                complete
                contracts,
                manipulation of
Admin. Code     assets or          $1,000 (plus  $1,000      $1,000 (plus  $1,000      $1,000 (plus  $1,000
§ 20-392(a)(4) accounts, or fraud revocation)** (plus       revocation)** (plus       revocation)** (plus
                or bad faith in                  revocation)               revocation)               revocation)
                business
                transactions, or
                unwholesome method
                or practice of
                solicitation
Admin. Code     Failure to display $500          $1,000      $750          $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
§ 20-392(a)(5) license properly
                Failure to comply
Admin. Code     with lawful demand $500          $1,000      $750          $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
§ 20-392(a)(6) or requirement of
                commissioner
                Act of omission,
                fraud, or
Admin. Code     misrepresentation
§ 20-392(a)(7) by agent or        $500          $1,000      $750          $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
                employee approved
                or known by
                licensee
                Prohibited
Admin. Code     practices in       $750 (plus    $1,000      $900 (plus    $1,000      $1,000 (plus  $1,000
§ 20-393       operation of home  revocation)** (plus       revocation)** (plus       revocation)** (plus
                improvement                      revocation)               revocation)               revocation)
                business
                Failure to provide
Admin. Code     notice of right of
§ 20-394.1     owner to cancel    $500          $1,000      $750          $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
                home improvement
                contract.
                Failure to advise
                consumer of
Admin. Code     availability of
§ 20-395       estimate or        $500          $1,000      $750          $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
                failure to provide
                estimate on
                request
                Failure to meet
6 RCNY          requirements for
§              content and        $500          $1,000      $750          $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
2-221           cancellation of
                home improvement
                contract
6 RCNY          Prohibited
§              advertising or     $500          $1,000      $750          $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
2-222           selling practices
                Violation of
6 RCNY          duties and
§              responsibilities   $500          $1,000      $750          $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
2-223           of home
                improvement prime
                contractor
                Failure of
                participant in
6 RCNY          home improvement
§              business trust     $500          $1,000      $750          $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
2-224           fund to meet
                requirements of
                participation
6 RCNY          Failure to furnish
§              required bond      $500          $1,000      $750          $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
2-225
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016)
§ 6-30 Process Servers Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs, clauses,
items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision, paragraph,
subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice of
Violation constitutes a separate violation of the law or rule.
   In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or
revocation, as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of
multiple provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods
run concurrently.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
            Violation        First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation    Description      Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                 Violation  Default
            Operated as an
Admin. Code unlicensed       $100 per  $100    $100 per  $100    $100 per   $100 per
§ 20-403   process server   day       per day day       per day day        day
            or process
            serving agency.
            Failure to
Admin. Code comply with the
§ 20-406.2 responsibilities $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
            of process
            serving agencies
Admin. Code Failure to
§ 20-406.3 maintain proper  $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
            records
            Failure to
Admin. Code maintain
§ 20-410   electronic       $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
            record of
            service
6 RCNY      Failure to
§          comply with      $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
2-233       recordkeeping
            requirements
            Failure to
            comply with
6 RCNY      global
§          positioning      $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
2-233b      system
            recordkeeping
            requirements
            Failure to
            comply with all
6 RCNY      federal, state
§          and municipal    $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
2-234       laws, rules,
            regulations and
            requirements
            Failure to
6 RCNY      comply with the
§          duties of        $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
2-234a      process serving
            agencies
            Failure to
            comply with the
6 RCNY      duty of process
§          servers to       $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
2-234b      report agencies
            that assign
            service
            Improper
6 RCNY      preparation or
§          maintenance of   $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
2-235       affidavit of
            service
            Failure to
6 RCNY      comply with the
§          duty to report   $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
2-236       hearings
            contesting
            service
6 RCNY      Improper wearing
§          of insignia      $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
2-237
6 RCNY      Improper use of
§          ZIP codes        $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
2-238
6 RCNY      Failure to
§          comply with      $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
2-239       email
            requirements
6 RCNY      Failure to
§          comply with      $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
2-240       audit
            requirements
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 5/11/2020,
eff. 6/10/2020; amended City Record 9/23/2022, eff. 10/23/2022)
§ 6-31 Electronic or Home Appliance Service Dealer Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   For the fine amounts marked by a single asterisk, if the respondent timely
submits the appropriate proof of having cured a first-time violation, the
respondent will not be subject to a civil penalty pursuant to Local Law 153 of
2013.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a sustained violation by the same respondent of the same provision of
law, rule, or regulation within two years of the prior violation(s).
   In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or
revocation, as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of
multiple provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods
shall run concurrently.
   The parties shall be authorized to present evidence to mitigate the license
revocation or suspension period within the date range marked by two asterisks
(**).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
                         Violation    First         First       Second        Second      Third and     Third and
Citation                 Description  Violation     Default     Violation     Default     Subsequent    Subsequent
                                                                                          Violation     Default
                         Operating
                         business as
                         an
                         electronic
Admin. Code              or home      $100 per day  $100 per    $100 per day  $100 per    $100 per day  $100 per
§ 20-412                appliance                  day                       day                       day
                         service
                         dealer
                         without a
                         license
                         Failure to
                         comply with
                         the duties
                         of an
Admin. Code              electronic   $175          $175        $300          $300        $500          $500
§ 20-417(1) through (5) or home
                         appliance
                         service
                         dealer
                         licensee
                         Failure to
Admin. Code              display the  $175          $175        $300          $300        $500          $500
§ 20-417(6)             required
                         repair sign
                         Failure to
Admin. Code              carry        $500          $500        $500          $500        $500          $500
§ 20-417(7)             required
                         insurance
Admin. Code              Engaging in
§ 20-420                prohibited   $175          $175        $300          $300        $500          $500
                         practices
6 RCNY                   Engaging in
§                       prohibited   $175          $175        $300          $300        $500          $500
2-251                    practices
6 RCNY                   Improper
§                       advertising  $175          $175        $300          $300        $500          $500
2-252                    by service
                         dealers
6 RCNY                   Failure to
§                       display      $175          $175        $300          $300        $500          $500
2-253                    required
                         information
                         Failure to
                         display
                         required
6 RCNY                   information
§                       regarding    $175          $175        $300          $300        $500          $500
2-253(a)(1)              service
                         dealer's
                         true
                         identity
                         Failure to
                         display
                         required
6 RCNY                   information
§                       regarding    $175          $175        $300          $300        $500          $500
2-253(a)(2)              "cash only"
                         or "cash or
                         certified
                         check" only
                         policy
6 RCNY                   Failure to
§                       display      $175*         $175*       $300          $300        $500          $500
2-253(a)(3)              required
                         notice
                         Failure to
                         comply with
6 RCNY                   disclosure
§                       required for $175          $175        $300          $300        $500          $500
2-254                    repairs made
                         on
                         licensee's
                         premises
                         Failure to
                         comply with
6 RCNY                   disclosure
§                       required for $175          $175        $300          $300        $500          $500
2-255                    repairs made
                         in the
                         customer's
                         home
                         Failure to
6 RCNY                   comply with
§                       estimated    $175          $175        $300          $300        $500          $500
2-256                    completion
                         date
                         requirements
6 RCNY                   Failure to
§                       comply with  $175          $175        $300          $300        $500          $500
2-257                    final bill
                         requirements
                         Failure to
6 RCNY                   give or
§                       maintain     $175          $175        $300          $300        $500          $500
2-258                    copies of
                         documents
6 RCNY                   Improper
§                       return of    $175          $175        $300          $300        $500          $500
2-259                    removed
                         parts
                         Failure to
6 RCNY                   comply with
§                       the picture  $175          $175        $300          $300        $500          $500
2-260                    tubes
                         requirements
6 RCNY                   Improper
§                       warranty or  $175          $175        $300          $300        $500          $500
2-261                    guarantees
6 RCNY                   Improper     $175 (plus 0  $175 (plus  $300 (plus 0  $300 (plus  $500 (plus    $500 (plus
§                       insurance    to 15 day     15 day      to 30 day     30 day      license       license
2-262                    coverage     suspension)** suspension) suspension)** suspension) revocation)** revocation)
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 1/14/2019,
eff. 2/13/2019; amended City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 6-32 Products for the Disabled: Sale, Rental, Repair and Servicing Penalty
Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   For the fine amounts marked by a single asterisk, if the respondent timely
submits the appropriate proof of having cured a first-time violation, the
respondent will not be subject to a civil penalty pursuant to Local Law 153 of
2013.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
   In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or
revocation, as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of
multiple provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods
shall run concurrently.
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
          Violation     First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation  Description   Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                            Violation  Default
Admin.    Engaged in    $100 per  $100    $100 per  $100    $100 per   $100 per
Code      unlicensed    day       per day day       per day day        day
§ 20-426 activity
Admin.    Engaged in
Code      prohibited    $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
§ 20-428 practices
Admin.    Failure to
Code      comply with   $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
§ 20-430 the duties of
          a licensee
6 RCNY    Engaged in
§        prohibited    $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
2-272     practices
          Failure to
6 RCNY    comply with
§        the written   $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
2-273     estimate
          requirements
6 RCNY    Improper
§        delay in      $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
2-274     delivery
6 RCNY    Improper
§        display of    $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
2-275     required
          information
          Failure to
          post the sign
6 RCNY    summarizing
§        provision of  $375*     $500*   $450      $500    $500       $500
2-275(c)  the products
          for the
          disabled law
6 RCNY    Improper
§        return of     $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
2-276     removed parts
6 RCNY    Improper
§        final bill    $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
2-277     and invoice
6 RCNY    Failure to
§        comply with   $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
 2-278    recordkeeping
          requirements
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016)
§ 6-33 Games of Chance Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 9 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
   In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or
revocation, as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of
multiple provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods
shall run concurrently.
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
             Violation      First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation     Description    Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                Violation  Default
             Failure to
             meet
Admin. Code  requirements   $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
§ 20-436    of conduct for
             games of
             chance
             Engaging in
Admin. Code  unlicensed     $100 per  $100    $100 per  $100    $100 per   $100 per
§ 20-436(1) games of       day       per day day       per day day        day
             chance
             Failure to
             meet
Admin. Code  requirement(s) $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
§ 20-440    for content
             and display of
             license
Admin. Code  Engaging in
§ 20-441    prohibited     $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
             practices
             Permitting
             under age
Admin. Code  person to
§ 20-442    conduct or     $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
             assist in the
             conduct of any
             game of chance
             Failure to
             meet the
Admin. Code  requirement(s)
§ 20-443    for the        $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
             frequency of
             the games of
             chance
             Failure to
             meet the
             requirement(s)
             for the
Admin. Code  persons
§ 20-444    operating and  $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
             conducting
             games,
             equipment and
             other
             operations
             Failure to
             meet the
             requirement(s)
             for the charge
Admin. Code  for admission
§ 20-445    and            $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
             participation,
             amount of
             prizes and
             award of
             prizes
             Failure to
             meet the
Admin. Code  requirement(s) $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
§ 20-446    for
             advertising
             games
             Failure to
Admin. Code  furnish        $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
§ 20-447    required
             documents
             Failure to
Admin. Code  allow
§ 20-448    examination of $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
             books and
             records
             Failure to
             keep the
             required books
             and records
Admin. Code  and failure to $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
§ 20-450    meet the
             requirements
             for the
             operation of
             the business
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016)
§ 6-34 Storage Warehouses Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
   In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or
revocation, as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of
multiple provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods
shall run concurrently.
   The parties shall be authorized to present evidence to mitigate the license
revocation or suspension period within the date range marked by two asterisks
(**).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
          Violation     First         First       Second        Second      Third and     Third and
Citation  Description   Violation     Default     Violation     Default     Subsequent    Subsequent
                                                                            Violation     Default
          Operating
Admin.    without a     $1,000 per    $1,000 per  $1,000 per    $1,000 per  $1,000 per    $1,000 per
Code      storage       day           day         day           day         day           day
§ 20-476 warehouse
          license
          Failure to
Admin.    comply with
Code      schedule of   $750          $1,000      $900          $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
§ 20-478 rates
          requirement
          (s)
          Failure to                  $1,000                    $1,000
Admin.    comply with   $1,000 (plus  (plus 15    $1,000 (plus  (plus 30    $1,000 (plus  $1,000
Code      insurance     0 to 15 day   day         0 to 30 day   day         revocation)** (plus
§ 20-480 requirement   suspension)** suspension) suspension)** suspension)               revocation)
          (s)
6 RCNY    Failure to
§        comply with   $750          $1,000      $900          $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
2-322     oral
          disclosures
          Failure to
6 RCNY    comply with
§        written       $750          $1,000      $900          $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
2-323     estimate
          requirement
          (s)
6 RCNY    Failure to
§        comply with   $750          $1,000      $900          $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
2-324     inventory
          requirement
6 RCNY    Failure to
§        comply with   $750          $1,000      $900          $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
2-325     cancellation
          requirement
6 RCNY    Improper bill
§        for services  $750          $1,000      $900          $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
2-326
          Failure to
6 RCNY    comply with
§        relocation of $750          $1,000      $900          $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
2-327     household
          goods
          requirements
6 RCNY    Failure to
§        meet          $750          $1,000      $900          $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
2-328     advertisement
          requirements
6 RCNY    Failure to    $1,000 (plus  $1,000      $1,000 (plus  $1,000                    $1,000
§        provide       0 to 15 day   (plus 15    0 to 30 day   (plus 30    $1,000 (plus  (plus
2-329(a)  liability     suspension)** day         suspension)** day         revocation)** revocation)
          insurance                   suspension)               suspension)
6 RCNY    Failure to
§        meet          $750          $1,000      $900          $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
2-329(b)  insurance
          requirements
          Failure to
          provide a
          written                     $1,000                    $1,000
6 RCNY    storage       $1,000 (plus  (plus 15    $1,000 (plus  (plus 30    $1,000 (plus  $1,000
§        contract      0 to 15 day   day         0 to 30 day   day         revocation)** (plus
2-330     before        suspension)** suspension) suspension)** suspension)               revocation)
          accepting
          household
          goods
          Failure to
6 RCNY    provide       $1,000 (plus  $1,000      $1,000 (plus  $1,000                    $1,000
§        consumer with 0 to 15 day   (plus 15    0 to 30 day   (plus 30    $1,000 (plus  (plus
2-331     access to     suspension)** day         suspension)** day         revocation)** revocation)
          household                   suspension)               suspension)
          goods
          Failure to                  $1,000                    $1,000
6 RCNY    meet general  $1,000 (plus  (plus 15    $1,000 (plus  (plus 30    $1,000 (plus  $1,000
§        release       0 to 15 day   day         0 to 30 day   day         revocation)** (plus
2-332     requirement   suspension)** suspension) suspension)** suspension)               revocation)
          (s)
6 RCNY    Improper sale $1,000 (plus  $1,000      $1,000 (plus  $1,000                    $1,000
§        of consumer   0 to 15 day   (plus 15    0 to 30 day   (plus 30    $1,000 (plus  (plus
2-333     goods         suspension)** day         suspension)** day         revocation)** revocation)
                                      suspension)               suspension)
          Failure to
6 RCNY    meet
§        requirements  $750          $1,000      $900          $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
2-334     to act as an
          agent
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016)
§ 6-35 Electronic Stores Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
   In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or
revocation, as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of
multiple provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods
shall run concurrently.
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
                             Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation                     Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                             Violation  Default
                             Operating
Admin. Code                  without an  $100 per  $100    $100 per  $100    $100 per   $100 per
§ 20-485                    electronic  day       per day day       per day day        day
                             store
                             license
Admin. Code                  Engaging in
§ 20-485.3                  prohibited  $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
                             practices
Admin. Code                  Improper
§ 20-485.4                  transfer of $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
                             license
                             Failure to
Admin. Code                  comply with
§ 20-485.5(a), (c), and (d) the duties  $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
                             of a
                             licensee
                             Failure to
Admin. Code                  display     $50       $50     $175      $175    $250       $250
§ 20-485.5(b)               selling
                             price
                             Failure to
Admin. Code                  provide a   $0        $0      $175      $175    $300       $300
§ 20-485.5(c)               receipt as
                             required
                             Failure to
                             comply with
6 RCNY                       regulations
§                           pertaining  $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
2-341                        to gray
                             market
                             merchandise
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 4/21/2020,
eff. 5/21/2020; amended City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 6-36 Towing Vehicles Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to the Administrative Code of the City of New York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
   In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or
revocation, as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of
multiple provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods
shall run concurrently.
   The parties shall be authorized to present evidence to mitigate the license
revocation or suspension period within the date range marked by two asterisks
(**).
Citation Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third     Third
         Description Violation Default Violation Default Violation Default
Citation        Violation Description                                                      First         First       Second        Second      Third         Third
                                                                                           Violation     Default     Violation     Default     Violation     Default
Admin. Code     Towing without written authorization from owner or lessee of property      $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
§ 19-169(c)(1)
Admin. Code     Towing an occupied vehicle                                                 $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
§ 19-169(c)(2)
Admin. Code     Towing vehicle in excess of distance permitted by law                      $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
§ 19-169(c)(3)
Admin. Code     Failure to notify police precinct within 30 minutes of vehicle’s arrival $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
§ 19-169(c)(4) at storage site
Admin. Code     Overcharging for disconnecting attached vehicle                            $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
§ 19-169(c)(5)
Admin. Code     Failure to allow owner to inspect vehicle before accepting its return      $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
§ 19-169(c)(6)
Admin. Code     Failure to comply with notice provisions of lien law                       $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
§ 19-169(c)(7)
Admin. Code     Refusing to remove vehicle without just cause                              $100          $100        $200          $200        $500          $500
§ 19-169(d)
Admin. Code     Overcharging for removal of vehicle from private property                  $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
§ 19-169.1(a)
Admin. Code     Failing to follow posted instructions when removing vehicle from private   $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
§ 19-169.1(a)  property
Admin. Code     Improper sign posted for removal of vehicles                               $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
§ 19-169.1(b)
Admin. Code     Removal of vehicle from private property without written authorization     $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
§ 19-169.1(c)  from property owner or agent
Admin. Code     Removal of vehicle while it was occupied                                   $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
§ 19-169.1(d)
Admin. Code     Storage of vehicle in excess of distance permitted by law                  $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
§ 19-169.1(e)
Admin. Code     Failure to notify police precinct within 30 minutes of vehicle removal     $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
§ 19-169.1(f)
Admin. Code     Failure to notify about disconnection rights                               $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
§ 19-169.1(g)
Admin. Code     Overcharging for disconnecting attached vehicle                            $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
§ 19-169.1(g)
Admin. Code     Failure to allow owner to inspect vehicle before accepting its return      $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
§ 19-169.1(h)
Admin. Code     Charging for improper removal of a vehicle                                 $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
§ 19-169.1(i)
Admin. Code     Towing of city vehicles                                                    $500          $500        $1,000        $1,000      $1,000        $1,000
§ 19-169.1(k)
Admin. Code     Unlicensed Activity                                                        $2,250        $3,000      $2,700        $3,000      $10,000       $10,000
§ 20-496
                                                                                           $2,500 (plus  $2,500      $3,000 (plus  $3,000                    $3,500
Admin. Code     Failure to comply with insurance requirements                              0 to 15 day   (plus 15    0 to 30 day   (plus 30    $3,500 (plus  (plus
§ 20-500                                                                                  suspension)** day         suspension)** day         revocation)** revocation)
                                                                                                         suspension)               suspension)
Admin. Code     Improper inspection of tow trucks                                          $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      $2,875        $3,500
§ 20-501
Admin. Code     Failure to comply with license plate requirements                          $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      $2,875        $3,500
§ 20-503
Admin. Code                                                                                                                                    $2,875(plus   $3,500
§ 20-507       Improper posting of required information                                   $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      revocation)** (plus
                                                                                                                                                             revocation)
Admin. Code                                                                                                                                    $10,000 (plus $10,000
§ 20-509       Failure to comply with rates requirements                                  $2,250        $3,000      $2,700        $3,000      revocation)** (plus
                                                                                                                                                             revocation)
Admin. Code                                                                                                                                    $2,875(plus   $3,500
§ 20-509.1     Failure to comply with arterial tow rates requirements                     $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      revocation)** (plus
                                                                                                                                                             revocation)
Admin. Code                                                                                                                                    $2,875(plus   $3,500
§ 20-510       Improper authorization to tow vehicles                                     $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      revocation)** (plus
                                                                                                                                                             revocation)
Admin. Code     Failure to properly remove vehicle obstructing traffic                     $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      $2,875        $3,500
§ 20-511
Admin. Code                                                                                                                                    $2,875(plus   $3,500
§ 20-512       Failure to comply with licensee obligation to perform service              $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      revocation)** (plus
                                                                                                                                                             revocation)
Admin. Code                                                                                                                                    $2,875(plus   $3,500
§ 20-514       Failure to comply with repair requirements                                 $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      revocation)** (plus
                                                                                                                                                             revocation)
Admin. Code     Engaging in prohibited acts                                                $2,250        $3,000      $2,700        $3,000      $10,000       $10,000
§ 20-515
Admin. Code                                                                                                                                    $2,875(plus   $3,500
§ 20-516       Improper recordkeeping                                                     $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      revocation)** (plus
                                                                                                                                                             revocation)
Admin. Code     Improper transfer of license                                               $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      $2,875        $3,500
§ 20-517
Admin. Code     Failure to comply with Directed Accident Response Program (DARP) program                                                       $2,875(plus   $3,500
§ 20-518       requirements                                                               $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      revocation)** (plus
                                                                                                                                                             revocation)
Admin. Code                                                                                                                                    $10,000 (plus $10,000
§ 20-518(b)(2) Unauthorized response                                                      $2,250        $3,000      $2,700        $3,000      revocation)** (plus
                                                                                                                                                             revocation)
Admin. Code                                                                                                                                    $2,875(plus   $3,500
§ 20-519       Failure to comply with Rotation Tow Program (ROTOW) program requirements   $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      revocation)** (plus
                                                                                                                                                             revocation)
Admin. Code                                                                                                                                    $2,875(plus   $3,500
§ 20-520       Improper removal of a disabled vehicle on a highway                        $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      revocation)** (plus
                                                                                                                                                             revocation)
Admin. Code                                                                                                                                    $2,875(plus   $3,500
§ 20-520.1(b)  Failure to comply with prerequisite requirements for city towing programs  $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      revocation)** (plus
                                                                                                                                                             revocation)
Admin. Code                                                                                                                                    $10,000 (plus $10,000
§ 20-527       Failure to comply with credit card requirement                             $2,250        $3,000      $2,700        $3,000      revocation)** (plus
                                                                                                                                                             revocation)
Admin. Code     Improper police precinct notification                                      $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      $2,875        $3,500
§ 20-528(a)
6 RCNY
§              Failure to comply with towing license requirements                         $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      $2,875        $3,500
2-362
6 RCNY
§              Failure to comply with the obligations of a tow truck licensee             $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      $2,875        $3,500
2-363
6 RCNY
§              Improper application for a tow truck operator's license                    $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      $2,875        $3,500
2-364
6 RCNY
§              Failure to comply with the obligations of a licensed tow truck operator    $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      $2,875        $3,500
2-365
6 RCNY
§              Failure to meet the responsibilities to provide towing services            $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      $2,875        $3,500
2-366
6 RCNY
§              Improper authorization to tow                                              $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      $2,875        $3,500
2-367
6 RCNY
§              Failure to comply with Consumer Bill of Rights requirements                $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      $2,875        $3,500
2-367.1
6 RCNY
§              Improper rates and charges                                                 $2,250        $3,000      $2,700        $3,000      $10,000       $10,000
2-368
6 RCNY
§              Failure to comply with the authorization to repair requirements            $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      $2,875        $3,500
2-369
6 RCNY
§              Improper arterial towing                                                   $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      $2,875        $3,500
2-370
6 RCNY          Failure to comply with Directed Accident Response Program (DARP)
§              requirements                                                               $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      $2,875        $3,500
2-371
6 RCNY
§              Failure to comply with Rotation Tow Program (ROTOW) requirements           $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      $2,875        $3,500
2-372
6 RCNY
§              Failure to comply with evidence vehicle program requirements               $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      $2,875        $3,500
2-373
6 RCNY
§              Improper primary or adjacent zones                                         $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      $2,875        $3,500
2-374
6 RCNY
§              Failure to comply with the requirements of the tow truck industry fund     $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      $2,875        $3,500
2-375
6 RCNY          Failure to comply with the duties pertaining to the nonconsensual towing
§              of vehicles from private property                                          $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      $2,875        $3,500
2-377
6 RCNY
§              Improper maintenance of records in electronic format                       $1,875        $2,500      $2,375        $3,000      $2,875        $3,500
2-378
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 4/5/2024,
eff. 5/5/2024)
§ 6-37 Booting of Motor Vehicles Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to the Administrative Code of the City of New York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
   In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or
revocation, as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of
multiple provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods
shall run concurrently.
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
                                                                                             First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation          Violation Description                                                      Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                                                                                 Violation  Default
Admin. Code       Unlicensed person engaged in booting                                       $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
§ 19-169.2(b)
Admin. Code       Insufficient number of signs posted by owner                               $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
§ 19-169.2(c)(1)
Admin. Code       Failure to post proper signs on private streets and at intersections with  $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
§ 19-169.2(c)(2) public streets warning of booting
Admin. Code       Charging more than posted rate for release of booted vehicle               $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
§ 19-169.2(c)(3)
Admin. Code       Booting a vehicle without a proper contract with the owner of the property $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
§ 19-169.2(c)(4) where the vehicle is parked
Admin. Code       Booted legally parked vehicle                                              $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
§ 19-169.2(d)
Admin. Code       Failure to attach sticker with booting company’s contact information and $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
§ 19-169.2(e)    warning that attempt to move vehicle may damage it
Admin. Code       Failure to provide signed receipt containing required information          $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
§ 19-169.2(f)
Admin. Code       Charging fee for improper booting                                          $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
§ 19-169.2(g)
Admin. Code       Failure to release vehicle within 30 minutes of request, after payment of  $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
§ 19-169.2(h)    charge
Admin. Code       Unlicensed booting activity                                                $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
§ 20-531
Admin. Code       Failure to maintain records as required                                    $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
§ 20-534
Admin. Code       Improper charge for release of vehicle; failure to release vehicle within  $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
§ 20-535         prescribed time or at prescribed place
6 RCNY
§                Failure to comply with signage requirements                                $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
2-401
6 RCNY
§                Improper form or content of vehicle window stickers                        $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
2-402
6 RCNY
§                Improper practices for acceptance of credit card payments                  $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
2-403
6 RCNY            Failure to disclose name, phone number and address of each officer,
§                director, principal or stockholder                                         $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
2-404(b)
6 RCNY
§                Failure to notify DCA within 15 days of change of address                  $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
2-404(d)
6 RCNY            Failure to notify DCA within 10 days of change in offers or directors or
§                transfer of capital stock                                                  $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
2-405
6 RCNY
§                Failure to post license at place of business                               $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
2-406
6 RCNY            Failure to provide employees with identification badge in required form;
§                failure to maintain record of identification badges issued; failure of     $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
2-407             employee to display identification made upon request
6 RCNY
§                Failure to maintain records or to issue receipts in required form          $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
2-408
6 RCNY
§                Failure to notify DCA of change in fees charged or properties served       $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
2-409
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 4/5/2024,
eff. 5/5/2024)
§ 6-38 Weights and Measures Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York,
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York, Article 16 of the New York
Agriculture and Markets Law, or Title 1 of the New York Code, Rules, and
Regulations.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   For the fine amounts marked by a single asterisk, if the respondent timely
submits the appropriate proof of having cured a first-time violation, the
respondent will not be subject to a civil penalty pursuant to Local Law 153 of
2013.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
          Violation      First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation  Description    Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                             Violation  Default
          Improper use
          of weighing or
Admin.    measuring
Code      device that    $50       $50     $75       $75     $100       $100
§ 20-584 has not been
          marked by the
          Department.
          Improper
          manufacturer
          or use of any
          dry or liquid
          measure unless
Admin.    it conforms to
Code      the standards  $50       $50     $75       $75     $100       $100
§ 20-585 provided by
          article
          sixteen of the
          agriculture
          and markets
          law.
          Improper sale
          or offer for
          sale of any
          commodity or
Admin.    article of
Code      merchandise at $50       $50     $75       $75     $100       $100
§ 20-587 or for a
          greater weight
          or measure
          than its true
          weight or
          measure.
          Failure to
Admin.    repair a
Code      condemned      $50       $50     $75       $75     $100       $100
§ 20-590 weighing or
          measuring
          device.
Admin.    Improper
Code      interference   $50       $50     $75       $75     $100       $100
§ 20-591 with
          inspector.
          Failure to
Admin.    comply with
Code      requirements   $50       $50     $75       $75     $100       $100
§ 20-595 for labels and
          signage
6 RCNY    Failure to
§        supplement     $50       $50     $75       $75     $100       $100
3-10      weight or
          measure.
6 RCNY    Failure to
§        have           $50*      $50*    $75       $75     $100       $100
3-12      information in
          English.
          Failure to
6 RCNY    meet the
§        requirements   $50       $50     $75       $75     $100       $100
3-21      of display of
          price by
          quantity.
          Failure to
          meet the
          requirement(s)
6 RCNY    for the use of
§        scales or      $50       $50     $75       $75     $100       $100
3-24      measuring
          devices in
          stores and
          markets.
          Failure to
6 RCNY    post sign
§        informing
3-24(f)   customer that  $50*      $50*    $75       $75     $100       $100
(2)       they may
          reweigh
          products
6 RCNY    Failure to
§        retain         $50       $50     $75       $75     $100       $100
3-25      inspection
          certificate(s)
          Failure to
6 RCNY    meet the
§        requirements   $50       $50     $75       $75     $100       $100
3-41      for markings
          on prepackaged
          foods.
          Failure to
6 RCNY    meet the
§        requirements   $50       $50     $75       $75     $100       $100
3-42      for markings
          on bread
          weight.
          Failure to
          meet the
6 RCNY    requirement(s)
§        for the sale   $50       $50     $75       $75     $100       $100
3-54      of meat,
          poultry, and
          seafood.
          Failure to
          meet the
          requirement(s)
          for labeling
6 RCNY    of frozen,
§        defrosted or   $50       $50     $75       $75     $100       $100
3-55      thawed and
          refrozen,
          meat, poultry,
          fish and
          products
          thereof.
6 RCNY    Improper
§        colored        $50       $50     $75       $75     $100       $100
3-57      lighting on
          meats
          Failure to
6 RCNY    meet the
§        requirements   $50       $50     $75       $75     $100       $100
3-72      of weighing
          device in
          laundry.
          Failure to
          meet the
6 RCNY    requirements
§        for the        $50       $50     $75       $75     $100       $100
3-81      purchase of
          gold, silver
          or precious
          metal.
          Improper use
          of a condemned
          device or
NY Agri & improper
Mkts      removal,       $450      $600    $1,080    $1,200  $1,200     $1,200
§ 184    obstruction,
          or defacement
          of a
          condemnation
          tag.
          Improper use,
          removal, or
NY Agri & failure to
Mkts      remove a       $450      $600    $1,080    $1,200  $1,200     $1,200
§ 185    device in
          violation of
          order.
          Improper
          possession of
NY Agri & a false
Mkts      weighing or    $450      $600    $1,080    $1,200  $1,200     $1,200
§ 186    measuring
          device or
          system.
          Failure to
          comply with
NY Agri & regulations
Mkts      pertaining to  $450      $600    $1,080    $1,200  $1,200     $1,200
§ 190    the method of
          sale of food
          and food
          products
NY Agri & Improper
Mkts      standardized   $450      $600    $1,080    $1,200  $1,200     $1,200
§ 191    packaging
1 NYCRR   Improper
§ 221.3  declaration of $300      $400    $720      $800    $800       $800
          identity
1 NYCRR   Improper
§ 221.4  declaration of $300      $400    $720      $800    $800       $800
          responsibility
1 NYCRR   Improper
§ 221.5  declaration of $300      $400    $720      $800    $800       $800
          quantity
          Failure to
          comply with
          regulations
1 NYCRR   pertaining to  $300      $400    $720      $800    $800       $800
§ 221.6  consumer
          package
          prominence and
          placement
          Failure to
          comply with
          regulations
1 NYCRR   pertaining to  $300      $400    $720      $800    $800       $800
§ 221.7  nonconsumer
          package
          prominence and
          placement
1 NYCRR   Improper       $300      $400    $720      $800    $800       $800
§ 221.11 variation
1 NYCRR   Improper
§ 221.12 method of sale $300      $400    $720      $800    $800       $800
          of commodities
          Improper
1 NYCRR   method of sale $300      $400    $720      $800    $800       $800
§ 221.13 of specific
          commodities
          Net contents
1 NYCRR   of containers  $300      $400    $720      $800    $800       $800
§ 221.14 not indicated
          on the outside
1 NYCRR   Improper sales $300      $400    $720      $800    $800       $800
§ 221.15 slip
          Improper use
1 NYCRR   of coin-       $300      $400    $720      $800    $800       $800
§ 221.16 operated
          devices
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 9/24/2019,
eff. 10/24/2019; amended City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 6-39 Dealers in Second-Hand Weighing or Measuring Devices Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
shall mean a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty,
being found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
          Violation      First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation  Description    Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                             Violation  Default
Admin.    Failure to
Code      have required  $100 per  $100    $100 per  $100    $100 per   $100 per
§ 20-601 license from   day       per day day       per day day        day
          DCA
          Failure to
Admin.    give notice
Code      regarding      $75       $100    $90       $100    $100       $100
§ 20-604 repaired
          devices
          Failure to
          comply with
Admin.    requirements
Code      regarding      $75       $100    $90       $100    $100       $100
§ 20-605 returning tags
          on condemned
          vehicles
Admin.    Failure to
Code      comply with    $75       $100    $90       $100    $100       $100
§ 20-606 recordkeeping
          requirements
          Failure to
Admin.    comply with
Code      testing        $75       $100    $90       $100    $100       $100
§ 20-607 equipment
          requirements
          Failure to
6 RCNY    meet
§        requirement(s) $75       $100    $90       $100    $100       $100
4-01      regarding the
          NYC security
          seal
          Failure to
6 RCNY    meet
§        requirement(s) $75       $100    $90       $100    $100       $100
4-02      regarding the
          licensee's
          security seal
          Failure to
          meet
6 RCNY    requirements
§        in use of      $75       $100    $90       $100    $100       $100
4-03      initials,
          abbreviations,
          trademarks and
          logos
          Failure to
          meet
6 RCNY    requirements
§        of employee's  $75       $100    $90       $100    $100       $100
4-04      identification
          number or
          letter
6 RCNY    Failure to
§        give notice of $75       $100    $90       $100    $100       $100
4-05      new repair or
          service person
          Failure to
          meet
6 RCNY    requirements
§        regarding the  $75       $100    $90       $100    $100       $100
4-06      cumulative
          list of
          employees.
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016)
§ 6-40 Etching Acid Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within one year of the prior
violation(s).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
          Violation       First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation  Description     Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                              Violation  Default
          Failure to meet
Admin.    the requirement
Code      (s) for the     $185      $250    $225      $250    $250       $250
§ 20-612 sale of etching
          acid.
Admin.    Failure to meet
Code      the requirement $185      $250    $225      $250    $250       $250
§ 20-613 (s) of posting
          notice.
Admin.    Failure to meet
Code      recordkeeping   $185      $250    $225      $250    $250       $250
§ 20-614 requirement(s)
          Failure to meet
6 RCNY    the requirement
§        (s) of valid    $185      $250    $225      $250    $250       $250
4-100     photo
          identification.
          Failure to meet
6 RCNY    the requirement
§        (s) of          $185      $250    $225      $250    $250       $250
4-101     maintaining
          purchasing
          records.
6 RCNY    Failure to meet
§        the requirement $185      $250    $225      $250    $250       $250
4-102     (s) of posting
          notice.
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 4/21/2020,
eff. 5/21/2020)
§ 6-41 Language Assistance in Pharmacies Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
          Violation      First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation  Description    Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                             Violation  Default
          Failure to
Admin.    meet the oral
Code      interpretation $1,875    $2,500  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
§ 20-621 services
          requirement
          (s).
          Failure to
Admin.    meet the
Code      requirement(s) $1,875    $2,500  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
§ 20-622 of written
          translation
          services.
          Failure to
          meet the
          requirement(s)
Admin.    for
Code      notification   $375      $500    $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
§ 20-623 relating to
          language
          assistance
          services.
          Failure to
          include
6 RCNY    required
§        statement in   $375      $500    $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
4-11(a)   language
          assistance
          signs
          Failure to
          comply with
6 RCNY    the required
§        form           $375      $500    $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
4-11(b)   pertaining to
          language
          assistance
          signs
          Failure to
          comply with
6 RCNY    the required
§        display of     $375      $500    $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
4-11(c)   language
          assistance
          signs
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016)
§ 6-42 Sales of Petroleum Products Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York;
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York; Title 1 of the New York Code,
Rules, and Regulations, or Article 16 of the New York State Agriculture and
Markets Law.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second, third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
               Violation      First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation       Description    Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                  Violation  Default
               Failure to
               comply with
Admin. Code    petroleum
§ 20-672      sign, placard, $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $15,000
               or other
               display
               requirements
               Failure to
Admin. Code    comply with
§ 20-672.1    sales          $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $15,000
               recordkeeping
               requirements
Admin. Code    Engaging in
§ 20-673      fraudulent     $7,500    $10,000 $9,000    $10,000 $15,000    $15,000
               practices
Admin. Code    Improper sale
§ 20-673.1    of unleaded    $1,000    $4,000  $2,500    $10,000 $10,000    $10,000
               gasoline
               Improper
Admin. Code    certification,
§ 20-673.2    display, or    $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $10,000
               representation
               of octane
               Failure to
Admin. Code    maintain       $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $15,000
§ 20-673.3    required
               records
6 RCNY         Use of
§             improper       $75       $100    $90       $100    $100       $100
3-91           delivery
               ticket
               Improper
6 RCNY         delivery in
§             excess of      $75       $100    $90       $100    $100       $100
3-92           marker
               capacity
               Improper oil
6 RCNY         temperature
§             for sale,      $75       $100    $90       $100    $100       $100
3-93           offer, or
               delivery
6 RCNY         Use of
§             improper       $75       $100    $90       $100    $100       $100
3-94           printer
               tickets
6 RCNY         Improper
§             contents of    $75       $100    $90       $100    $100       $100
3-95           printer ticket
               Improper
6 RCNY         handling of
§             printer ticket $75       $100    $90       $100    $100       $100
3-96           during
               delivery
6 RCNY         Failure to
§             leave delivery $75       $100    $90       $100    $100       $100
3-97           ticket
               Improper
6 RCNY         measured
§             liquid         $75       $100    $90       $100    $100       $100
3-98           diversion
               device or
               mechanism
6 RCNY         Use of
§             improper air   $75       $100    $90       $100    $100       $100
3-99           eliminator
               Improper
6 RCNY         representation
§             of oil         $75       $100    $90       $100    $100       $100
3-100          quantities on
               delivery
               tickets
6 RCNY         Failure to
§             submit truck   $75       $100    $90       $100    $100       $100
3-102          for inspection
               Failure to
6 RCNY         retain or
§             produce copies $75       $100    $90       $100    $100       $100
3-103          of printer
               tickets
6 RCNY         Improper
§             testing or     $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $15,000
4-51           approval of
               pumps
6 RCNY         Improper
§             priming of     $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $15,000
4-52           pumps
6 RCNY         No official
§             seals on pumps $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $15,000
4-53
6 RCNY         Missing or
§             broken         $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $15,000
4-54           security seal
               on pump
6 RCNY         No "out of
§             order" sign on $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $15,000
4-55           pumps
               Improper
6 RCNY         interlock or
§             signage at     $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $15,000
4-56           dispensing
               devices
6 RCNY         Improper use
§             of bottles and $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $15,000
4-57           measures
6 RCNY         Improper use
§             of grease      $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $15,000
4-58           measuring
               devices
6 RCNY         Failure to
§             retain         $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $15,000
4-59           certificate(s)
               of inspection
               Failure to
6 RCNY         comply with
§             yard and       $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $15,000
4-60           delivery
               ticket
               requirements
               Failure to
6 RCNY         comply with
§             return and     $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $15,000
4-61           inspection of
               ticket
               requirements
6 RCNY         Failure to
§             comply with    $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $15,000
4-62           selector valve
               requirements
6 RCNY         Failure to
§             comply with    $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $15,000
4-63           signage
               requirements
               Failure to
6 RCNY         comply with
§             fill and stick $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $15,000
4-64           lines -
               general
               requirements
               Failure to
6 RCNY         comply with
§             fill and stick $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $15,000
4-65           lines - major
               oil company
               requirements
6 RCNY         Failure to
§             comply with    $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $15,000
4-66           color sample
               requirements
6 RCNY         Failure to
§             comply with    $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $15,000
4-67           gauge
               requirements
               Improper sale
6 RCNY         of a petroleum
§             product other  $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $15,000
4-68           than gasoline
               or diesel
               motor fuel
               Failure to
6 RCNY         comply with
§             requirements   $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $15,000
4-69           regarding
               water in gas
               storage tanks
6 RCNY         Improper
§             octane ratings $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $10,000
4-70
6 RCNY         Improper
§             octane         $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $10,000
4-71           labeling
               Failure to
6 RCNY         comply with
§             regulations    $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-51           pertaining to
               retail sale of
               gasoline
               Improper
               interference
NY Agri & Mkts with the
§ 181         powers and     $450      $600    $1,080    $1,200  $1,200     $1,200
               duties of
               municipal
               directors
               Improper
               notification
NY Agri & Mkts or use of      $450      $600    $1,080    $1,200  $1,200     $1,200
§ 182         weighing and
               measuring
               devices
               Improper
               removal,
NY Agri & Mkts obliteration,  $450      $600    $1,080    $1,200  $1,200     $1,200
§ 183         or defacing of
               official or
               security seal
               Failure to
               comply with
               the
               requirements
NY Agri & Mkts pertaining to  $450      $600    $1,080    $1,200  $1,200     $1,200
§ 184         the
               condemnation,
               seizure, or
               repair of
               false devices
               Failure to
               comply with
NY Agri & Mkts stop-use,      $450      $600    $1,080    $1,200  $1,200     $1,200
§ 185         stop-removal,
               or removal
               order
               Improper
NY Agri & Mkts possession or  $450      $600    $1,080    $1,200  $1,200     $1,200
§ 186         use of false
               device
               Failure to
               comply with
               the
NY Agri & Mkts requirements   $450      $600    $1,080    $1,200  $1,200     $1,200
§ 189         pertaining to
               the method of
               sale of
               commodities
               Failure to
               comply with
               the
NY Agri & Mkts requirements
§ 192         pertaining to  $450      $600    $1,080    $1,200  $1,200     $1,200
               the sale or
               delivery of
               petroleum
               products
               Failure to
               comply with
               the signage
               requirements
NY Agri & Mkts for selling or
§ 192(5)      offering to    $75       $100    $450      $500    $500       $500
               sell motor
               fuel for use
               in internal
               combustion
               engines
               Failure to
               provide
NY Agri & Mkts functioning    $25 per   $25 per $25 per   $25 per $25 per    $25 per
§ 192(6)      motor driven   day       day     day       day     day        day
               air
               compressors
               Failure to
NY Agri & Mkts comply with
§ 192-a       fuel octane    $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $10,000
               labeling
               requirements
               Failure to
               comply with
NY Agri & Mkts fuel lead      $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $10,000
§ 192-b       content
               labeling and
               requirements
               Failure to
               comply with
               motor fuel
NY Agri & Mkts standards and
§ 192-c       labeling;      $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $10,000
               cetane rating
               of diesel
               fuel; alcohol
               content
               Failure to
NY Agri & Mkts maintain the   $200      $200    $400      $400    $400       $400
§ 192-c(4)(c) required
               records
               Failure to
               comply with
               the
NY Agri & Mkts regulations
§ 192-e       pertaining to  $450      $600    $1,080    $1,200  $1,200     $1,200
               the sale or
               delivery of
               liquefied
               petroleum gas
               Improper
NY Agri & Mkts packaging or   $450      $600    $900      $1,200  $1,200     $1,200
§ 193         labeling of
               containers
NY Agri & Mkts Improper use
§ 194         of false       $450      $600    $900      $1,200  $1,200     $1,200
               labels
               Failure to
NY Agri & Mkts comply with    $450      $600    $900      $1,200  $1,200     $1,200
§ 195         the duties of
               weigh masters
               Used a
1 NYCRR        prohibited
§ 220.1       false or       $300      $400    $720      $800    $800       $800
               unapproved
               device
               Improper use
1 NYCRR        of inaccurate
§ 220.2       or defective   $300      $400    $720      $800    $800       $800
               petroleum
               devices
1 NYCRR        Failure to
§ 220.5       submit device  $300      $400    $720      $800    $800       $800
               for inspection
1 NYCRR        Improper       $300      $400    $720      $800    $800       $800
§ 220.11      retail scales
               Failure to
               comply with
               gasoline-
1 NYCRR        alcohol,       $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $10,000
§ 224.3       octane,
               diesel, or
               kerosene
               requirements
               Failure to
1 NYCRR        comply with    $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $10,000
§ 224.4       delivery
               requirements
               Failure to
1 NYCRR        comply with
§ 224.5       delivery       $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $10,000
               recordkeeping
               requirements
               Improper or
1 NYCRR        inaccurate
§ 224.6       retail         $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $10,000
               measuring
               device
               Failure to
1 NYCRR        maintain       $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $10,000
§ 224.7       required
               records
               Failure to
               remove the
1 NYCRR        water from     $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $10,000
§ 224.7(c)    storage tank
               (s) as
               required
               Improper
1 NYCRR        retail sale of $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $10,000
§ 224.8       gasoline-
               alcohol blends
               Failure to
1 NYCRR        comply with    $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $10,000
§ 224.9       octane
               requirements
1 NYCRR        Failure to
§ 224.10      properly post  $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $10,000
               cetane ratings
               Improper
1 NYCRR        octane or      $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $10,000
§ 224.11      cetane
               labeling
1 NYCRR        Failure to
§ 224.12      post unleaded  $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $10,000
               gasoline sign
               Failure to
               identify grade
1 NYCRR        or post        $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $10,000
§ 224.13      required
               kerosene
               signage
1 NYCRR        Failure to
§ 224.14      properly mark  $500      $875    $1,000    $4,000  $5,000     $10,000
               fill ports
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 9/24/2019,
eff. 10/24/2019; amended City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022)
§ 6-43 Sales of Meats Penalty Schedule. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; repealed City Record 11/26/2021,
eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 6-44 Sale of Prepackaged Meat Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
 
             Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation     Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                             Violation  Default
             Failure to
             meet the
Admin. Code  requirement
§ 20-682(a) (s) for the $300      $300    $400      $400    $500       $500
             sales of
             prepackaged
             meat
             Failure to
             meet the
             signage
Admin. Code  requirement $300      $300    $400      $400    $500       $500
§ 20-682(b) (s) for the
             sales of
             prepackaged
             meat
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 11/26/2021,
eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 6-45 Perishable Foods Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
 
          Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third     Third   Fourth and Fourth and
Citation  Description Violation Default Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                            Violation  Default
          Failure to
          meet the
Admin.    requirement
Code      (s) for the $0        $0      $131      $175    $202      $225    $225       $225
§ 20-685 sale of
          perishable
          food
          Failure to
6 RCNY    meet the
§        requirement $0        $0      $131      $175    $202      $225    $225       $225
4-112     (s) for
          display
          Failure to
          meet
6 RCNY    requirement
§        (s) for     $0        $0      $131      $175    $202      $225    $225       $225
4-113     labeling of
          perishable
          foods
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 11/26/2021,
eff. 12/26/2021; amended City Record 5/24/2024, eff. 6/23/2024)
§ 6-46 Price Displays Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   Each consecutive day a violation of this section is continued shall
constitute a separate first violation of the law pursuant to section 20-692 of
the Administrative Code.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
 
          Violation    First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation  Description  Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                           Violation  Default
          Failure to
Admin.    meet the
Code      requirements $50       $50     $100      $100    $150       $150
§ 20-691 of price
          displays
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 11/26/2021,
eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 6-47 Consumer Protection Law Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   For the fine amounts marked by a single asterisk, if the respondent timely
submits the appropriate proof of having cured a first-time violation, the
respondent will not be subject to a civil penalty pursuant to Local Law 153 of
2013.
   Pursuant to Section 20-703(d) of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York, the knowing violation of any provision of Subchapter 1 of Chapter 5 of
Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New York or of any rule
promulgated thereunder is subject to a penalty of $3,500.
   Pursuant to Section 20-703(b) of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York, each individual statement, description or other representation or
omission that constitutes a deceptive trade practice shall give rise to a
distinct and independent violation.
   The number of violations of any provision listed below shall be calculated
pursuant to § 20-703(c) of the Administrative Code of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within three years of the prior
violation(s).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
                                                                                  First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation  Violation Description                                                   Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                                                                      Violation  Default
Admin.
Code      Engaged in an unlawful deceptive or unconscionable trade practice       $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
§ 20-700
6 RCNY
§        Failure to comply with requirements related to free offers              $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-06
6 RCNY
§        Failure to comply with number size requirements in advertised prices    $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-07
6 RCNY
§        Failure to comply with prize award scheme requirements                  $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-08
6 RCNY
§        Failure to comply with the requirements for limitations on offers       $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-09
6 RCNY
§        Engaged in deceptive classified ads                                     $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-10
6 RCNY
§        Failure to comply with requirements for limited editions                $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-11
6 RCNY    Failure to comply with requirements for prices in multi-product and
§        multi-service advertisements                                            $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-12
6 RCNY    Failure to comply with advertisements claiming to boost the immune
§        system                                                                  $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-13
6 RCNY    Misrepresenting a good or service as “certified” or “certified pre-
§        owned”                                                                $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-14(a)
6 RCNY
§        Misrepresenting a good or service as “manufacturer certified”       $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-14(b)
6 RCNY
§        Failure to meet the requirement(s) for layaway plans                    $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-23
6 RCNY
§        Failure to meet requirement(s) for credit card limitations              $150*     $150*   $250      $250    $350       $350
5-24
6 RCNY
§        Failure to meet the requirement(s) for documentation of transactions    $150      $150    $250      $250    $350       $350
5-32
6 RCNY    Failure to comply with the requirements for transactions negotiated in
§        Spanish                                                                 $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-33
6 RCNY
§        Failure to meet the requirement(s) for sale of used items               $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-36
6 RCNY
§        Failure to comply with disclosure of refund policy requirements         $150*     $150*   $250      $250    $350       $350
5-37
6 RCNY    Failure to comply with requirements for selling goods temporarily in
§        short supply                                                            $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-38
6 RCNY
§        Failure to meet the requirements for cancellation of home appointment   $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-39
6 RCNY
§        Improper limit or disclaimer of liability for negligence                $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-40
6 RCNY
§        Improper posting of sign that business is not liable for negligence     $525*     $525*   $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-40(e)
6 RCNY    Collected sales tax on sale of good or service not subject to such tax
§        under Article 28 of the NYS Tax Law or rule and regulations promulgated $150      $150    $250      $250    $350       $350
5-41      thereunder
6 RCNY
§        Violation of the prohibition on price gouging                           $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-42
6 RCNY
§        Failure to meet the requirement(s) for jewelry sellers and appraisers   $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-47
6 RCNY    Failure to comply with the requirements for delivery of furniture and
§        major appliances                                                        $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-50
6 RCNY
§        Failure to meet the requirement(s) for retail sale of gasoline          $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-51
6 RCNY
§        Failure to meet the requirement(s) for repairs of consumer goods        $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-54
6 RCNY
§        Failure to meet the requirement(s) for meat and poultry advertising     $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-55
6 RCNY
§        Failure to meet the requirement(s) for window gates                     $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-56
6 RCNY
§        Failure to meet the requirement(s) for utility bill payments            $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-57
6 RCNY
§        Improper offer of sale of food in damaged containers                    $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-58
6 RCNY
§        Improper imposition of restaurant surcharges                            $150      $150    $250      $250    $350       $350
5-59
6 RCNY
§        Failure to meet the requirement(s) for franchises                       $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-60
6 RCNY
§        Failure to meet the requirement(s) for public performance seats         $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-61
6 RCNY
§        Failure to meet the requirement(s) for catering contracts               $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-63
6 RCNY
§        Failure to meet the requirements for dealers at flea markets            $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-68
6 RCNY
§        Failure to meet the requirements of blood pressure reading services     $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-69
6 RCNY
§        Failure to meet the requirements for retail service establishments      $150      $150    $250      $250    $350       $350
5-70
6 RCNY
§        Failure to meet the requirement(s) for the sale of box cutters          $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-73
6 RCNY    Failure to post the Buyer's Guide when selling or offering to sell any
§        used automobile                                                         $150      $150    $250      $250    $350       $350
5-75
6 RCNY
§§      Prohibited conduct in offering sales or discounts and related
5-87      recordkeeping requirements                                              $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
through
5-103
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 8/22/2017,
eff. 9/21/2017; amended City Record 4/26/2018, eff. 5/26/2018; amended City
Record 1/14/2019, eff. 2/13/2019; amended City Record 3/18/2020, eff. 3/18/
2020; amended City Record 5/11/2020, eff. 6/10/2020; amended City Record 6/26/
2020, eff. 6/26/2020; amended City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022; amended
City Record 3/19/2024, eff. 4/18/2024; amended City Record 8/15/2024, eff. 9/
14/2024)
§ 6-48 Truth in Pricing Law.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
               Violation    First       First       Second     Second     Third and  Third and
Citation       Description  Violation   Default     Violation  Default    Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                          Violation  Default
               Failure to
               display
Admin. Code    total        $50         $50         $175       $175       $250       $250
§ 20-708      selling
               price by tag
               or sign
                                                    $45 (for   $50 (for   $50 (for   $50 (for
                            $18 (for    $25 (for    each of    each of    each of    each of
Admin. Code    Improper     each of the each of the the first  the first  the first  the first
§ 20-708.1(b) item pricing first 20    first 20    20         20         20         20
                            violations) violations) violations violations violations violations
                                                    within 60  within 60  within 60  within 60
                                                    days)      days)      days)      days)
Admin. Code    Improper
§ 20-708.1(d) scanner      $260        $350        $500       $500       $500       $500
               accuracy
                                                    $45 (for   $50 (for   $50 (for   $50 (for
                            $18 (for    $25 (for    each of    each of    each of    each of
Admin. Code    Improper     each of the each of the the first  the first  the first  the first
§ 20-708.1(e) price        first 20    first 20    20         20         20         20
               accuracy     violations) violations) violations violations violations violations
                                                    within 60  within 60  within 60  within 60
                                                    days)      days)      days)      days)
               Failure to
Admin. Code    display      $50         $50         $175       $175       $250       $250
§ 20-709      price per
               measure
               Failure to
               meet the
6 RCNY         requirements
§             of           $50         $50         $175       $175       $250       $250
5-113          calculation
               and display
               price per
               measure
               Failure to
6 RCNY         meet
§             guidelines   $50         $50         $175       $175       $250       $250
5-115          on multiple
               pricing
                                                    $45 (for   $50 (for   $50 (for   $50 (for
               Failure to   $18 (for    $25 (for    each of    each of    each of    each of
6 RCNY         meet         each of the each of the the first  the first  the first  the first
§             requirements first 20    first 20    20         20         20         20
5-116          for price    violations) violations) violations violations violations violations
               scanners                             within 60  within 60  within 60  within 60
                                                    days)      days)      days)      days)
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 4/26/2018,
eff. 5/26/2018; amended City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021; amended, City
Record 8/26/2022, eff. 9/25/2022)
§ 6-49 Posting of Prescription Drug Prices.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
 
         Violation     First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description   Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                           Violation  Default
         Failure to
         meet the
         requirements
6 RCNY   for
§       displaying    $175      $175    $500      $500    $750       $750
5-122    information
         relating to
         emergency
         contraception
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 11/26/2021,
eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 6-50 Representations in Advertising Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
 
            Violation    First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation    Description  Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                             Violation  Default
            Failure to
            meet
            requirements
Admin. Code for business $3,750    $5,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
§ 20-723.2 promoting
            credit
            counseling
            services.
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016)
§ 6-51 Availability for Sale of Advertised Merchandise Penalty Schedule.
[Repealed]
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 11/26/2021,
eff. 12/26/2021; repealed City Record 5/24/2024, eff. 6/23/2024)
§ 6-52 Information with Respect to Funeral Costs Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
          Violation    First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation  Description  Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                           Violation  Default
          Failure to
          comply with
Admin.    the casket
Code      and outer    $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
§ 20-731 interment
          receptacle
          information
          requirements
          Failure by
          provider of
Admin.    funeral
Code      services to  $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
§ 20-732 furnish
          required
          statement
Admin.    Engaging in
Code      prohibited   $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
§ 20-733 practices
          Failure to
Admin.    comply with
Code      merchandise  $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
§ 20-734 and service
          selection
          requirements
          Failure to
Admin.    provide
Code      price        $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
§ 20-736 information
          over
          telephone
          Improper
6 RCNY    casket and
§        outer        $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
5-161     interment
          receptacle
          information
          Failure by
          provider of
6 RCNY    funeral
§        services to  $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
5-162     comply with
          general
          price list
          requirements
6 RCNY    Improper
§        display of   $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
5-163     merchandise
          Failure to
          give
6 RCNY    required
§        price        $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
5-164     information
          over
          telephone
          Failure to
6 RCNY    comply with
§        display of   $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
5-165     ownership
          information
          requirements
          Failure to
6 RCNY    comply with
§        sale of      $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
5-166     monuments
          requirements
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016)
§ 6-53 Income Tax Preparers Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   For the fine amounts marked by a single asterisk, if the respondent timely
submits the appropriate proof of having cured a first-time violation, the
respondent will not be subject to a civil penalty pursuant to Local Law 153 of
2013.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
             Violation      First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation     Description    Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                Violation  Default
             Failure to
             post
Admin. Code  identification $375*     $500*   $675      $750    $750       $750
§ 20-740(a) and
             qualification
             statement
             Failure to
Admin. Code  provide        $375      $500    $675      $750    $750       $750
§ 20-740(b) customer with
             receipt
Admin. Code  Improper
§ 20-740.1  consumer bill  $375      $500    $675      $750    $750       $750
             of rights
Admin. Code  Improper       $375      $500    $675      $750    $750       $750
§ 20-741    records
             Failure to
             comply with
Admin. Code  refund         $375      $500    $675      $750    $750       $750
§ 20-741.1  anticipation
             loan
             requirements
6 RCNY       Improper tax
§           preparation    $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-66(b)      practices
6 RCNY       Failure to
§           post the
5-66(c)(1)   required tax   $150*     $150*   $250      $250    $350       $350
and (c)(2)   preparation
             signs
6 RCNY       Required tax
§           preparation    $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
5-66(c)(3)   practices
6 RCNY       Requirements
§           for tax
5-66(d) and  preparation    $525      $525    $1,050    $1,050  $3,500     $3,500
(e)          refunds and
             records
             Failure to
6 RCNY       provide
§           disclosure in  $150      $150    $250      $250    $350       $350
5-66(f)      foreign
             languages
6 RCNY       Failure to
§           comply with    $375      $500    $675      $750    $750       $750
5-171        sign location
             requirement
6 RCNY       Improper sign
§           form and       $375      $500    $675      $750    $750       $750
5-172        content
6 RCNY       Failure to
§           comply with    $375      $500    $675      $750    $750       $750
5-173(a)     sign
             requirements
             Failure to
6 RCNY       comply with
§           requirements   $375      $500    $675      $750    $750       $750
5-173(b)     regarding
             provision of
             bill of rights
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 12/14/2017,
eff. 1/13/2018; amended City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022; amended City
Record 3/11/2022, eff. 4/10/2022)
§ 6-54 Posting of Prices in Retail Service Establishments Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   For the fine amounts marked by a single asterisk, if the respondent timely
submits the appropriate proof of having cured a first-time violation, the
respondent will not be subject to a civil penalty pursuant to Local Law 153 of
2013.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
 
             Violation    First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation     Description  Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                              Violation  Default
             Improper
Admin. Code  display of   $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
§ 20-750(a) service
             prices
             Improper
Admin. Code  regular      $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
§ 20-750(b) price list
             display
             Disclosure
Admin. Code  of differing $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
§ 20-750(c) prices based
             on gender
             Failure to
Admin. Code  comply with
§ 20-751    base fee     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
             disclosure
             requirements
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 11/26/2021,
eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 6-55 Motorized Scooters Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within one year of the prior
violation(s).
 
             Violation    First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation     Description  Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                              Violation  Default
             Failure to
Admin. Code  comply with
§ 20-762(b) motor        $1,000    $1,000  $2,000    $2,000  $2,000     $2,000
             scooter
             requirements
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 4/21/2020,
eff. 5/21/2020)
§ 6-56 Immigration Assistance Service Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
               Violation     First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation       Description   Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                 Violation  Default
Admin. Code    Engaging in
§ 20-776      prohibited    $7,500    $10,000 $18,000   $20,000 $20,000    $20,000
               conduct
Admin. Code    Improper
§ 20-777      written       $7,500    $10,000 $13,500   $15,000 $15,000    $15,000
               agreement
               Failure to
               include most
               recent
Admin. Code    "Consumer     $7,500    $10,000 $13,500   $15,000 $15,000    $15,000
§ 20-777(14)  Bill of
               Rights" on
               separate page
               of contract
Admin. Code    Failure to
§ 20-777.1    post sign or  $7,500    $10,000 $13,500   $15,000 $15,000    $15,000
               improper sign
               Improper
Admin. Code    advertisement $7,500    $10,000 $13,500   $15,000 $15,000    $15,000
§ 20-777.2(a) disclaimer
               notice
Admin. Code    Improper      $7,500    $10,000 $18,000   $20,000 $20,000    $20,000
§ 20-777.2(b) advertisement
Admin. Code    Improper
§ 20-778      document      $7,500    $10,000 $13,500   $15,000 $15,000    $15,000
               retention
               Failure to
Admin. Code    comply with   $7,500    $10,000 $13,500   $15,000 $15,000    $15,000
§ 20-779      surety
               requirements
               Failure to
6 RCNY         comply with
§             location or   $7,500    $10,000 $13,500   $15,000 $15,000    $15,000
5-260          availability
               of records
               requirement
               Failure to
6 RCNY         comply with
§             written       $7,500    $10,000 $13,500   $15,000 $15,000    $15,000
5-261          agreement
               requirements
6 RCNY         Failure to
§             complete form $7,500    $10,000 $13,500   $15,000 $15,000    $15,000
5-262          preparation
               declaration
               Failure to
6 RCNY         comply with
§             disclosure of $7,500    $10,000 $13,500   $15,000 $15,000    $15,000
5-264          surety
               requirements
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 8/7/2018,
eff. 9/6/2018; amended City Record 10/22/2025, eff. 11/21/2025)
§ 6-57 Tenant Screening Report Disclosure Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   For the fine amounts marked by a single asterisk, if the respondent timely
submits the appropriate proof of having cured a first-time violation, the
respondent will not be subject to a civil penalty pursuant to Local Law 153 of
2013.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
 
          Violation    First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation  Description  Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                           Violation  Default
Admin.    Failure to
Code      post sign or $375*     $500*   $450      $500    $500       $500
§ 20-809 improper
          sign
          Failure to
          comply with
          the
6 RCNY    requirements
§        for posting  $375*     $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
5-265     signs about
          tenant
          screening
          reports
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 4/26/2018,
eff. 5/26/2018)
§ 6-58 Prohibition on the Sale of Expired Over-The-Counter-Medication Penalty
Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law, within two years of the prior violation
(s).
 
             Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation     Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                             Violation  Default
             Sale of
Admin. Code  expired
§ 20-822(a) over-the-   $250      $250    $500      $500    $500       $500
             counter
             medication
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016)
§ 6-59 Employment Agency Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Chapter 20, Article 11 of the New York General Business
Law, Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New York, or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   For the fine amounts marked by a single asterisk, if the respondent timely
submits the appropriate proof of having cured a first-time violation, the
respondent will not be subject to a civil penalty pursuant to Section 189(5) of
the New York General Business Law.
   In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or
revocation, as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of
multiple provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods
shall run concurrently.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
 
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
          Violation      First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation  Description    Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                             Violation  Default
NY Gen    Unlicensed
Bus       activity       $750      $1,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
§ 172
          Failure to
          notify the
NY Gen    Department of
Bus       changes in     $750      $1,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
§ 175    license or
          ownership of
          the agency
          Improper
          assignment or
NY Gen    transfer of
Bus       license,       $750      $1,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
§ 176    change of
          location, or
          addition of a
          location
          Failure to
NY Gen    maintain
Bus       adequate       $750      $1,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
§ 179    registers and
          other records
          Failure to
NY Gen    maintain
Bus       adequate       $750      $1,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
§ 181    contracts or
          receipts
          Failure to
          provide
          identification
NY Gen    card to nurse
Bus       or maintain    $750      $1,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
§ 182    records of
          investigation
          and
          verification
          of nurses
          Failure to
          comply with
          requirements
          pertaining to
NY Gen    recruitment of
Bus       domestic or    $750      $1,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
§ 184    household
          employees who
          are residents
          of other
          states
          Failure to
          comply with
          requirements
          pertaining to
NY Gen    recruitment of
Bus       domestic or    $750      $1,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
§ 184-a  household
          employees from
          outside the
          continental
          United States
NY Gen    Charging or
Bus       accepting an   $750      $1,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
§ 185    unlawful fee
          Failure to
          comply with
          requirements
NY Gen    pertaining to
Bus       domestic       $750      $1,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
§ 185-a  dayworkers who
          are
          transported to
          the place of
          employment
          Failure to
          comply with
NY Gen    the
Bus       requirements   $750      $1,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
§ 186    pertaining to
          the return of
          fees
NY Gen    Engaging in
Bus       prohibited     $750      $1,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
§ 187    activities or
          conduct
NY Gen    Failure to
Bus       post the       $750*     $1,000* $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
§ 188    required
          copies of law
          Failure to
          comply with
NY Gen    requirements
Bus       including      $750      $1,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
§ 189    inspection of
          books and
          records
          Failure to
          provide a
          statement of
Admin.    employee
Code      rights and     $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
§ 20-771 employer
          obligations
          under city,
          state and
          federal law
          Failure to
          provide a
Admin.    statement of
Code      job conditions $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
§ 20-772 or maintain
          required
          records
6 RCNY    Improper
§        financial      $750      $1,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
5-241     records
          Failure to
6 RCNY    comply with
§        corporate      $750      $1,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
5-242     applicant
          requirements
          Failure to
6 RCNY    comply with
§        trade name and $750      $1,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
5-243     partnership
          certificate
          requirements
6 RCNY    Failure to
§        comply with    $750      $1,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
5-245     premises
          requirements
6 RCNY    Failure to
§        comply with    $750      $1,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
5-246     referral card
          requirements
          Improper
6 RCNY    recruitment of
§        domestic or    $750      $1,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
5-247     household
          employees
6 RCNY    Engaging in
§        prohibited     $750      $1,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
5-248     practices
6 RCNY    Failure to
§        display sign   $750*     $1,000* $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
5-250     in required
          form
6 RCNY    Improper
§        display of     $750*     $1,000* $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
5-251     license
          Failure to
          comply with
6 RCNY    the notice of
§        hearing and    $750      $1,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
5-252     subpoena duces
          tecum
          requirement
          Failure to
6 RCNY    comply with
§        change of      $750      $1,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
5-253     address
          requirement
6 RCNY    Failure to
§        comply with    $750      $1,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
5-254     judgment
          requirements
6 RCNY    Failure to
§        respond to     $750      $1,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
5-255     consumer
          complaints
          Failure to
6 RCNY    comply with
§        lost or        $750      $1,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
5-257     mutilated
          license
          requirements
          Failure to
6 RCNY    provide the
§        "Terms and     $750      $1,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
5-259     Conditions"
          document
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 2/27/2019,
eff. 3/29/2019; amended City Record 4/21/2020, eff. 5/21/2020)
§ 6-60 Domestic Workers & Household Employees Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law, within two years of the prior violation
(s).
 
          Violation    First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation  Description  Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                           Violation  Default
          Failure to
          meet the
          requirements
          for
          providing
Admin.    the
Code      statement of $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
§ 20-771 employee
          rights and
          employer
          obligations
          under city,
          state and
          federal law
          Improper
          statement of
Admin.    job
Code      conditions   $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
§ 20-772 or failure
          to keep
          records
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016)
§ 6-61 Public Safety Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 10 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
shall mean a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty,
being found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
   The parties shall be authorized to present evidence to mitigate the premise
sealing period within the date range marked by two asterisks (**).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
             Violation    First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation     Description  Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                              Violation  Default
             Placing
             aerosol
             spray paint
Admin. Code  cans, broad
§ 10-117(d) tipped       $375      $500    $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
             indelible
             markers or
             etching acid
             on display
             Unlawful                                         $8,000     $8,000
Admin. Code  sale of a                                        (plus 0 to (plus 5
§ 10-131(g) toy or       $5,000    $5,000  $8,000    $8,000  5 day      day
             imitation                                        sealing)** sealing)
             firearm
             Failure to
             comply with
Admin. Code  required
§ 10-160(b) security     $250      $250    $250      $250    $250       $250
             measures at
             ATM
             facilities
             Failure to
             comply with
             the
Admin. Code  requirements $300      $300    $500      $500    $1,000     $1,000
§ 10-134.2  pertaining
             to the sale
             of laser
             pointers
             Improper
6 RCNY       sign content
§           regarding    $300      $300    $500      $500    $500       $500
4-10         laser
             pointers
             Improper
6 RCNY       size of sign
§           regarding    $300      $300    $500      $500    $500       $500
4-11         laser
             pointers
             Improper
6 RCNY       posting of
§           sign         $300      $300    $500      $500    $500       $500
4-12         regarding
             laser
             pointers
             Improper
6 RCNY       number of
§           signs        $300      $300    $500      $500    $500       $500
4-15         regarding
             laser
             pointers
6 RCNY       Sign not in
§           required     $300      $300    $500      $500    $500       $500
4-16         language
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; amended City Record 8/22/2017,
eff. 9/21/2017; amended City Record 1/14/2019, eff. 2/13/2019)
§ 6-62 Debt Collection Agency Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
   In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or
revocation, as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of
multiple provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods
shall run concurrently.
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
                    Violation      First     First    Second    Second   Third and  Third and
Citation            Description    Violation Default  Violation Default  Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                         Violation  Default
                                   $750,     $1,000,  $900,     $1,000,
                    Acting as a    plus $100 plus     plus $100 plus     $1,000,    $1,000,
                    debt           per day & $100 per per day,  $100 per plus $100  plus $100
Admin. Code         collection     $100 per  day, &   & $100    day, &   per day, & per day, &
§ 20-490           agency without instance  $100 per per       $100 per $100 per   $100 per
                    a DCA license  of        instance instance  instance instance   instance
                                   contact   of       of        of       of contact of contact
                                             contact  contact   contact
                    Failure to
Admin. Code         provide a call
§ 20-493.1(a)(i)   back number    $750      $1,000   $900      $1,000   $1,000     $1,000
                    answered by a
                    natural person
                    Failure to
                    provide the
Admin. Code         name of the    $750      $1,000   $900      $1,000   $1,000     $1,000
§ 20-493.1(a)(ii)  debt
                    collection
                    agency
                    Failure to
Admin. Code         provide the
§ 20-493.1(a)(iii) originating    $750      $1,000   $900      $1,000   $1,000     $1,000
                    creditor of
                    the debt
                    Failure to
Admin. Code         provide the
§ 20-493.1(a)(iv)  name of the    $750      $1,000   $900      $1,000   $1,000     $1,000
                    person to call
                    back
                    Failure to
                    provide the
Admin. Code         amount of the  $750      $1,000   $900      $1,000   $1,000     $1,000
§ 20-493.1(a)(v)   debt at the
                    time of
                    communication
                    Failure to
                    provide
                    written
                    confirmation
                    to the
Admin. Code         consumer
§ 20-493.1(b)      within 5       $750      $1,000   $900      $1,000   $1,000     $1,000
                    business days
                    of any debt
                    payment
                    schedule or
                    settlement
                    agreement
                    Attempting to
                    collect or
                    contact a
                    consumer about
Admin. Code         a debt after
§ 20-493.2(a)      failing to     $750      $1,000   $900      $1,000   $1,000     $1,000
                    provide
                    adequate
                    verification
                    of the debt
                    upon request
                    Contacting a
                    consumer about
                    a debt for
                    which the
Admin. Code         statute of
§ 20-493.2(b)      limitations    $750      $1,000   $900      $1,000   $1,000     $1,000
                    has expired
                    without first
                    providing
                    required
                    notice
                    Failure to
                    provide
6 RCNY              specified
§                  written        $750      $1,000   $900      $1,000   $1,000     $1,000
2-190               documentation
                    verifying the
                    debt
                    Failure to
                    provide
6 RCNY              specified
§                  statute of     $750      $1,000   $900      $1,000   $1,000     $1,000
2-191               limitations
                    disclosure
                    regarding the
                    debt
                    Failure to
                    provide
                    specified
6 RCNY              written
§                  confirmation   $750      $1,000   $900      $1,000   $1,000     $1,000
2-192               of the debt
                    payment
                    schedule or
                    settlement
                    agreement
                    Failure to
                    comply with
6 RCNY              debt
§                  collection     $375      $500     $450      $500     $500       $500
2-193               agency record-
                    maintenance
                    requirements
                    Failure to
6 RCNY              comply with
§                  call-back      $750      $1,000   $900      $1,000   $1,000     $1,000
2-194               number
                    requirements
                    Failure to
                    comply with
6 RCNY              requirements
§                  pertaining to  $525      $525     $1,050    $1,050   $3,500     $3,500
5-77(a)             acquisition of
                    location
                    information
                    Failure to
                    comply with
                    requirements
6 RCNY              pertaining to
§                  communicating  $525      $525     $1,050    $1,050   $3,500     $3,500
5-77(b)             in connection
                    with the
                    collection of
                    a debt
                    Engaging in
                    harassment or
6 RCNY              abuse in
§                  connection     $525      $525     $1,050    $1,050   $3,500     $3,500
5-77(c)             with the
                    collection of
                    a debt
                    Making a
                    false,
                    deceptive, or
6 RCNY              misleading
§                  representation $525      $525     $1,050    $1,050   $3,500     $3,500
5-77(d)             in connection
                    with the
                    collection of
                    a debt
                    Using an
                    unfair or
6 RCNY              unconscionable
§                  means to       $525      $525     $1,050    $1,050   $3,500     $3,500
5-77(e)             collect or
                    attempt to
                    collect a debt
                    Failure to
                    comply with
                    the validation
6 RCNY              procedures for
§                  debt           $525      $525     $1,050    $1,050   $3,500     $3,500
5-77(f)             collectors who
                    are creditors
                    or who are
                    employed by
                    creditors
                    Failure to
6 RCNY              comply with
§                  requirements   $525      $525     $1,050    $1,050   $3,500     $3,500
5-77(h)             for public
                    websites
                    Designing,
                    compiling, or
                    furnishing a
                    form to create
6 RCNY              false consumer
§                  belief that a  $525      $525     $1,050    $1,050   $3,500     $3,500
5-78                third party is
                    participating
                    in the
                    collection of
                    a debt
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2017, eff. 9/21/2017; amended City Record 5/28/2020,
eff. 6/27/2020; amended City Record 12/20/2021, eff. 1/19/2022)
§ 6-63 Air Conditioning System Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within 18 months of the prior
violation(s).
 
             Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third     Third   Fourth and Fourth and
Citation     Description Violation Default Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                               Violation  Default
             Business
             keeps door
             or window
             open while
Admin. Code  using air
§ 20-910(b) conditioner $0        $0      $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
             to cool the
             area
             adjacent to
             the door or
             window
             Chain store
             keeps door
             or window
             open while
Admin. Code  using air
§ 20-910(b) conditioner $375      $500    $900      $1,000  $1,000    $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
             to cool the
             area
             adjacent to
             the door or
             window
             Failure to
             post open
Admin. Code  door or     $375      $500    $450      $500    $500      $500    $500       $500
§ 20-910(f) window
             complaint
             sign
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2017, eff. 9/21/2017; amended City Record 4/21/2020,
eff. 5/21/2020; amended City Record 5/24/2024, eff. 6/23/2024)
§ 6-64 Carpet Volatile Organic Compound Emissions Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 17 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 24 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
           Violation      First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation   Description    Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                              Violation  Default
           Non-compliant
           carpet or
Admin.     carpet cushion
Code       sold, offered  $250      $500    $500      $500    $500       $500
§ 17-1402 for sale,
           installed, or
           laid
           Non-compliant
Admin.     carpet
Code       adhesive       $250      $500    $500      $500    $500       $500
§ 17-1403 installed in
           building
           Required
           documentation
           establishing
           compliance
Admin.     with volatile
Code       organic        $250      $250    $250      $250    $250       $250
§ 17-1405 compound (VOC)
           standards not
           maintained and
           available for
           inspection
           Required
           notice not
Admin.     posted in a
Code       conspicuous    $250      $250    $250      $250    $250       $250
§ 17-1407 location, or
           not provided
           in written
           form
           Required
           documentation
           establishing
           compliance
           with volatile
24 RCNY    organic
§         compound (VOC) $250      $250    $250      $250    $250       $250
30-03(c)   standards not
           provided
           within three
           (3) business
           days of
           request
           Required
           receipt not
24 RCNY    provided to
§         consumer or    $150      $250    $250      $250    $250       $250
30-03(d)   required
           receipt does
           not meet
           specifications
24 RCNY    Posted sign
§         does not meet  $150      $250    $250      $250    $250       $250
30-04(a)   required
           specifications
           Notice text
24 RCNY    does not
§         conform to     $150      $250    $250      $250    $250       $250
30-04(b)   wording
           requirement
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2017, eff. 9/21/2017)
§ 6-65 Pregnancy Services Centers Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
shall mean a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty,
being found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
   The parties shall be authorized to present evidence to mitigate the premise
sealing period within the date range marked by two asterisks (**).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
                Violation       First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation        Description     Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                    Violation  Default
                Failure to
                comply with
                requirements
Admin. Code     pertaining to   $750      $1,000  $2,250    $2,500  $2,500     $2,500
§ 20-817       confidentiality
                of health and
                personal
                information
Admin. Code     Sealing order
§ 20-818(b)(5) mutilated or    $187      $250    $225      $250    $250       $250
                removed
                Intentional
Admin. Code     disobedience or $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
§ 20-818(b)(5) resistance to
                sealing order
                Failure to
                comply with                                         $2,500     $2,500
6 RCNY          requirements                                        (plus 0 to (plus 5
§              pertaining to   $750      $1,000  $2,250    $2,500  5 day      day
5-268           displaying                                          sealing)** sealing)
                disclosure
                signs
                Failure to
6 RCNY          comply with                                         $2,500     $2,500
§              requirements    $750      $1,000  $2,250    $2,500  (plus 0 to (plus 5
5-269           pertaining to                                       5 day      day
                disclosures in                                      sealing)** sealing)
                advertising
                Failure to
6 RCNY          comply with                                         $2,500     $2,500
§              requirements    $750      $1,000  $2,250    $2,500  (plus 0 to (plus 5
5-270           pertaining to                                       5 day      day
                oral                                                sealing)** sealing)
                disclosures
 
(Added City Record 8/22/2017, eff. 9/21/2017)
§ 6-66 Ticket Sellers Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or
revocation, as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of
multiple provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods
shall run concurrently.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second, third, fourth or subsequent
violation means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty,
being found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
   The parties shall be authorized to present evidence to mitigate the license
revocation or suspension period within the date range marked by two asterisks
(**).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third     Third   Fourth and Fourth and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                           Violation  Default
                Violation          First         First       Second        Second      Third         Third       Fourth and    Fourth and
Citation        Description        Violation     Default     Violation     Default     Violation     Default     Subsequent    Subsequent
                                                                                                                 Violation     Default
Admin. Code     Vending without a
§ 20-551(a)(1) ticket seller      $50           $50         $100          $100        $250          $250        $500          $500
                license
                Knowingly selling,
                giving, or
Admin. Code     transferring, for  $38           $50         $90           $100        $250          $250        $500          $500
§ 20-551(a)(2) vending, tickets
                to an unlicensed
                ticket seller
Admin. Code     Improper transfer  $38           $50         $90           $100        $250          $250        $500          $500
§ 20-551(d)    of license
                Failure to notify
Admin. Code     DCA within 10 days $38           $50         $90           $100        $250          $250        $500          $500
§ 20-551(f)    of changes to
                application
                Failure to comply
                with requirements                                                      $250 (plus 0  $250 (plus
Admin. Code     pertaining to      $38           $50         $90           $100        to 15 day     15 day      $500 (plus    $500 (plus
§ 20-554       display of license                                                     suspension)** suspension) revocation)** revocation)
                and required
                apparel
                Failure to comply
                with requirements
Admin. Code     pertaining to
§ 20-555       duties of ticket   $38           $50         $90           $100        $250          $250        $500          $500
                sellers regarding
                written records
                and inspections
Admin. Code     Vending            $38 (plus 0   $50 (plus   $90 (plus 0   $100 (plus  $250 (plus    $250 (plus  $500 (plus    $500 (plus
§ 20-556(a)    aggressively       to 15 day     15 day      to 30 day     30 day      revocation)** revocation) revocation)** revocation)
                                   suspension)** suspension) suspension)** suspension)
                Failure to comply
Admin. Code     with restrictions
§ 20-556(b)    pertaining to      $38           $50         $90           $100        $250          $250        $500          $500
                vending within a
                bus stop
                Failure to comply
Admin. Code     with restrictions
§ 20-556(c)    pertaining to      $38           $50         $90           $100        $250          $250        $500          $500
                vending within a
                taxi stand
                Failure to comply
                with restrictions
                pertaining to
                vending in the bed
Admin. Code     of a road or
§ 20-556(d)    vending in a       $38           $50         $90           $100        $250          $250        $500          $500
                manner that
                restricts a clear
                passageway for
                pedestrians or
                vehicles
                Failure to comply
Admin. Code     with DOT rules
§ 20-556(e)    pertaining to      $38           $50         $90           $100        $250          $250        $500          $500
                vending in a
                pedestrian plaza
                Failure to comply
                with restrictions
Admin. Code     pertaining to      $38           $50         $90           $100        $250          $250        $500          $500
§ 20-556(f)    vending on a
                median strip of a
                divided roadway
                Failure to comply
                with restrictions
Admin. Code     pertaining to
§ 20-556(g)    vending in areas   $38           $50         $90           $100        $250          $250        $500          $500
                under Parks
                jurisdiction or
                control
                Failure to comply
                with restrictions
                pertaining to
Admin. Code     vending in the     $38           $50         $90           $100        $250          $250        $500          $500
§ 20-556(h)    area bounded by
                Broadway, Liberty,
                West and Vesey
                Streets
                Failure to obey
                notice to
                temporarily move   $38 (plus 0   $50 (plus   $90 (plus 0   $100 (plus
Admin. Code     and/or stop        to 15 day     15 day      to 30 day     30 day      $250 (plus    $250 (plus  $500 (plus    $500 (plus
§ 20-556(i)    vending at a       suspension)** suspension) suspension)** suspension) revocation)** revocation) revocation)** revocation)
                location due to
                exigent
                circumstances
                Failure to comply
                with restrictions
Admin. Code     pertaining to use  $38           $50         $90           $100        $250          $250        $500          $500
§ 20-556(j)    of equipment,
                stands, vehicles,
                racks, or displays
                Making fraudulent,
                misrepresentative, $38 (plus 0   $50 (plus   $90 (plus 0   $100 (plus
Admin. Code     or false           to 15 day     15 day      to 30 day     30 day      $250 (plus    $250 (plus  $500 (plus    $500 (plus
§ 20-556(k)    statements in      suspension)** suspension) suspension)** suspension) revocation)** revocation) revocation)** revocation)
                connection with
                vending
6 RCNY          Failure to comply
§              with requirements  $38           $50         $90           $100        $250          $250        $500          $500
2-441           pertaining to
                records
6 RCNY          Failure to provide
§              required           $38           $50         $90           $100        $250          $250        $500          $500
2-442           disclosure
6 RCNY          Failure to comply
§              with restrictions  $38           $50         $90           $100        $250          $250        $500          $500
2-443
 
(Added City Record 2/27/2018, eff. 3/29/2018; amended City Record 10/25/2019,
eff. 11/24/2019)
§ 6-67 Car Washes Penalty Schedule.
   All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law
or rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs,
clauses, items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision,
paragraph, subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice
of Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
   In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or
revocation, as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of
multiple provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods
shall run concurrently.
   Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
   The parties shall be authorized to present evidence to mitigate the license
revocation or suspension period within the date range marked by two asterisks
(**).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
             Violation    First         First       Second        Second      Third and     Third and
Citation     Description  Violation     Default     Violation     Default     Subsequent    Subsequent
                                                                              Violation     Default
             Operating as
Admin. Code  a car wash   $100 per day  $100 per    $100 per day  $100 per    $100 per day  $100 per
§ 20-541(a) without a                  day                       day                       day
             license
             Failure to
             comply with
Admin. Code  requirements $375          $500        $450          $500        $500          $500
§ 20-542    pertaining
             to surety
             bonds
             Failure to
             comply with
             requirements
             pertaining   $375 (plus 0  $500 (plus  $450 (plus 0  $500 (plus
Admin. Code  to records,  to 15 day     15 day      to 30 day     30 day      $500 (plus    $500 (plus
§ 20-544    or make      suspension)** suspension) suspension)** suspension) revocation)** revocation)
             records
             available
             for
             inspection
             Knowingly
             submits
             false
             information
             as part of   $750 (plus 0  $1,000      $900 (plus 0  $1,000                    $1,000
Admin. Code  license      to 15 day     (plus 15    to 30 day     (plus 30    $1,000 (plus  (plus
§ 20-545(c) application  suspension)** day         suspension)** day         revocation)   revocation)
             or in                      suspension)               suspension)
             response to
             other
             request for
             information
             Failure to
6 RCNY       comply with  $375 (plus 0  $500 (plus  $450 (plus 0  $500 (plus
§           requirements to 15 day     15 day      to 30 day     30 day      $500 (plus    $500 (plus
2-431(a)     pertaining   suspension)** suspension) suspension)** suspension) revocation)** revocation)
             to liability
             insurance
             Failure to
             comply with
6 RCNY       requirements $375 (plus 0  $500 (plus  $450 (plus 0  $500 (plus  $500 (plus    $500 (plus
§           pertaining   to 15 day     15 day      to 30 day     30 day      revocation)** revocation)
2-431(b)     to workers'  suspension)** suspension) suspension)** suspension)
             compensation
             insurance
             Failure to
             comply with
6 RCNY       requirements $375 (plus 0  $500 (plus  $450 (plus 0  $500 (plus
§           pertaining   to 15 day     15 day      to 30 day     30 day      $500 (plus    $500 (plus
2-431(c)     to           suspension)** suspension) suspension)** suspension) revocation)** revocation)
             disability
             benefits
             insurance
             Failure to
             comply with
6 RCNY       requirements $375 (plus 0  $500 (plus  $450 (plus 0  $500 (plus  $500 (plus    $500 (plus
§           pertaining   to 15 day     15 day      to 30 day     30 day      revocation)** revocation)
2-431(d)     to           suspension)** suspension) suspension)** suspension)
             unemployment
             insurance
             Failure to
6 RCNY       notify DCA   $375 (plus 0  $500 (plus  $450 (plus 0  $500 (plus
§           of insurance to 15 day     15 day      to 30 day     30 day      $500 (plus    $500 (plus
2-431(e)     cancellation suspension)** suspension) suspension)** suspension) revocation)** revocation)
             or
             termination
             Failure to
             furnish
             proof of
6 RCNY       continued    $375 (plus 0  $500 (plus  $450 (plus 0  $500 (plus  $500 (plus    $500 (plus
§           coverage     to 15 day     15 day      to 30 day     30 day      revocation)** revocation)
2-431(f)     and/or copy  suspension)** suspension) suspension)** suspension)
             of required
             policy upon
             request
6 RCNY       Failure to
§           comply with
2-432,       requirements $375 (plus 0  $500 (plus  $450 (plus 0  $500 (plus  $500 (plus    $500 (plus
except for   pertaining   to 15 day     15 day      to 30 day     30 day      revocation)** revocation)
6 RCNY       to surety    suspension)** suspension) suspension)** suspension)
§           bonds
2-432(e)
             Failure to
             maintain
6 RCNY       surety bond  $375 (plus 0  $500 (plus  $450 (plus 0  $500 (plus  $500 (plus    $500 (plus
§           in amount    to 15 day     15 day      to 30 day     30 day      revocation)** revocation)
2-432(e)     required     suspension)** suspension) suspension)** suspension)
             throughout
             license term
             Failure to
             comply with
6 RCNY       requirements
§           pertaining   $375          $500        $450          $500        $500          $500
2-433        to damage
             complaint
             records
             Failure to
             comply with
             requirements
             pertaining
             to providing
             updated
6 RCNY       information  $375 (plus 0  $500 (plus  $450 (plus 0  $500 (plus  $500 (plus    $500 (plus
§           to the       to 15 day     15 day      to 30 day     30 day      revocation)** revocation)
2-434(c)     Department   suspension)** suspension) suspension)** suspension)
             concerning
             vehicles
             used for
             mobile car
             wash
             services
             Failure to
             comply with
             requirements
6 RCNY       to display
§           license in   $375          $500        $450          $500        $500          $500
2-434(d)     vehicle used
             for mobile
             car wash
             services
 
(Added City Record 4/26/2018, eff. 5/26/2018; amended City Record 1/28/2020,
eff. 2/27/2020)
§ 6-68 General Vendor Penalty Schedule
All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law or
rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs, clauses,
items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision, paragraph,
subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice of
Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by admitting to the
violation, being found in violation in a decision, or entering into a
settlement agreement for violating the same provision of law or rule, within
two years of the prior violation(s).
In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or revocation,
as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of multiple
provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods shall run
concurrently.
Continued unlicensed activity, pursuant to Section 20-472(c)(1) of the
Administrative Code, means a second or third or subsequent violation by the
same respondent, whether by admitting to the violation, being found in
violation in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for violating
the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior violation(s).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third     Third   Fourth and Fourth and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                           Violation  Default
             Violation          First     First   Second    Second  Third     Third   Fourth and Fourth and
Citation     Description        Violation Default Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                                      Violation  Default
             Unlicensed general           $250,             $1,000,           $1,000,
Admin. Code  vendor, including  $250,     plus    $1,000,   plus    $1,000,   plus    $1,000,    $1,000,
§ 20-453    continued          plus $250 $250    plus $250 $250    plus $250 $250    plus $250  plus $250
             unlicensed         per day   per day per day   per day per day   per day per day    per day
             activity
Admin. Code  Failure to carry &
§ 20-461(a) exhibit license on $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
             demand
             Failure to wear
Admin. Code  license            $0        $0      $25       $25     $50       $50     $50        $50
§ 20-461(b) conspicuously
             while vending
             Failure to notify
Admin. Code  DCWP of change of  $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
§ 20-462    info. on license
             application
Admin. Code  Failure to keep or
§ 20-463    produce required   $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
             written record
Admin. Code  Failure to permit
§ 20-464(a) regular            $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
             inspections
             Failure to provide
             name/address of
Admin. Code  manufacturer,      $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
§ 20-464(b) supplier,
             distributor or
             place of storage
Admin. Code  Vending of         $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
§ 20-464(c) prohibited goods
Admin. Code  Transfer of
§ 20-464(d) license without    $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
             approval of Comm.
             Vending on
Admin. Code  sidewalk less than $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
§ 20-465(a) 12 ft. wide, or
             not at curb
             Using more than 8
Admin. Code  ft. parallel to    $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
§ 20-465(b) curb or 3 ft. from
             curb
             Stand or goods
Admin. Code  touching or
§ 20-465(c) leaning against    $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
             building or
             structure
             Stand or goods
             against display
             window or within
             20 ft. of entrance
             of any building or
Admin. Code  within 20 ft. from $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
§ 20-465(d) exits, including
             service exits, to
             buildings that are
             exclusively
             residential at
             street level
             Vending in bus
             stop, taxi stand,
             sidewalk next to a
             hospital or health
Admin. Code  facility no        $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
§ 20-465(e) standing zone or
             within 10 ft. of
             drive/subway
             entrance or exit/
             corner
Admin. Code  Violation of
§ 20-465(f) parking rules and  $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
             regulations
Admin. Code  Vending in
§ 20-465(g) prohibited zone or $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
             area
Admin. Code  Vending on median
§ 20-465(i) strip not intended $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
             for mall or plaza
             Vending within
Admin. Code  Parks jurisdiction $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
§ 20-465(j) without Parks
             Comm. approval
             Failure to move
Admin. Code  after notice of
§ 20-465(k) exigent            $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
             circumstances
             given
             Vending over
             ventilation grill,
Admin. Code  cellar door,
§ 20-465(m) manhole,           $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
             transformer vault
             or subway access
             grating
             Display of goods
             on sidewalk
             surface, blanket,
             trash receptacle,
             cardboard boxes or
             board placed on
             sidewalk surface;
             display exceeding
             5 ft. in height
             from ground level;
             or less than 24
             in. above
             sidewalk, or less
Admin. Code  than 12 in. above
§ 20-465(n) sidewalk where     $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
             display is
             vertical; size of
             table or base less
             than size of
             display structure
             placed thereon;
             objects placed on
             base larger than
             size limitations
             of this section;
             area other than
             area under display
             surface used for
             storage
Admin. Code  Vending from a
§ 20-465(o) parked motor       $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
             vehicle
             Illegal use of
             electricity,
             electrical
Admin. Code  generating
§ 20-465(p) equipment, oil or  $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
             gasoline powered
             equipment,
             machinery of any
             kind
             Vending within 20
             ft. of sidewalk
             cafes; within 5
Admin. Code  ft. of bus
§ 20-465(q) shelters,          $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
             newsstands, public
             telephones,
             disabled access
             ramps
             Vending at times/
Admin. Code  places restricted  $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
§ 20-465.1  by rule of Vendor
             Review Panel
             Transfer of goods/
Admin. Code  vehicle/stand/     $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
§ 20-466    pushcart to
             unlicensed vendor
             Unlicensed
             distribution of
             goods to a vendor;
             unlicensed driver,
             operating on the
             distributor's
             behalf, fails to
             carry proof of the
             distributor's
Admin. Code  license or fails   $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
§ 20-474.1  to comply with the
             General Vendor
             law/rules; failure
             to notify DCWP
             within 10 days of
             changes to
             information in
             distributor's
             license
             application
             Distributor's
Admin. Code  delivery vehicle   $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
§ 20-474.2  without the
             required ID
6 RCNY       Failure to notify
§           DCWP after 4 or    $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
2-302(a)     more violations
             Failure to notify
             DCWP regarding
6 RCNY       failure to answer
§           summons/appear for $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
2-302(b)     a hearing/pay
             penalty within 30
             days
6 RCNY       Failure to notify
§           DCWP of change of  $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
2-302(c)     address or
             telephone number
6 RCNY       Failure to notify
§           DCWP of supplier's $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
2-302(d)     address change
6 RCNY       Failure to keep
§           daily gross        $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
2-303(a)     receipts record
6 RCNY       Failure to make
§           records available  $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
2-303(b)     to DCWP
6 RCNY       Vending in road
§           where parking/     $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
2-304(a)     standing
             prohibited
6 RCNY       Failure to comply
§           with parking meter $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
2-304(b)     requirement
6 RCNY       Vending near fire
§           hydrant or in      $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
2-304(c)     safety zone
             Failure to move
6 RCNY       after notice of
§           exigent            $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
2-306        circumstances
             given
             Misrepresentations
6 RCNY       concerning
§           merchandise        $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
2-307(a)     (Consumer Prot.
             Law)
6 RCNY       Failure to
§           conspicuously      $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
2-307(b)     display price
             exclusive of tax
6 RCNY       Failure to offer
§           receipt for        $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
2-307(c)     purchase
6 RCNY       Failure to retain
§           duplicate copies   $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
2-307(d)     of receipts
6 RCNY       Failure to
§           conspicuously wear $0        $0      $25       $25     $50       $50     $50        $50
2-309        license while
             vending
6 RCNY       Vending on a
§           restricted street  $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
2-310
6 RCNY       Vending on a
§           restricted street  $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
2-314
6 RCNY       Failure to comply
§           with requirements  $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
2-318        for use of general
             vendor helpers
 
(Added City Record 9/12/2018, eff. 10/12/2018; amended City Record 11/26/2021,
eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 6-69 Conversion Therapy Penalty Schedule.
All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law or
rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs, clauses,
items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision, paragraph,
subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice of
Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
shall mean a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty,
being found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
 
          Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation  Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                          Violation  Default
          Offer or
Admin.    provide
Code      prohibited  $750      $1,000  $4,500    $5,000  $10,000    $10,000
§ 20-825 conversion
          therapy
          services
 
(Added City Record 6/22/2018, eff. 7/22/2018)
§ 6-70 Polystyrene Items Penalty Schedule.
All citations are to Title 16 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York.
Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law or
rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs, clauses,
items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision, paragraph,
subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice of
Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
shall mean a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty,
being found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within one year of the prior
violation(s).
 
 
          Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation  Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                          Violation  Default
          Possession,
          sale, or
          offer for
Admin.    use
Code      expanded    $250      $250    $500      $500    $1,000     $1,000
§ 16-329 polystyrene
          single
          service
          articles
 
(Added City Record 1/14/2019, eff. 2/13/2019)
§ 6-71 Bail Bond Agents Penalty Schedule.
All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law or
rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs, clauses,
items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision, paragraph,
subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice of
Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
shall mean a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty,
being found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
 
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
             Violation     First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation     Description   Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                               Violation  Default
Admin. Code  Failure to
§ 20-831(b) post required $3,750    $5,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
             sign
             Failure to
             distribute to
Admin. Code  consumer the
§ 20-831(c) required bill $3,750    $5,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
             of rights or
             flier in
             proper manner
             Failure to
             include
Admin. Code  required      $3,750    $5,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
§ 20-831(d) information
             in receipts
             and contracts
             Failure to
             provide to
Admin. Code  each consumer
§ 20-831(e) a copy of a   $3,750    $5,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
             document that
             was signed by
             consumer
             Failure to
             maintain
             copies of
Admin. Code  required
§ 20-831(f) documents or  $3,750    $5,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
             make such
             documents
             available for
             inspection
             Failure to
             maintain
Admin. Code  records of
§ 20-831(g) the names of  $3,750    $5,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
             persons
             employed or
             subcontracted
             Failure to
Admin. Code  post required $3,750    $5,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
§ 20-832    compensation
             sign
6 RCNY       Failure to
§           post required $3,750    $5,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
5-273(a)     sign
             Failure to
6 RCNY       distribute to
§           consumer the  $3,750    $5,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
5-273(b)     required
             flier in
             proper manner
             Failure to
6 RCNY       distribute to
§           consumer the  $3,750    $5,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
5-273(c)     required bill
             of rights in
             proper manner
6 RCNY       Failure to
§           post required $3,750    $5,000  $4,500    $5,000  $5,000     $5,000
5-273(d)     compensation
             sign
 
(Added City Record 4/11/2019, eff. 5/11/2019; amended City Record 4/21/2020,
eff. 5/21/2020)
§ 6-72 Cashless Establishments Penalty Schedule.
All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law or
rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs, clauses,
items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision, paragraph,
subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice of
Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
 
 
          Violation      First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation  Description    Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                             Violation  Default
Admin.    Violating the
Code      prohibitions   $750      $1,000  $1,350    $1,500  $1,500     $1,500
§ 20-840 on cashless
          establishments
          Violating the
6 RCNY    presumptions
§        regarding      $750      $1,000  $1,350    $1,500  $1,500     $1,500
5-280     cashless
          establishments
 
(Added City Record 9/8/2020, eff. 10/8/2020)
§ 6-73 Hotel Service Disruptions Penalty Schedule.
All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law or
rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs, clauses,
items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision, paragraph,
subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice of
Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or revocation,
as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of multiple
provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods shall run
concurrently.
Unless otherwise specified by law, a second, third, or fourth and subsequent
violation means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty,
being found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
 
          Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third     Third   Fourth and Fourth and
Citation  Description Violation Default Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                            Violation  Default
          Violation
Admin.    of hotel
Code      service     $500      $500    $1,000    $1,000  $2,500    $2,500  $5,000     $5,000
§ 20-851 disruption
          provisions
 
(Added City Record 2/22/2021, eff. 3/24/2021)
§ 6-74 Single-Use Beverage Plastics Penalty Schedule
All citations are to Title 16 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York.
Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law or
rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs, clauses,
items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision, paragraph,
subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice of
Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by admitting to the
violation, being found in violation in a decision, or entering into a
settlement agreement for violating the same provision of law or rule, on a
different day within twelve months of the prior violation(s).
 
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
                Violation       First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation        Description     Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                    Violation  Default
                Providing
                single-use
Admin. Code     plastic
§ 16-401(b)    stirrers or     $100      $100    $200      $200    $400       $400
                single-use
                plastic splash
                sticks
                Providing
                single-use,
                non-compostable
                plastic straws
                to customers
Admin. Code     without
§ 16-401(c)(1) customer        $100      $100    $200      $200    $400       $400
                request
                (including
                providing such
                straws at a
                self-serve
                station)
                Failure to
                maintain a
Admin. Code     sufficient
§ 16-401(c)(2) supply of       $100      $100    $200      $200    $400       $400
                single-use,
                non-compostable
                plastic straws
                Failure to
                provide a
Admin. Code     single-use,     $100      $100    $200      $200    $400       $400
§ 16-401(c)(2) non-compostable
                plastic straw
                upon request
                Charging a
                customer for a
                single-use,
                non-compostable
                plastic straw
Admin. Code     that the
§ 16-401(c)(2) customer has    $100      $100    $200      $200    $400       $400
                requested or
                inquiring as to
                the reason a
                customer has
                requested such
                plastic straw
                Failure to
                display
Admin. Code     required        $100      $100    $200      $200    $400       $400
§ 16-401(c)(3) signage about
                plastic straw
                availability
                Providing
                compostable
                plastic straws
                to be used
                outside of the
                food
                establishment's
                premises;
Admin. Code     failure to
§ 16-401(d)    appropriately   $100      $100    $200      $200    $400       $400
                dispose of
                compostable
                plastic straws;
                failure to
                maintain
                required bins
                for disposal of
                compostable
                plastic straws
                Providing
                eating
                utensils,
                condiment
Admin. Code     packets,
§ 16-402(b)    napkins, or     $50       $50     $150      $150    $250       $250
                extra eating
                containers
                without
                customer
                request
                Failure to
                prominently and
                conspicuously
                provide
                customers with
Admin. Code     the option to
§ 16-402(c)(1) request eating  $50       $50     $150      $150    $250       $250
                utensils,
                condiment
                packets,
                napkins, or
                extra eating
                containers
                Default option
                not set to no
                eating
Admin. Code     utensils,
§ 16-402(c)(1) condiment       $50       $50     $150      $150    $250       $250
                packets,
                napkins, or
                extra eating
                containers
                Providing
                eating
                utensils,
                condiment
Admin. Code     packets,
§ 16-402(c)(2) napkins, or     $50       $50     $150      $150    $250       $250
                extra eating
                containers
                without
                customer
                request
 
(Added City Record 12/9/2021, eff. 1/8/2022; amended City Record 8/7/2023, eff.
9/6/2023)
§ 6-75 Mobile Food Vendor Penalty Schedule.
Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law or
rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs, clauses,
items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision, paragraph,
subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice of
Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or revocation,
as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of multiple
provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods shall run
concurrently.
Unless otherwise specified in this section or by law, a second, third, or
fourth and subsequent violation means a violation by the same respondent,
whether by pleading guilty, being found guilty in a decision, or entering into
a settlement agreement for violating the same provision of law or rule, within
two years of the prior violation(s).
For violations marked with a single asterisk (*) a second, third, or fourth and
subsequent violation means a violation by the same respondent, whether by
pleading guilty, being found guilty in a decision, or entering into a
settlement agreement for violating the same provision of law or rule, within
one year of the prior violation(s).
A person who commits three or more violations marked with a hashtag (#) within
a two-year period is subject to mandatory revocation of their mobile food
vending license pursuant to subdivision f of section 17-317 of the
Administrative Code.
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third     Third   Fourth and Fourth and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                           Violation  Default
                                 Violation    First     First   Second    Second  Third     Third   Fourth and Fourth and
Citation                         Description  Violation Default Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                                                    Violation  Default
                                 Litter in
Admin. Code                      any street   $75       $75     $300      $300    $400      $400    $400       $400
§ 16-118*                       or public
                                 place
                                 Unlicensed   $1,000    $1,000  $1,000    $1,000  $1,000    $1,000
Admin. Code                      or           (plus     (plus   (plus     (plus   (plus     (plus   $1,000     $1,000
§ 17-307(a), (b) and (c)        unpermitted  $100 per  $100    $100 per  $100    $100 per  $100    (plus $100 (plus $100
                                 vending      day)      per     day)      per     day)      per     per day)   per day)
                                                        day)              day)              day)
                                 Failure to
Admin. Code                      display
§ 17-311(a), (b), (d), and (e)# license,     $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
                                 permit, or
                                 letter grade
                                 Failure to
                                 affix
Admin. Code                      current
§ 17-311(c)                     letter grade $500      $500    $500      $500    $500      $500    $500       $500
                                 or letter
                                 grade
                                 pending
                                 Failure to
Admin. Code                      make         $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
§ 17-312#                       notification
                                 of change
                                 Failure to
Admin. Code                      follow       $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
§ 17-313#                       bookkeeping
                                 requirements
                                 Failure to
                                 comply with
Admin. Code                      duties of    $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
§ 17-314#                       licensees
                                 and
                                 permittees
                                 Failure to
Admin. Code                      comply with  $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
§ 17-315#                       location
                                 restrictions
Admin. Code                      Improper
§ 17-316#                       transfer of  $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
                                 food
                                 Vending at
                                 times/places
Admin. Code                      restricted   $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
§ 20-465.1                      by rule of
                                 Vendor
                                 Review Panel
Admin. Code                      Failure to
§ 20-708                        display      $50       $50     $100      $100    $250      $250    $250       $250
                                 price
6 RCNY                           Vending on a
§                               restricted   $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
2-314                            street
6 RCNY                           Failure to
§                               comply with  $350      $350    $350      $350    $350      $350    $350       $350
5-32(c)                          receipt
                                 requirements
                                 Failure to
24 RCNY                          comply with
§                               construction $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
6-04#                            and
                                 equipment
                                 requirements
                                 Failure to
24 RCNY                          comply with
§                               supplies and $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
6-05#                            equipment
                                 requirements
                                 Failure to
24 RCNY                          comply with
§                               size and     $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
6-06#                            placement
                                 requirements
24 RCNY                          Failure to
§                               comply with  $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
6-07#                            green cart
                                 requirements
24 RCNY                          Failure to
§                               comply with  $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
6-08#                            facilities
                                 requirements
                                 Failure to
24 RCNY                          comply with
§                               requirements $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
6-09#                            for lease
                                 agreements
24 RCNY                          Failure to
§                               comply with  $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
6-12#                            records
                                 requirements
24 RCNY                          Failure to
§                               post letter  $500      $500    $500      $500    $500      $500    $500       $500
6-19#                            grades as
                                 required
24 RCNY                          Improper
§                               tampering    $25       $25     $50       $50     $100      $100    $250       $250
6-20#                            with letter
                                 grade
                                 Failure to
                                 comply with
24 RCNY Health Code §           garbage,     $200      $200    $200      $200    $250      $250    $500       $500
89.25                            refuse, and
                                 waste
                                 requirements
34 RCNY                          Illegal
§                               vending in a $50       $50     $50       $50     $50       $50     $50        $50
4-08(h)(7)                       parking
                                 space
 
(Added City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021; amended City Record 12/20/2021,
eff. 1/19/2022)
§ 6-76 Car Rentals Penalty Schedule.
Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law or
rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs, clauses,
items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision, paragraph,
subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice of
Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
Unless otherwise specified in this section or by law, a second, third, or
fourth and subsequent violation means a violation by the same respondent,
whether by pleading guilty, being found guilty in a decision, or entering into
a settlement agreement for violating the same provision of law or rule, within
two years of the prior violation(s).
 
          Violation    First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation  Description  Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                           Violation  Default
          Failure to
Admin.    display
Code      notice of    $150      $150    $250      $250    $350       $350
§ 20-861 consumer
          rights
          Failure to
6 RCNY    comply with
§        car rental   $150      $150    $250      $250    $350       $350
5-290(a)  reservation
          requirements
          Failure to
6 RCNY    meet the
§        requirement  $150      $150    $250      $250    $350       $350
5-290(b)  (s) for a
and (c)   car rental
          business
          Failure to
          display the
6 RCNY    required
§        notice of    $150      $150    $250      $250    $350       $350
5-290(d)  consumer
          rights or
          meet sign
          requirements
 
(Added City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 6-77 Information Regarding Redemption of Beverage Containers Penalty
Schedule.
Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law or
rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs, clauses,
items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision, paragraph,
subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice of
Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
Unless otherwise specified in this section or by law, a second, third, or
fourth and subsequent violation means a violation by the same respondent,
whether by pleading guilty, being found guilty in a decision, or entering into
a settlement agreement for violating the same provision of law or rule, within
two years of the prior violation(s).
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
          Violation     First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation  Description   Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                            Violation  Default
          Failure to
          conspicuously
Admin.    display
Code      notice of     $150      $150    $150      $150    $150       $150
§ 20-746 rights and
          obligations
          of redeemers
6 RCNY    Sign is
§        smaller than  $150      $150    $150      $150    $150       $150
5-191     required size
6 RCNY    Sign does not
§        include       $150      $150    $150      $150    $150       $150
5-192     required
          content
          Dealer does
          not use an
          approved
6 RCNY    substitute
§        sign or does  $150      $150    $150      $150    $150       $150
5-194     not include
          all required
          information
          on substitute
          sign
          Sign is not
6 RCNY    conspicuously
§        placed within $150      $150    $150      $150    $150       $150
5-195     10 feet of
          cash register
          Dealer does
          not have the
6 RCNY    appropriate
§        number of     $150      $150    $150      $150    $150       $150
5-196     signs for
          number of
          cash
          registers
          Sign not
          available in
6 RCNY    other
§        languages     $150      $150    $150      $150    $150       $150
5-197     used to
          attract
          customers
 
(Added City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 6-78 Information Regarding Room Air Conditioners Penalty Schedule.
Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law or
rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs, clauses,
items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision, paragraph,
subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice of
Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
Unless otherwise specified in this section or by law, a second, third, or
fourth and subsequent violation means a violation by the same respondent,
whether by pleading guilty, being found guilty in a decision, or entering into
a settlement agreement for violating the same provision of law or rule, within
two years of the prior violation(s).
 
          Violation     First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation  Description   Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                            Violation  Default
          Failure to
          display
          required
Admin.    energy use or                   $25 per   $25 per $25 per    $25 per
Code      item          $0        $0      day       day     day        day
§ 20-718 information
          for room air
          conditioner
          for sale
          Failure to
          furnish upon
          request
Admin.    energy use or                   $25 per   $25 per $25 per    $25 per
Code      item          $0        $0      day       day     day        day
§ 20-719 information
          for room air
          conditioner
          for sale
          Failure to
          include
          energy use or
          item
Admin.    information
Code      for room air  $0        $0      $25 per   $25 per $25 per    $25 per
§ 20-720 conditioner                     day       day     day        day
          for sale in
          an
          advertisement
          within the
          city
 
(Added City Record 11/26/2021, eff. 12/26/2021)
§ 6-79 Third-Party Food Delivery Services Penalty Schedule.
All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law or
rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs, clauses,
items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision, paragraph,
subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice of
Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or revocation,
as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of multiple
provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods shall run
concurrently.
Unless otherwise specified by law, a second, or third and subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
Violations by third-party food delivery services accrue on a daily basis for
each day and for each food service establishment with respect to which a
violation is committed.
 
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
            Violation      First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation    Description    Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                               Violation  Default
            Operating
            without a
Admin. Code third-party    $500      $500    $500      $500    $500       $500
§ 20-563.1 food delivery
            service
            license
            Failure to
            comply with
Admin. Code requirements   $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
§ 20-563.2 for the
            issuance of a
            license
            Failure to
Admin. Code comply with    $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
§ 20-563.3 the caps on
            fees
            Failure to
Admin. Code comply with
§ 20-563.4 requirements   $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
            for telephone
            orders
            Failure to
            comply with
Admin. Code requirements   $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
§ 20-563.5 for listing
            telephone
            numbers
            Failure to
            comply with
            requirements
            on
            unauthorized
            listings or
            requirements
Admin. Code for the        $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
§ 20-563.6 contents of
            agreements
            between third-
            party food
            delivery
            services and
            food service
            establishments
            Failure to
Admin. Code comply with
§ 20-563.7 requirements   $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
            on customer
            data
            Failure to
Admin. Code comply with    $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
§ 20-563.8 records
            requirements
            Failure to
6 RCNY      comply with
§          license        $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
2-461       application
            requirements
6 RCNY      Failure to
§          comply with    $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
2-462       records
            requirements
            Failure to
            comply with
6 RCNY      requirements
§          for gratuities $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
2-463       for food
            delivery
            workers
            Failure to
6 RCNY      comply with
§          requirements   $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
2-464       for telephone
            number
            listings
            Failure to
6 RCNY      comply with
§          requirements   $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
2-465       for sharing
            customer data
 
(Added City Record 1/19/2022, eff. 2/18/2022)
§ 6-80 Construction Labor Providers Penalty Schedule.
All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law or
rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs, clauses,
items, and any other provisions contained therein. Each subdivision, paragraph,
subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice of
Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
In certain cases, the Department may ask for license suspension or revocation,
as permitted by statute. If a respondent is found in violation of multiple
provisions that require a suspension period, the suspension periods shall run
concurrently.
Unless otherwise specified by law, a second, or third and subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, or such respondent's successor(s) as
defined by section 20-564 of the Administrative Code, whether by pleading
guilty, being found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement
agreement for violating the same provision of law or rule, within one year of
the prior violation(s).
Penalties for violations of 20-564.1(a) of the Administrative Code accrue daily
for every day during which the unlicensed construction labor provider operated.
Each covered construction worker or third-party client for whom the
construction labor provider did not provide a notification in accordance with
section 20-564.2 constitutes a separate and distinct offense.
Each day during which a third-party client accepts the services of a covered
construction worker in violation of section 20-564.4 of the Administrative Code
constitutes a separate and distinct offense.
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                         Violation  Default
                Violation     First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation        Description   Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                  Violation  Default
                Operating
                without a
Admin. Code     construction  $500 per  $500    $500 per  $500    $500 per   $500 per
§ 20-564.1(a)  labor         day       per day day       per day day        day
                provider
                license
                Failure to
Admin. Code     comply with
§ 20-564.1(b), requirements  $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
(c), and (d)    for the
                issuance of a
                license
                Failure to
                comply with
Admin. Code     requirements  $250      $250    $500      $500    $500       $500
§ 20-564.2     for providing
                required
                notices
                Failure to
Admin. Code     comply with
§ 20-564.3     requirements  $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
                for
                recordkeeping
                Prohibition
                on third-
                party client
Admin. Code     accepting
§ 20-564.4     services of   $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
                unlicensed
                construction
                labor
                provider
                Failure to
6 RCNY          comply with
§              requirements  $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
2-471           for the
                issuance of a
                license
                Failure to
6 RCNY          comply with
§              requirements  $250      $250    $500      $500    $500       $500
2-472           for providing
                required
                notices
                Failure to
6 RCNY          comply with
§              requirements  $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
2-473           for
                recordkeeping
 
(Added City Record 6/10/2022, eff. 7/10/2022)
§ 6-81 Automated Employment Decision Tools Penalty Schedule.
All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law or
rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs, clauses,
items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision, paragraph,
subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice of
Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
Unless otherwise specified by law, a second, or third and subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
Each day on which an automated employment decision tool is used in violation of
this section gives rise to a separate violation of subdivision a of section 20-
871 of the Administrative Code.
Failure to provide any notice to a candidate or an employee in violation of
paragraphs 1, 2 or 3 of subdivision b of section 20-871 of the Administrative
Code shall constitute a separate violation.
 
             Violation    First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation     Description  Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                              Violation  Default
             Failure to
             comply with
             requirements
Admin. Code  for use of   $375      $500    $1,350    $1,500  $1,500     $1,500
§ 20-871(a) an automated
             employment
             decision
             tool
             Failure to
             comply with
             notice
Admin. Code  requirements
§ 20-871(b) related to   $375      $500    $1,350    $1,500  $1,500     $1,500
             automated
             employment
             decision
             tools
 
(Added City Record 7/6/2022, eff. 8/5/2022)
§ 6-82 Force-Fed Products Penalty Schedule.
All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law or
rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs, clauses,
items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision, paragraph,
subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice of
Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
Unless otherwise specified by law, a second, or third and subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
Each violation may be treated as a separate and distinct offense. Each day on
which a respondent commits a violation may be treated as a separate and
distinct offense.
 
           Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation   Description Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                           Violation  Default
           Failure to
           comply with
           prohibition
Admin.     on force-
Code       fed         $500      $500    $500      $500    $500       $500
§ 17-1902 products or
           food
           containing
           force-fed
           products
 
(Added City Record 7/6/2022, eff. 8/5/2022)
§ 6-83 Open Captioning at Motion Picture Theaters Penalty Schedule.
All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law or
rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs, clauses,
items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision, paragraph,
subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice of
Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
Unless otherwise specified by law, a second, or third and subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
 
               Violation    First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation       Description  Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                Violation  Default
               Failure to
Admin. Code    provide open
§ 20-699.7(b) motion       $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
               picture
               captioning
               Failure to
               comply with
               timing
Admin. Code    requirements $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
§ 20-699.7(d) for open
               motion
               picture
               captioning
               Failure to
               comply with
               public
Admin. Code    notice
§ 20-699.7(e) requirements $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
               for open
               motion
               picture
               captioning
               Failure to
Admin. Code    comply with  $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
§ 20-699.7(f) records
               requirements
 
(Added City Record 7/6/2022, eff. 8/5/2022; renumbered City Record 2/1/2023,
eff. 3/3/2023)
§ 6-84 Electric Space Heater Penalty Schedule.
All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law or
rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs, clauses,
items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision, paragraph,
subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice of
Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
Unless otherwise specified by law, a second, or third and subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
Each failure to comply with respect to any one stock keeping unit gives rise to
a separate violation of subdivision a of § 20-699.11 of the Administrative
Code.
 
             Violation     First     First   Second    Second  Third     Third   Fourth and Fourth and
Citation     Description   Violation Default Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                                 Violation  Default
             Distributing,
             selling, or
Admin. Code  offering for
§ 20-699.11 sale a non-   $0        $0      $750      $1,000  $900      $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
             compliant
             electric
             space heater
 
(Added City Record 2/1/2023, eff. 3/3/2023)
§ 6-85 Data Breach Notification Penalty Schedule.
All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law or
rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs, clauses,
items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision, paragraph,
subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice of
Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
Unless otherwise specified by law, a second, or third and subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
Each failure to comply gives rise to a separate violation of § 20-117 of the
Administrative Code.
 
          Violation     First     First   Second    Second  Third and  Third and
Citation  Description   Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                            Violation  Default
          Failure to
Admin.    promptly
Code      provide DCWP  $175      $175    $300      $300    $500       $500
§ 20-117 with data
          breach
          notification.
 
(Added City Record 6/6/2023, eff. 7/6/2023)
§ 6-86 Powered Mobility Devices Penalty Schedule.
All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York.
Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law or
rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs, clauses,
items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision, paragraph,
subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice of
Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by admitting to the
violation, being found in violation in a decision, or entering into a
settlement agreement for violating the same provision of law or rule, on a
different day within two years of the prior violation(s).
Each failure to comply with respect to any one stock keeping unit gives rise to
a separate violation of subdivision a, b, or c of § 20-610 of the
Administrative Code.
Each day on which a violation of § 20-610.1 of the Administrative Code
continues constitutes a separate violation.
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third     Third   Fourth and Fourth and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                           Violation  Default
               Violation     First     First   Second    Second  Third     Third   Fourth and Fourth and
Citation       Description   Violation Default Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                                   Violation  Default
               Distributing,
               selling,
               leasing,
               renting, or
Admin. Code    offering for  $0        $0      $1,500    $2,000  $1,800    $2,000  $2,000     $2,000
§ 20-610(a)   sale, lease,
               or rent a
               non-compliant
               powered
               bicycle
               Distributing,
               selling,
               leasing,
               renting, or
Admin. Code    offering for
§ 20-610(b)   sale, lease,  $0        $0      $1,500    $2,000  $1,800    $2,000  $2,000     $2,000
               or rent a
               non-compliant
               powered
               mobility
               device
               Distributing,
               selling,
               leasing,
               renting, or
Admin. Code    offering for  $0        $0      $1,500    $2,000  $1,800    $2,000  $2,000     $2,000
§ 20-610(c)   sale, lease,
               or rent a
               non-compliant
               storage
               battery
               Failure to
               display logo,
               wordmark, or
               name of
Admin. Code    accredited    $0        $0      $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
§ 20-610(e)   testing
               laboratory on
               online
               product
               listing page
               Failure to
Admin. Code    comply with   $0        $0      $375      $500    $450      $500    $500       $500
§ 20-610(h)   recordkeeping
               requirements
               Failure to
               conspicuously
Admin. Code    post          $113 per  $150    $225 per  $250    $350 per  $350    $350 per   $350 per
§ 20-610.1(c) informational day       per day day       per day day       per day day        day
               materials
               near devices
               Failure to
               conspicuously
Admin. Code    hyperlink     $150 per  $150    $250 per  $250    $350 per  $350    $350 per   $350 per
§ 20-610.1(d) informational day       per day day       per day day       per day day        day
               materials on
               webpage
 
(Added City Record 8/7/2023, eff. 9/6/2023; amended City Record 9/12/2024, eff.
10/12/2024)
§ 6-87 Disclosure of Total Ticket Costs in Advertisements.
All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York or
Title 6 of the Rules of the City of New York.
Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law or
rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs, clauses,
items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision, paragraph,
subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice of
Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by pleading guilty, being
found guilty in a decision, or entering into a settlement agreement for
violating the same provision of law or rule, within two years of the prior
violation(s).
Each distinct advertisement that fails to include the required information
shall constitute a separate violation. For the purposes of determining the
total civil penalty, each day on which a violating advertisement is exposed to
the public shall constitute a separate violation.
 
          Violation      First     First   Second    Second  Third     Third   Fourth and Fourth and
Citation  Description    Violation Default Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                               Violations Defaults
          Failure to
Admin.    disclose total
Code      ticket costs   $0        $0      $125      $250    $375      $500    $450       $500
§ 20-882 in
          advertisements
 
(Added City Record 12/7/2023, eff. 1/6/2024)
§ 6-88 Hotel Licensing Penalty Schedule.
All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York.
Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law or
rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs, clauses,
items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision, paragraph,
subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice of
Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by admitting to the
violation, being found in violation in a decision, or entering into a
settlement agreement for violating the same provision of law or rule on a
different day or against a different person within two years of the prior
violation.
Each instance in which a core employee is employed in a manner other than
direct employment in violation of Administrative Code § 20-565.5 constitutes a
separate and distinct offense.
Each instance in which a hotel operator failed to provide a panic button to an
employee in violation of Administrative Code § 20-565.6 constitutes a separate
and distinct offense.
Each instance in which a hotel operator retaliates against an employee in
violation of Administrative Code § 20-565.7 constitutes a separate and distinct
offense.
         Violation   First     First   Second    Second  Third     Third   Fourth and Fourth and
Citation Description Violation Default Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                           Violation  Default
            Violation     First     First   Second    Second  Third     Third   Fourth and Fourth and
Citation    Description   Violation Default Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                                Violation  Default
Admin. Code Operating a   $100 per  $100    $100 per  $100    $100 per  $100    $100 per   $100 per
§ 20-565.1 hotel without day       per day day       per day day       per day day        day
            a license
            Failure to
Admin. Code conspicuously $500      $500    $1,000    $1,000  $2,500    $2,500  $5,000     $5,000
§ 20-565.3 display hotel
            license
            Failure to
            comply with
Admin. Code hotel service $500      $500    $1,000    $1,000  $2,500    $2,500  $5,000     $5,000
§ 20-565.4 requirements
            and
            prohibitions
            Failure to
            comply with
Admin. Code direct        $500      $500    $1,000    $1,000  $2,500    $2,500  $5,000     $5,000
§ 20-565.5 employment
            requirement
            at hotel
            Failure to
Admin. Code provide a     $500      $500    $1,000    $1,000  $2,500    $2,500  $5,000     $5,000
§ 20-565.6 panic button
            to employee
            Improper
Admin. Code retaliation   $500      $500    $1,000    $1,000  $2,500    $2,500  $5,000     $5,000
§ 20-565.7 against hotel
            employee
                                                                                   
            Failure to
6 RCNY §   maintain or   $500      $500    $1,000    $1,000  $2,500    $2,500  $5,000     $5,000
2-482       produce
            records
 
(Added City Record 5/2/2025, eff. 5/2/2025)
§ 6-89 Fees for Rental of Residential Property Penalty Schedule.
All citations are to Title 20 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York.
Unless otherwise specified, the penalties set forth for each section of law or
rule shall also apply to all subdivisions, paragraphs, subparagraphs, clauses,
items, or any other provision contained therein. Each subdivision, paragraph,
subparagraph, clause, item, or other provision charged in the Notice of
Violation shall constitute a separate violation of the law or rule.
Unless otherwise specified by law, a second or third or subsequent violation
means a violation by the same respondent, whether by admitting to the
violation, being found in violation in a decision, or entering into a
settlement agreement for violating the same provision of law or rule, within
two years of the prior violation(s).
 
                Violation    First     First   Second    Second  Third     Third   Fourth and Fourth and
Citation        Description  Violation Default Violation Default Violation Default Subsequent Subsequent
                                                                                   Violation  Default
                Agent
                liability
                for unlawful
Admin. Code     imposition
§ 20-699.21(a) or           $750      $1,000  $1,800    $2,000  $2,000    $2,000  $2,000     $2,000
                collection
                of fee for
                residential
                rental
                Landlord
                liability
                for unlawful
Admin. Code     imposition   $750      $1,000  $1,800    $2,000  $2,000    $2,000  $2,000     $2,000
§ 20-699.21(b) or
                collection
                of fee by
                agent
                Unlawful
                conditioning
Admin. Code     of
§ 20-699.21(c) residential  $750      $1,000  $1,800    $2,000  $2,000    $2,000  $2,000     $2,000
                rental on
                engagement
                of an agent
Admin. Code     Unlawful
§ 20-699.21(d) fees posted  $750      $1,000  $1,800    $2,000  $2,000    $2,000  $2,000     $2,000
                in listing
                Failure to
                disclose in
                residential
                rental
Admin. Code     listing all
§ 20-699.22(a) fees to be   $375      $500    $900      $1,000  $1,000    $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
                paid by
                tenant in a
                clear and
                conspicuous
                manner
                Failure to
                provide
                tenant with
Admin. Code     itemized fee $375      $500    $900      $1,000  $1,000    $1,000  $1,000     $1,000
§ 20-699.22(b) disclosure
                for
                residential
                rental
 
(Added City Record 6/10/2025, eff. 7/10/2025)
Subchapter C: Public Hearings
§ 6-1000 Authority.
   Where required by statute, the Department shall provide for an open public
hearing. An open public hearing may also be held at the discretion of the
Commissioner for any lawful purpose.
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; renumbered City Record 2/1/2023,
eff. 3/3/2023)
§ 6-1001 Notice.
   (a)   Notice shall be provided in the manner prescribed by the statute
authorizing the Department to hold the hearing.
   (b)   Unless otherwise provided by law, notice shall be reasonable and
afford all parties who are affected by the proceeding an opportunity to present
their views.
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; renumbered City Record 2/1/2023,
eff. 3/3/2023)
§ 6-1002 Location.
   The hearing may be held at the Department's main office or at any other
appropriate location. The precise location shall be specified in the notice of
the public hearing.
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; renumbered City Record 2/1/2023,
eff. 3/3/2023)
§ 6-1003 Procedures.
   (a)   The hearing shall be presided over by any employee of the Department
designated by the Commissioner to serve as the presiding officer.
   (b)   The presiding officer shall have authority to determine the order in
which testimony is presented and evidence received.
   At the conclusion of the hearing, the presiding officer shall cause a
transcript of the hearing to be made and prepare a written report containing a
summary of the proposal and the evidence submitted.
(Added City Record 8/22/2016, eff. 8/22/2016; renumbered City Record 2/1/2023,
eff. 3/3/2023)
Chapter 7: Office of Labor Policy and Standards
Subchapter A: Office of Labor Policy and Standards
7-101 Definitions.
   (a)   As used in this subchapter, the following terms have the following
meanings:
      "Employee" means any person who meets the definition of "employee," as
defined by § 20-912 of the Code, "eligible grocery employee," as defined by §
22-507 of the Code, "fast food employee," as defined by § 20-1201 or 20-1301 of
the Code, or "retail employee," as defined by § 20-1201 of the Code.
      "Employer" means any person who meets the definition of "employer," as
defined by Section 20-912 of the Code, "successor grocery employer" or
"incumbent grocery employer," as defined by § 22-507 of the Code, "fast food
employer," as defined by § 20-1201 or 20-1301 of the Code, or "retail
employer," as defined by § 20-1201 of the Code.
      "Freelancers Law and rules" means Chapter 10 of Title 20 of the Code and
Subchapter E of this chapter.
      "OLPS laws and rules" means Chapters 8, 12, and 13 of Title 20 and § 22-
507 of the Code and Subchapters A, B, D, F, and G of this chapter.
      "Transportation Benefits Law and rules" means Chapter 9 of Title 20 of
the Code and Subchapter C of this chapter.
   (b)   As used in the OLPS laws and rules, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      "Code" means the Administrative Code of the City of New York.
      "Department" means the New York City Department of Consumer Affairs.
      "Director" means the director of the office of labor standards
established, pursuant to Section 20-a of the Charter.
      "Joint employer" means each of two or more employers who has some control
over the work or working conditions of an employee or employees. Joint
employers may be separate and distinct individuals or entities with separate
owners, managers and facilities. A determination of whether or not a joint
employment relationship exists will not often be decided by the application of
any single criterion; rather the entire relationship shall be viewed in its
totality.
      "Office" means the office of labor standards established, pursuant to
Section 20-a of the Charter and referred to as the Office of Labor Policy and
Standards.
      "Supplements" means all remuneration for employment paid in any medium
other than cash, or reimbursement for expenses, or any payments which are not
‘wages' within the meaning of the New York State Labor Law, including, but not
limited to, health, welfare, non-occupational disability, retirement, vacation
benefits, holiday pay, life insurance, and apprenticeship training.
      "Temporary help firm" means an employer that recruits and hires its own
employees and assigns those employees to perform work or services for another
organization to: (i) support or supplement the other organization's workforce;
(ii) provide assistance in special work situations including, but not limited
to, employee absences, skill shortages, or seasonal workloads; or (iii) perform
special assignments or projects.
      "Work week" means a fixed and regularly recurring period of 168 hours or
seven consecutive 24 hour periods; it may begin on any day of the week and any
hour of the day, and need not coincide with a calendar week.
      "Written" or "writing" means a hand-written or machine-printed or
printable communication in physical or electronic format, including a
communication that is maintained or transmitted electronically, such as a text
message.
(Added City Record 8/21/2018, eff. 9/20/2018)
§ 7-102 Construction.
This chapter shall be liberally construed to permit the Office to accomplish
the purposes contained in Section 20-a of the Charter. The provisions of this
subchapter shall not be construed to supersede any other provision of the OLPS
laws and rules, the Freelancers Law and rules, or the Transportation Benefits
Law and rules.
(Added City Record 8/21/2018, eff. 9/20/2018)
§ 7-103 Severability.
The rules contained in this chapter shall be separate and severable. If any
word, clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section, or portion of these
rules or the application thereof to any person, employer, employee, or
circumstance is contrary to a Local, State or Federal law or held to be
invalid, it shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the rules or the
validity of the application of the rules to other persons or circumstances.
(Added City Record 8/21/2018, eff. 9/20/2018)
§ 7-104 Complainants and Witnesses.
   (a)   All people, regardless of immigration status, may access resources
provided by the Office.
   (b)   Any person who meets the definition of employee in 6 RCNY §
7-101 is entitled to the rights and protections provided by this subchapter to
employees and any applicable provision of the OLPS laws and rules, regardless
of immigration status.
   (c)   The Office shall conduct its work without inquiring into the
immigration status of complainants and witnesses.
   (d)   The Office shall maintain confidential the identity of a complainant
or natural person providing information relevant to enforcement of the OLPS
laws and rules and the Transportation Benefits Law and rules, unless disclosure
is necessary for resolution of the investigation or matter, or otherwise
required by law, and the Office, to the extent practicable, notifies such
complainant or natural person that the Office will be disclosing such person's
identity before such disclosure.
   (e)   For purposes of effectuating subdivision (d) of this section, the
Office shall keep confidential any information that may be used to identify,
contact, or locate a single person, or to identify an individual in context.
(Added City Record 8/21/2018, eff. 9/20/2018)
§ 7-105 Joint Employers.
   (a)   Joint employers are individually and jointly liable for violations of
all applicable OLPS laws and rules and satisfaction of any penalties or
restitution imposed on a joint employer for any violation thereof, regardless
of any agreement among joint employers to the contrary.
   (b)   A joint employer must count every employee it employs for hire or
permits to work, whether joint or not, in determining the number of employees
employed for hire or permitted to work for the employer. For example, a joint
employer who employs three workers from a temporary help firm and also has
three permanent employees under its sole control has six employees for purposes
of the OLPS laws and rules.
(Added City Record 8/21/2018, eff. 9/20/2018)
§ 7-106 Determining Damages Based on Lost Earnings.
   (a)   The following provisions apply to the extent necessary in
circumstances described in paragraphs (1) and (2) below for the calculation of
damages based on lost earnings in an administrative enforcement action:
      (1)   When an employer pays a flat rate of pay for work performed,
regardless of the number of hours actually worked, an employee's hourly rate of
pay shall be based on the most recent hourly rate paid to the employee for the
applicable pay period, calculated by adding together the employee's total
earnings, including tips, commissions, and supplements, for the most recent
work week in which no sick time or other leave was taken and dividing that sum
by the number of hours spent performing work during such work week or forty
hours, whichever amount of hours is less.
      (2)   If an employee performs more than one job for the same employer or
the employee's rate of pay fluctuates for a single job, the hourly rate of pay
shall be the rate of pay that the employee would have been paid during the time
that employee would have been performing work but for the employee's absence.
   (b)   If the methods for calculating the hourly rate described in
subdivision (a) produce an hourly rate that is below the full hourly minimum
wage, then the employee's lost earnings shall be based on the full hourly
minimum wage.
(Added City Record 8/21/2018, eff. 9/20/2018)
§ 7-107 Required Notices and Postings.
   (a)   For any notice created by the Office that is made available on the
City's website and that is then required by a provision of the OLPS laws and
rules to be provided to an employee or posted in the workplace, an employer
must provide and/or post such notice in English and in any language spoken as a
primary language by at least five percent of employees at the employer's
location, provided that the Director has made the notice available in such
language. Employers covered by the Earned Safe and Sick Time Act, Chapter 8 of
Title 20 of the Code, are required to comply with this subdivision in addition
to the requirement, pursuant to § 20-919 of the Code that an employer provide
the notice of rights in an employee's primary language.
   (b)   (1)   For any notice that is not created by the Office and made
available on the City's website, that is required to be provided to an employee
and/or posted in the workplace by a provision of the OLPS laws and rules, an
employer must provide and/or post such notice in English and in any language
that the employer customarily uses to communicate with the employee.
      (2)   For any notice that is not created by the Office and made available
on the City's website, that is required to be posted in the workplace by a
provision of the OLPS laws and rules, an employer must post such notice in
English and in any language that the employer customarily uses to communicate
with any of the employees at that location.
   (c)   Any notice, policy, or other writing that is required by a provision
of the OLPS laws and rules to be personally provided to an employee must be
provided by a method that reasonably ensures personal receipt by the employee
and that is consistent with any other applicable law or rule that specifically
addresses a method of delivery.
   (d)   Any notice, policy or, other writing that is required to be posted,
pursuant to a provision of the OLPS laws and rules must be posted in a printed
format in a conspicuous place accessible to employees where notices to
employees are customarily posted, pursuant to State and Federal laws and,
except for notices created by the Office, in a form customarily used by the
employer to communicate with employees.
   (e)   An employer that places employees to perform work off-site or at
dispersed job-sites, such as in private homes, building security posts, or on
delivery routes, must comply with any applicable requirement to post a notice,
policy or other writing contained in the OLPS laws and rules by providing
employees with the required notice personally upon commencement of employment,
within fourteen (14) days of the effective date of any changes to the required
posting, and upon request by the employee, in addition to the requirements in
subdivision (c) of this section.
(Added City Record 8/21/2018, eff. 9/20/2018)
§ 7-108 Retaliation.
   (a)   No person shall take any adverse action against an employee that
penalizes an employee for, or is reasonably likely to deter an employee from,
exercising or attempting to exercise rights under the OLPS laws and rules or
interfere with an employee's exercise of rights under the OLPS laws and rules.
   (b)   Taking an adverse action includes, but is not limited to threatening,
intimidating, disciplining, discharging, demoting, suspending, or harassing an
employee, reducing the hours of pay of an employee, informing another employer
than an employee has engaged in activities protected by the OLPS laws and
rules, discriminating against the employee, including actions related to
perceived immigration status or work authorization, and maintenance or
application of an absence control policy that counts protected leave as an
absence that may lead to or result in an adverse action.
   (c)   An employee need not explicitly refer to a provision of the OLPS laws
and rules to be protected from an adverse action.
   (d)   The Office may establish a causal connection between the exercise,
attempted exercise, or anticipated exercise of rights protected by the OLPS
laws and rules and an employer's adverse action against an employee or a group
of employees by indirect or direct evidence.
   (e)   For purposes of this section, retaliation is established when the
Office shows that a protected activity was a motivating factor for an adverse
action, whether or not other factors motivated the adverse action.
(Added City Record 8/21/2018, eff. 9/20/2018)
§ 7-109 Enforcement and Penalties.
   (a)   The Office may open an investigation to determine compliance with laws
enforced by the Office on its own initiative or based on a complaint, except as
otherwise provided by § 20-1309 of Chapter 13 of Title 20 of the Code.
   (b)   Whether it was issued in person, via mail, or, on written consent of
the employer, email, an employer must respond to a written request for
information or records by providing the Office with true, accurate, and
contemporaneously-made records or information within the following timeframes,
except as provided in subdivision (c) of this section, subdivision (c) of § 20-
924 of the Code, 6 RCNY §
7-213 or other applicable law:
      (1)   For an initial request for information or records, the employer
shall
         i.   Within ten (10) days of the date that the request for information
was received by the employer provide the following information, if applicable:
            A.   the employer's correct legal name and business form;
            B.   the employer's trade name or DBA;
            C.   the names and addresses of other businesses associated with
the employer;
            D.   the employer's Federal Employer Identification Number;
            E.   the employer's addresses where business is conducted;
            F.   the employer's headquarters and principal place of business
addresses;
            G.   the name, phone number, email address, and mailing address of
the owners, officers, directors, principals, members, partners and/or
stockholders of more than 10 percent of the outstanding stock of the employer
business and their titles;
            H.   the name, phone number, email address, and mailing address of
the individuals who have operational control over the business;
            I.   the name, phone number, email address, and mailing address of
the individuals who supervise employees;
            J.   the name and contact information of the individual who the
office should contact regarding an investigation of the business and an
affirmation granting authority to act; and
         ii.   Within fourteen (14) days of the date of that the initial
request for information or records was received, provide the remaining
information or records requested in that initial request.
      (2)   For all requests for information or records after the initial
request, an employer must respond within the timeframe prescribed by the Office
in the request, which shall not exceed fourteen (14) days from the date that
the request was received by the employer, unless a longer timeframe has been
agreed to by the Office.
      (3)   Upon good cause shown, the Director may extend response timeframes
required, pursuant to this subdivision.
   (c)   An employer shall respond to a written request for information or
records by providing the Office with true, accurate, and contemporaneously-made
records or information in a lesser amount of time than provided in paragraphs 2
and 3 of subdivision b of this section if agreed to by the parties or the
Office has reason to believe that:
      (1)   The employer will destroy or falsify records;
      (2)   The employer is closing, selling, or transferring its business,
disposing of assets or is about to declare bankruptcy;
      (3)   The employer is the subject of a government investigation or
enforcement action or proceeding related to wages and hours, unemployment
insurance, workers' compensation, discrimination, OLPS laws and rules, the
Freelancers Law and rules, or the Transportation Benefits Law and rules; or
      (4)   More immediate access to records is necessary to prevent or remedy
retaliation against employees.
   (d)   In accordance with applicable law, the Office may resolve or attempt
to resolve an investigation at any point through settlement upon terms that are
satisfactory to the Office.
   (e)   The Office may issue a notice of violation to an employer who fails to
provide true and accurate information or records requested by the Office in
connection with an investigation.
   (f)   An employer who fails to timely and fully respond to the request for
information or records that is the subject of a notice of violation issued
under subdivision (e) of this section on or before the first scheduled
appearance date is subject to a penalty of five hundred dollars, in addition to
any penalties or remedies imposed as a result of the Office's investigation.
   (g)   The employer may cure a notice of violation issued in accordance with
subdivision (e) of this section without the penalty imposed in connection with
subdivision (f) by:
      (1)   producing the requested information or records on or before the
first scheduled appearance date; or
      (2)   resolving, to the satisfaction of the Office on or before the first
scheduled appearance date, the investigation that is the basis for the request
for information or records.
   (h)   A finding that an employer has an official or unofficial policy or
practice that denies a right established or protected by the OLPS laws and
rules shall constitute a violation of the applicable provision of the OLPS laws
and rules for each and every employee subject to such policy or practice.
(Added City Record 8/21/2018, eff. 9/20/2018)
§ 7-110 Service.
Service of documents issued by the Office to employers, including written
requests for information or records and notices of violation, shall be made in
a manner reasonably calculated to achieve actual notice to the employer. The
following are presumed to be reasonably calculated to achieve actual notice:
(i) personal service on the employer; (ii) personal service on the employer by
regular first-class mail, certified mail, return receipt requested, or private
mail delivery services, such as UPS, to an employer's last known business
address; or (iii) if an employer has so consented, facsimile, email, including
an attachment to an email.
(Added City Record 8/21/2018, eff. 9/20/2018)
§ 7-111 Recordkeeping.
   (a)   An employer's failure to maintain, retain, or produce a record that is
required to be maintained under the OLPS laws and rules that is relevant to a
material fact alleged by the Office in a notice of violation issued, pursuant
to a provision of the OLPS laws and rules creates a reasonable inference that
such fact is true, unless a rebuttable presumption or other adverse inference
is provided by applicable law.
   (b)   An employer that produces records to the department or Office in
response to a request for information affirms that the records produced are
true and accurate.
(Added City Record 8/21/2018, eff. 9/20/2018)
Subchapter B: Earned Safe and Sick Time
(Subchapter title amended City Record 8/21/2018, eff. 9/20/2018)
§ 7-201 Definitions.
   (a)   As used in this subchapter, the terms "calendar year", "department",
"domestic worker", "employee", "employer", "health care provider", "safe/sick
time", "safe time", and "sick time" shall have the same meanings as set forth
in § 20-912 of the Administrative Code.
   (b)   As used in this subchapter and § 20-913 of the Administrative Code,
the term "net income" shall have the same meaning as "entire net income" as set
forth in section 208 of the New York State Tax Law.
   (c)   As used in this subchapter, the term “paid prenatal leave” has the
same meaning as “paid prenatal personal leave” as set forth in subdivision 4-
a of section 196-b of the labor law.
(Amended City Record 2/3/2016, eff. 3/4/2016; amended City Record 11/28/2017,
eff. 11/28/2017; amended City Record 8/21/2018, eff. 9/20/2018; amended City
Record 9/15/2023, eff. 10/15/2023; amended City Record 6/2/2025, eff. 7/2/2025)
§ 7-202 Employer Size.
   (a)   Employer size shall be determined based on the employer's total number
of employees nationwide. Employer size during a given calendar year shall be
determined by counting the highest total number of employees concurrently
employed at any point during the calendar year to date. For the purposes of
counting the number of employees concurrently employed:
      (1)   Part-time employees shall be considered employed each working day
of the calendar week;
      (2)   Employees jointly employed by more than one employer shall be
counted by each employer, whether or not their names appear on the employer's
payroll; and
      (3)   Employees on paid or unpaid leave, including safe/sick time, leaves
of absence, disciplinary suspension, or any other type of temporary absence,
shall be counted as long as the employer has a reasonable expectation that the
employee will later return to active employment.
   (b)   For employers that increase the number of employees during a calendar
year from fewer than five to between five to 99 employees:
      (1)   The duty to provide paid safe/sick time shall be prospective from
the date of the increase in the number of employees and shall not entitle an
employee to reimbursement for previously used unpaid safe/sick time.
      (2)   After the increase in the number of employees, an employer must
allow an employee to use, and receive pay for, up to 40 hours of accrued safe/
sick time, less the number of unpaid safe/sick time hours the employee had
previously used in that calendar year.
Example 1: Liz is hired by an employer with only one other employee on January
1, 2021. The employer has a frontloading policy, so Liz has 40 hours of unpaid
safe/sick time immediately available for use from the start of her employment.
Liz uses 10 hours of unpaid safe/sick time from January 1 to May 31, 2021,
bringing her accrual balance to 30 hours. On June 1, 2021, the employer brings
on five additional employees, so the employer is now required to provide each
employee with up to 40 hours of paid safe/sick time per year. If Liz uses any
additional safe/sick time in 2021, she must be paid for up to 30 hours of safe/
sick time used. The employer is not obligated to pay Liz for the 10 hours of
safe/sick time she used before June 1, 2021.
Example 2: Liz is hired by an employer with only one other employee on January
1, 2021. The employer has an accrual policy. Liz works approximately 30 hours
per week and accrues 20 hours of unpaid sick time between January and May 2021.
She uses 10 of those hours of unpaid sick time in May 2021, bringing her
accrual balance to 10 hours as of May 31, 2021. On June 1, 2021, the employer
brings on five additional employees, so the employer is now required to provide
each employee with up to 40 hours of paid safe/sick time per year. If Liz uses
any of the remaining 10 hours of safe/sick time she already accrued as of May
31, 2021, she must be paid for those 10 hours and any additional safe/sick time
she accrues and uses, up to the 40-hour per calendar year limits set forth in
subdivision (f) of 6 RCNY §
7-214. The employer is not obligated to pay Liz for the 10 hours of safe/sick
time she used before June 1, 2021.
   (c)   For employers that increase the number of employees during a calendar
year from 99 or fewer to 100 or more, an employee's right to use additional
paid safe/sick time up to 56 hours shall be prospective from the date of such
increase in the number of employees.
Example 1: An employer with a calendar year of January 1 - December 31 has 90
employees. Shane works 40 hours per week. She used 20 hours of safe/sick time
in 2020 and carried over 20 hours to 2021. In June 2021, the employer hired
several new employees, bringing the total headcount to 110. Shane has not used
safe/sick time in 2021, and had worked 1,050 hours between January 2021 and the
date the employee headcount went over 99 employees. She therefore has 55 hours
of safe/sick time available for immediate use: 35 hours accrued in 2021 (1050 /
30 = 35) plus the 20 hours she carried over from 2020 equals 55.
Example 2: In the same scenario, Shane used 40 hours of accrued safe/sick time
in May 2021, before her employer's headcount increased above 100. After her
employer's headcount increases in June 2021, Shane has 15 hours of safe/sick
time available for immediate use: 35 hours accrued in 2021 plus the 20 hours
carried over from 2020, less 40 hours used in 2021.
   (d)   Reductions in the number of employees working for an employer shall
not reduce employee safe/sick time entitlements under § 20-913(b) of the
Administrative Code until the following calendar year.
Example: An employer with a calendar year of January 1 - December 31 has four
employees. On April 1, 2021, the employer hires three new employees, bringing
the employer's total number of employees to seven. On November 1, 2021, the
employer lays off four employees, reducing the employer's total number of
employees to three. The employer must begin providing paid safe/sick time to
all employees on April 1, 2021. The employer must continue providing paid safe/
sick time to the three remaining employees through at least December 31, 2021,
the last day of the current calendar year.
(Amended City Record 2/3/2016, eff. 3/4/2016; amended City Record 8/21/2018,
eff. 9/20/2018; amended City Record 9/15/2023, eff. 10/15/2023)
§ 7-203 Employees.
   (a)   An employee, as defined by § 20-912 of the Administrative Code, is
"employed for hire within the City of New York" if the employee performs work,
including work performed by telecommuting, while the employee is physically
located in New York City, regardless of where the employer is located. An
employee who only performs work, including by telecommuting, while physically
located outside of New York City, is not "employed for hire within the City of
New York," even if the employer is located in New York City. As of September
30, 2020, hours worked within New York City also count towards an employee's
accrual of sick leave under New York Labor Law section 196-b.
   (b)   An employee with a primary work location outside of New York City is
"employed for hire within the City of New York" if they regularly perform, or
are expected to regularly perform, work in New York City during a calendar
year. For such an employee, only hours worked within New York City must count
toward the accrual of safe/sick time for the purpose of § 20-913(b) of the
Administrative Code.
Example 1: A retail business based in New Jersey with locations in both New
Jersey and New York City hires a new employee. The employee, who lives in New
Jersey, will work primarily at a New Jersey location but may be asked to cover
shifts in New York City when needed due to staffing shortages at those
locations. The employer estimates that some months, the employee will work one
to three six to eight-hour shifts in New York City, but that their New York
City hours will vary and some months the employee may not work in New York City
at all. This is work that the employer expects the employee to perform
regularly, so the employee is employed for hire within the City of New York for
the purposes of § 20-912 of the Administrative Code. The employee must accrue
one hour of safe/sick time for every 30 hours worked within New York City and
must be allowed to use their accrued hours for the reasons provided by § 20-914
of the Administrative Code when scheduled to work within New York City.
Example 2: An employee lives in Florida and works from home for a company based
in Manhattan. The employee is required to attend daylong meetings at the
Manhattan headquarters approximately twice a year. The employee is not
"employed for hire within the City of New York" under § 20-912.
Example 3: A custom cabinetry business based in Massachusetts is commissioned
by a New York City resident to build kitchen cabinets. After the cabinets are
completed at the company's Massachusetts studio, a Massachusetts-based employee
travels to New York City and spends eight hours installing them in the client's
residence. The employer does not currently expect the employee to go back to
New York City in the course of her employment within the remainder of the
calendar year. The employee is not "employed for hire within the City of New
York" under § 20-912.
Example 4: A construction business based in Nassau County does business both
within New York City and on Long Island. An employee works a total of 300 hours
for the employer at a site in Queens from June 1, 2021 to July 26, 2021. The
employee is employed for hire within the City of New York for the purposes of §
20-912 of the Administrative Code and accrued 10 hours of safe/sick time. The
employee continues working for the employer at a site on Long Island from July
27, 2021 to September 28, 2021, working a total of 450 hours during that
timeframe and accruing 15 hours of sick leave under section 196-b of the New
York Labor Law. On October 1, 2021, the employee is scheduled to report to work
on Long Island but is unable to do so due to illness. The employee is not
entitled to use sick time under § 20-914 of the Administrative Code at the time
of his illness because he was scheduled to report for work on Long Island.
However, the employee is covered by section 196-b of the New York Labor Law,
and has a total of 25 hours accrued and available for immediate use under
section 196-b from the time worked in New York City and Nassau County.
(Amended City Record 2/3/2016, eff. 3/4/2016; amended City Record 8/21/2018,
eff. 9/20/2018; amended City Record 9/15/2023, eff. 10/15/2023)
§ 7-204 Minimum Increments and Fixed Intervals for the Use of Safe/Sick Time
and Paid Prenatal Leave.
   (a)   Unless otherwise in conflict with state or federal law or regulations,
an employee may decide how much safe/sick time or paid prenatal leave to use,
provided however, that an employer may adopt a written policy, as set forth in
6 RCNY §
7-211, setting a minimum increment for the use of safe/sick time not to exceed
four hours per day, or one hour per day for the use of paid prenatal leave as
provided in labor law section 196-b(4-a), provided such minimum increment is
reasonable under the circumstances.
Example 1: An employer has a written policy setting a minimum increment of four
hours per day for use of safe/sick time. The employee has not yet accrued four
hours of time, but is entitled to use the time he or she has already accrued.
Under these circumstances, it would not be "reasonable under the circumstances"
for the employer to require the employee to use a minimum of four hours of
safe/sick time as the minimum increment.
Example 2: An employee is scheduled to work from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Mondays. She schedules a doctor's appointment for 9:00 a.m. on a Monday and
notifies her employer of her intent to use sick time and return to work the
same day. The employer's written sick time policies require a four-hour minimum
increment of sick time used per day. If she does not go to work before her
appointment, she should appear for work by 12:00 p.m.
   (b)   An employer may set fixed periods of 30 minutes or any smaller amount
of time for the use of accrued safe/sick time beyond the minimum increment
described in subdivision (a) of this section and may require fixed start times
for such intervals.
Example: The employee in Example 2 of subdivision (a) of this section arrives
to work at 12:17 p.m. Under her employer's written sick time policies,
employees must use sick time in half-hour intervals that start on the hour or
half-hour. The employer can require the employee to use four-and-a-half hours
of her accrued sick time and require her to begin work at 12:30 p.m. Similarly,
if the employee wanted to leave work at 8:40 a.m. to go to her 9:00 a.m.
doctor's appointment, the employer could require the employee to stop work at
8:30 a.m.
(Amended City Record 2/3/2016, eff. 3/4/2016; amended City Record 8/21/2018,
eff. 9/20/2018; amended City Record 9/15/2023, eff. 10/15/2023; amended City
Record 6/2/2025, eff. 7/2/2025)
§ 7-205 Employee Notification of Use of Safe/Sick Time and Paid Prenatal Leave.
   (a)   An employer may require an employee to provide reasonable notice of
the need to use safe/sick time or paid prenatal leave, provided the requirement
to provide notice and the method of providing notice are set forth in the
written policy required by 6 RCNY §
7-211.
   (b)   An employer that requires notice of the need to use safe/sick time or
paid prenatal leave where the need is not foreseeable shall provide a written
policy that contains reasonable procedures for the employee to provide notice
as soon as practicable. Examples of such procedures may include, but are not
limited to, instructing the employee to: (1) call a designated phone number at
which an employee can leave a message; (2) follow a uniform call-in procedure;
(3) send an email to a designated email address; (4) submit a leave request in
a scheduling software system, provided the employee has access to such system
on non-work time, and has been trained on and given written instructions on how
to use the system; or (5) use another reasonable and accessible means of
communication identified by the employer. Such procedures for employees to give
notice of the need to use safe/sick time or paid prenatal leave when the need
is not foreseeable may not include any requirement that an employee appear in
person at a worksite or deliver any document to the employer prior to using
safe/sick time or paid prenatal leave.
   (c)   In determining when notice is practicable in a given situation, an
employer must consider the individual facts and circumstances of the situation.
   (d)   An employer that requires notice of the need to use safe/sick time or
paid prenatal leave where the need is foreseeable shall have a written policy
that contains procedures for the employee to provide reasonable notice, which
may include any of the reasonable procedures set forth in 6 RCNY §
7-205(b). Such policy shall not require more than seven days' notice prior to
the date such safe/sick time is to begin. The employer may require that such
notice be in writing.
   (e)   A need is foreseeable when the employee is aware of the need to use
safe/sick time or paid prenatal leave seven days or more before such use.
Otherwise, the need is unforeseeable.
(Amended City Record 2/3/2016, eff. 3/4/2016; amended City Record 8/21/2018,
eff. 9/20/2018; amended City Record 9/15/2023, eff. 10/15/2023; amended City
Record 6/2/2025, eff. 7/2/2025)
§ 7-206 Documentation of Authorized Use of Safe/Sick Time and Paid Prenatal
Leave.
   (a)   When an employee's use of safe/sick time or paid prenatal leave
results in an absence of more than three consecutive work days, an employer may
require reasonable written documentation that the use was for a purpose
authorized under § 20-914(a) or (b) of the Administrative Code or labor law
section 196-b(4-a), respectively. For a use of sick time or paid prenatal
leave, written documentation signed by a licensed clinical social worker,
licensed mental health counselor, or other licensed health care provider
indicating the need for the amount of sick time or paid prenatal leave,
respectively, taken shall be considered reasonable documentation. For a use of
safe time, any documentation set forth in § 20-914(b)(2) indicating the need
for the amount of safe time taken shall be considered reasonable documentation.
Consistent with the requirements in §§ 20-914 and 20-921 of the Administrative
Code and section 196-b(5)(a) of the labor law, an employer cannot require
disclosure of details, except the dates the employee needed to use safe/sick
time or paid prenatal leave.
   (b)   "Work days" as used in this section and in § 20-914 of the
Administrative Code means the days or shifts the employee would have worked had
the employee not used safe/sick time or paid prenatal leave.
   (c)   If an employer requires an employee to provide reasonable written
documentation in accordance with subdivision (a) of this section, the employee
shall be allowed a minimum of seven days from the date he or she returns to
work to obtain such documentation. Unless otherwise required by law, an
employer must not require an employee to submit such documentation before
returning to work. If an employer requests or requires documentation for sick
time or paid prenatal leave and the licensed health care provider charges the
employee a fee for the provision of such documentation, such employer shall
reimburse the employee for such fee. If an employer requests or requires
documentation for safe time, such employer shall reimburse an employee for all
reasonable costs or expenses incurred for the purpose of obtaining such
documentation for the employer.
   (d)   If an employee provides reasonable written documentation in accordance
with subdivision (a) of this section, an employer may not require an employee
to obtain additional documentation indicating the need for safe/sick time or
paid prenatal leave in the amount used by the employee.
   (e)   An employer that requires employees to provide reasonable written
documentation for uses of safe/sick time or paid prenatal leave in accordance
with subdivision (a) of this section must set forth this requirement, along
with the types of reasonable written documentation the employer will accept and
instructions on how employees can submit the documentation to the employer, in
the written safe/sick time policy required by 6 RCNY §
7-211.
   (f)   An employer shall not require documentation that the use of safe/sick
time or paid prenatal leave was for a purpose authorized under § 20-914 of the
Administrative Code or labor law section 196-b(4-a) if the use of such safe/
sick time or paid prenatal leave lasts three or fewer consecutive work days.
(Amended City Record 2/3/2016, eff. 3/4/2016; amended City Record 8/21/2018,
eff. 9/20/2018; amended City Record 9/15/2023, eff. 10/15/2023; amended City
Record 6/2/2025, eff. 7/2/2025)
§ 7-207 Notice of Safe/Sick Time Accruals and Use of Safe/Sick Time and Paid
Prenatal Leave on Pay Statement.
   (a)   The pay statement or other form of written documentation required by §
20-919(c) of the Administrative Code must inform the employee of the amount of
safe/sick time accrued and used during the relevant pay period. It must also
inform the employee of the total balance of the employee's accrued safe/sick
time available for use. As set forth in 6 RCNY §
7-214(f), an employee's accrued safe/sick time balance may exceed the amount of
safe/sick time the employee has available for use in a calendar year. When this
occurs, the pay statement or other form of written documentation must inform
the employee of the amount of safe/sick time available for use in the calendar
year. For each pay period that an employee uses paid prenatal leave, the
employer must inform the employee of the amount of paid prenatal leave used
during the relevant pay period and the total balance of paid prenatal leave
available for use, either on the pay statement or other form of written
documentation required by § 20-919(c) or in separate written documentation.
   (b)   If an employer uses an electronic system to issue pay statements or
other documentation related to safe/sick time or paid prenatal leave, the
employer may comply with the requirements of § 20-919(c) of the Administrative
Code and subdivision a of this section by (i) electronically alerting the
employee each pay period to the availability of the required information; (ii)
making the content required by 6 RCNY §
7-212(b)(4) readily accessible by the employee outside of the workplace within
the electronic system; and (iii) maintaining accrual, use, and balance
information for any past pay period in the electronic system such that it is
readily accessible to the employee outside of the workplace.
(Amended City Record 2/3/2016, eff. 3/4/2016; amended City Record 8/21/2018,
eff. 9/20/2018; amended City Record 9/15/2023, eff. 10/15/2023; amended City
Record 6/2/2025, eff. 7/2/2025)
§ 7-208 Rate of Pay for Safe/Sick Time and Paid Prenatal Leave.
   (a)   An employer shall pay an employee for paid safe/sick or paid prenatal
leave time at the employee's regular rate of pay at the time the paid safe/sick
time or paid prenatal leave is taken, provided that the rate of pay shall not
be less than the highest applicable rate of pay to which the employee would be
entitled pursuant to section 652 of the New York State Labor Law, or any other
applicable federal, state, or local law, rule, contract, or agreement.
   (b)   If the employee uses paid safe/sick time or paid prenatal leave during
hours that would have been designated as overtime, the employer is not required
to pay the overtime rate of pay. The employer may only deduct the number of
hours of safe/sick time or paid prenatal leave actually used by the employee
from the employee's safe/sick time accruals or bank of paid prenatal leave,
respectively, regardless of whether those hours would have been classified as
straight-time or overtime hours.
   (c)   An employee is not entitled to compensation for lost tips or
gratuities, provided, however, that an employer must pay an employee whose
regular rate of pay is based in whole or in part on tips or gratuities at least
the highest applicable rate of pay to which the employee would be entitled
pursuant to section 652 of the New York State Labor Law, or any other
applicable federal, state, or local law, rule, contract, or agreement, without
allowing for any tip credit or tip allowance, as provided in § 20-913(a)(1) of
the Administrative Code.
   (d)   Unless a higher applicable rate applies pursuant to any other law,
rule, regulation, contract, or agreement, when employees are paid on a
commission (whether base wage plus commission or commission only), the hourly
rate of pay shall be the base wage or minimum wage, whichever is greater.
   (e)   Unless a higher applicable rate applies pursuant to any other law,
rule, regulation, contract, or agreement, when an employer pays a flat rate of
pay for work performed, regardless of the number of hours actually worked, an
employee's hourly rate of pay shall be based on the most recent hourly rate
paid to the employee for the applicable pay period, calculated by adding
together the employee's total earnings, including tips, commissions, and
supplements, for the most recent work week in which no safe/sick time or other
leave was taken and dividing that sum by the number of hours spent performing
work during such work week or 40 hours, whichever amount of hours is less.
   (f)   Unless a higher applicable rate applies pursuant to any other law,
rule, regulation, contract, or agreement, if an employee performs more than one
job for the same employer or the employee's rate of pay fluctuates for a single
job, the rate of pay shall be the rate or rates of pay that the employee would
have been paid during the time the employee used the safe/sick time or paid
prenatal leave.
   (g)   The fact that an employer pays cash in lieu of supplements to an
employee does not relieve the employer of the requirements of the Earned Safe
and Sick Time Act.
   (h)   Under no circumstance can the employer pay the employee less than the
minimum wage for paid safe/sick time or paid prenatal leave.
(Amended City Record 2/3/2016, eff. 3/4/2016; amended City Record 8/21/2018,
eff. 9/20/2018; amended City Record 9/15/2023, eff. 10/15/2023; amended City
Record 6/2/2025, eff. 7/2/2025)
§ 7-209 Payment of Safe/Sick Time and Paid Prenatal Leave.
   (a)   Safe/sick time or paid prenatal leave must be paid no later than the
payday for the next regular payroll period beginning after the safe/sick time
or paid prenatal leave was used by the employee.
   (b)   If the employer requires reasonable written documentation in
accordance with 6 RCNY §
7-206 or confirmation of use of safe/sick time or paid prenatal leave pursuant
to § 20-914(d) of the Administrative Code or 6 RCNY §
7-216, the employer is not required to pay safe/sick time or paid prenatal
leave until the employee has provided such documentation or confirmation,
except that an employer shall not withhold payment of safe/sick time or paid
prenatal leave when the required documentation is unattainable by the employee
due to associated costs.
   (c)   If an employer requests or requires documentation and the employee has
provided to the employer such documentation and proof of the fee or reasonable
costs incurred for the purpose of obtaining such documentation, the employer
shall reimburse the employee for such fee or reasonable costs in accordance
with subdivision (c) of 6 RCNY §
7-206 no later than the payday for the next regular payroll period beginning
after the provision of such proof.
   (d)   An employer that withholds payment of safe/sick time or paid prenatal
leave in accordance with subdivision (b) of this section must set forth this
policy and instructions on how employees can submit requests for reimbursement
and proof of fees or costs to the employer in the written safe/sick time policy
required by 6 RCNY §
7-211.
(Amended City Record 2/3/2016, eff. 3/4/2016; amended City Record 8/21/2018,
eff. 9/20/2018; amended City Record 9/15/2023, eff. 10/15/2023; amended City
Record 6/2/2025, eff. 7/2/2025)
§ 7-210 Employer's Sale of Business or Transfer of Employees.
   (a)   Business sales, transfers in corporate ownership, or changes in
subcontracting relationships between corporate entities shall not impact
employees' safe/sick time balances. When such changes occur, an employee will
retain and may use all accrued safe/sick time if the employee continues to
perform work within the City of New York for the successor employer or
contractor. Failure to properly transfer an employee's accrued safe/sick time
to a successor employer constitutes a policy or practice of not providing or
refusing to allow the use of accrued safe/sick time in violation of § 20-913 of
the Administrative Code. The original and successor employer and any joint
employer(s) are individually and jointly liable for the satisfaction of all
penalties and employee relief imposed for the violation of § 20-913, regardless
of any agreement between the original and successor employer to the contrary.
Example: Company A is in the business of operating a call center in Brooklyn.
Company B, a staffing agency, provides Company A with workers to answer its
phones. The phone operators are nominally employees of Company B. After one
year of answering Company A's phones as an employee of Company B, a phone
operator is informed that Company A has shifted its business to Company C, and
so her nominal employer will now be Company C. Her job duties and the location
of her work do not change. The phone operator's accrued safe/sick time must be
transferred to Company C. If this does not occur, Company A, Company B, and
Company C are jointly and severally liable for the violation of § 20-913 of the
Administrative Code.
   (b)   If the successor employer falls within a smaller employer size
threshold from the former employer, the employee is entitled to use and be
compensated for unused safe/sick time accrued while working for the former
employer, until such safe/sick time is exhausted.
Example: Fast Food LLC is a franchisee of a national fast food chain with 500
employees in New York City. Fast Food LLC frontloads employees with 56 hours of
safe/sick time per calendar year. Quick Pizza LLC, a new company seeking to
enter the fast food franchising market in Brooklyn, acquires a subset of Fast
Food LLC's locations in August 2021. After the acquisition, Quick Pizza LLC has
80 employees. Jimmy, an employee at one of the acquired locations, had used 46
hours of safe/sick time in 2021 prior to the transfer. He is entitled to use
and be compensated for 10 hours of safe/sick time he had remaining in his safe/
sick time balance at the time of the transfer. If Jimmy does not use any of the
10 hours of his remaining safe/sick time at the end of the calendar year, his
employer must allow him to carry the unused hours over to the next calendar
year pursuant to § 20-913(h) of the Administrative Code.
   (c)   A successor employer must provide employees with its written safe/sick
time policies at the time of sale or acquisition, or as soon as practicable
thereafter, which shall include a policy that complies with this section.
(Amended City Record 2/3/2016, eff. 3/4/2016; amended City Record 8/21/2018,
eff. 9/20/2018; amended City Record 9/15/2023, eff. 10/15/2023)
§ 7-211 Employer's Written Safe/Sick Time and Paid Prenatal Leave Policies.
   (a)   Every employer shall maintain written safe/sick time and paid prenatal
leave policies in a single writing and follow such written safe/sick time and
paid prenatal leave policies except as allowed in subdivision (d) of this
section.
   (b)   Every employer must distribute its written safe/sick time and paid
prenatal leave policies to employees personally upon commencement of
employment, within 14 days of the effective date of any changes to the policy,
and upon request by the employee.
   (c)   An employer’s written safe/sick time and paid prenatal leave policies
must meet or exceed all of the requirements of the Earned Safe and Sick Time
Act and this subchapter and must address the following:
      (1)   The employer’s method of calculating safe/sick time as follows:
         (i)   If an employer provides employees with an amount of safe/sick
time that meets or exceeds the requirements of the Earned Safe and Sick Time
Act on the first day of employment and on the first day of each new calendar
year, which for the purposes of this section is defined as “frontloaded safe/
sick time”, then the employer’s written safe/sick time policy must specify the
amount of frontloaded safe/sick time to be provided and that such frontloaded
time is immediately available for use;
         (ii)   If the employer does not apply frontloaded safe/sick time, then
the employer’s written safe/sick time policy must specify that accrual of safe/
sick time starts at commencement of employment, the rate at which an employee
accrues safe/sick time and that an employee may use safe/sick time as it
accrues;
      (2)   The availability of a separate bank of 20 hours of paid prenatal
leave during any 52-week calendar period, in accordance with 6 RCNY §
7-216.
      (3)   The employer’s policies regarding the use of safe/sick time and
paid prenatal leave, including any limitations or conditions the employer
places on the use of safe/sick time or paid prenatal leave, such as:
         (i)   Any requirement that an employee provide notice of a need to use
safe/sick time or paid prenatal leave and the procedures for doing so in
accordance with 6 RCNY §
7-205;
         (ii)   Any requirement for reasonable written documentation or
confirmation of the use of safe/sick time or paid prenatal leave in accordance
with §§ 20-914(a)(2), 20-914(b)(2), or 20-914(d) of the Administrative Code and
6 RCNY §§
7-206 and
7-216, and the employer’s policy regarding any consequences of an employee’s
failure or delay in providing such documentation or confirmation;
         (iii)   Any reasonable minimum increment or fixed period for the use
of accrued safe/sick time or paid prenatal leave as set forth in 6 RCNY §
7-204;
         (iv)   Any policy on discipline for employee misuse of safe/sick time
or paid prenatal leave under 6 RCNY §
7-215; and
         (v)   A statement that the employer will not ask the employee to
provide details about the medical condition that led the employee to use sick
time or paid prenatal leave, or the personal situation that led the employee to
use safe time, and that any information the employer receives about the
employee’s use of safe/sick time or paid prenatal leave will be kept
confidential and not disclosed to anyone without the employee’s written
permission or as required by law.
      (4)   The employer’s policy regarding carry-over of unused safe/sick time
at the end of an employer’s calendar year in accordance with § 20-913(h) of the
Administrative Code; and,
      (5)   If an employer uses a term other than “safe/sick time” or “safe and
sick time” to describe leave provided by the employer to meet the requirements
of the Earned Safe and Sick Time Act and this subchapter, the employer’s policy
must state that such leave may be used by an employee for any of the purposes
set forth in the Earned Safe and Sick Time Act and this subchapter without any
condition prohibited by the Earned Safe and Sick Time Act or this subchapter.
Terms used to describe such leave may include, but are not necessarily limited
to, “paid time off” (“PTO”), vacation time, personal days, or days of rest.
   (d)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prevent an employer from making
exceptions to its written safe/sick time and paid prenatal leave policies for
individual employees that are more generous to the employee than the terms of
the employer’s written policy.
   (e)   Requirements relating to an employer’s additional and separate
obligation to provide employees with a Notice of Rights under the Earned Safe
and Sick Time Act are set forth in § 20-919 of the Administrative Code and 6
RCNY §
7-107. An employer may not distribute the Notice of Rights required by § 20-919
of the Administrative Code or any other department writing in lieu of
distributing its own written safe/sick time and paid prenatal leave policies as
required by this section.
   (f)   An employer that has not provided to the employee a copy of its
written safe/sick time and paid prenatal leave policies along with any forms or
procedures required by the employer related to the use of safe/sick time or
paid prenatal leave shall not deny permission to use safe/sick time or paid
prenatal leave, payment of safe/sick time or paid prenatal leave, or take
adverse actions as set forth in § 20-918 of the Administrative Code against the
employee based on non-compliance with such a policy.
(Amended City Record 2/3/2016, eff. 3/4/2016; amended City Record 11/28/2017,
eff. 11/28/2017; amended City Record 8/21/2018, eff. 9/20/2018; amended City
Record 9/15/2023, eff. 10/15/2023; amended City Record 6/2/2025, eff. 7/2/2025)
§ 7-212 Employer Records.
   (a)   Employers must create and retain records demonstrating compliance with
the requirements of the Earned Safe and Sick Time Act, including records of any
policies required, pursuant to this subchapter, for a period of three years
unless otherwise required by any other law, rule or regulation.
   (b)   An employer must maintain, in an accessible format, contemporaneous,
true, and accurate records that show, for each employee:
      (1)   The employee's name, address, phone number, date(s) of start of
employment, date(s) of end of employment (if any), rate of pay, and whether the
employee is exempt from the overtime requirements of New York State labor laws
and regulations;
      (2)   The hours worked each week by the employee, unless the employee is
exempt from the overtime requirements of New York State labor laws and
regulations and has a regular work week of 40 hours or more;
      (3)   The date and time of each instance of safe/sick time or paid
prenatal leave used by the employee and the amount paid for each instance;
      (4)   For each pay period, the amount of safe/sick time accrued and used
during the pay period, the employee’s total balance of accrued safe/sick time,
the amount of accrued safe/sick time available for use by the employee, the
amount of paid prenatal leave used during the pay period, and the employee’s
total balance of paid prenatal leave;
      (5)   Any change in the material terms of employment specific to the
employee; and
      (6)   The date that the Notice of Rights as set forth in § 20-919 of the
Administrative Code was provided to the employee and proof that the Notice of
Rights was received by the employee.
   (c)   If the department issues a written request for information or records,
an employer shall provide the department with such information or records, upon
appropriate notice, at the department's office. Alternately, an employer shall
provide the department with access to such information or records upon
appropriate notice and at a mutually agreeable time of day at the employer's
place of business.
   (d)   "Appropriate notice" shall mean 14 days' written notice, unless the
employer agrees to a lesser amount of time, the department's request for the
information or records is a second or subsequent request made to the same
employer during the same investigation or case as the first request, or the
department has reason to believe that:
      (1)   the employer will destroy or falsify records;
      (2)   the employer is closing, selling or transferring its business,
disposing of assets or is about to declare bankruptcy;
      (3)   the employer is the subject of a government investigation or
enforcement action or proceeding related to wages and hours, unemployment
insurance, workers' compensation, discrimination, or any matter under the
jurisdiction of the department; or
      (4)   more immediate access to records is necessary to prevent
retaliation against employees.
   (e)   The department will make two attempts by letter, email or telephone to
arrange a mutually agreeable time of day for the employer to provide access to
its records in accordance with subdivision(c) of this section. If these
attempts are not successful, the department may set a time to access records at
the employer's place of business during regular business hours, upon two days'
notice.
(Amended City Record 2/3/2016, eff. 3/4/2016; amended City Record 11/28/2017,
eff. 11/28/2017; amended City Record 8/21/2018, eff. 9/20/2018; amended City
Record 9/15/2023, eff. 10/15/2023; amended City Record 6/2/2025, eff. 7/2/2025)
§ 7-213 Enforcement and Penalties.
   (a)   A finding that an employer has an official or unofficial policy or
practice of not providing or refusing to allow the use of safe time or sick
time as required under the Earned Safe and Sick Time Act constitutes a
violation of § 20-913 of the Administrative Code for each and every employee
affected by the policy and will be subject to penalties as provided in § 20-924
(e) of the Code.
   (b)   For the purpose of § 20-924(d)(v) of the Administrative Code, an
employee shall be considered "covered by an employer's official or unofficial
policy or practice of not providing or refusing to allow the use of accrued
safe/sick time in violation of section 20-913" if they were employed by the
employer during the time period that the official or unofficial policy or
practice that violated § 20-913 was in effect. If the unlawful policy or
practice was in effect for multiple calendar years, a separate violation of §
20-913 shall be considered to have occurred for each calendar year the policy
or practice remained in effect.
   (c)   There shall be a reasonable inference that the employer, as a matter
of official or unofficial policy or practice, does not provide or refuses to
allow the use of accrued safe/sick time in violation of § 20-913 of the
Administrative Code, if an employer:
      (1)   Fails to maintain or distribute a written safe/sick time policy as
required by 6 RCNY §
7-211; and
      (2)   Fails to maintain adequate records of employees' accrued safe/sick
time use and balances as required under 6 RCNY §
7-212.
   (d)   Additional evidence that an employer maintains a policy or practice of
not providing or refusing to allow the use of accrued safe/sick time may
include, but is not limited to:
      (i)   Unlawful barriers to employees' use of safe/sick time, whether
written or unwritten, such as requirements that workers find replacement
workers to cover shifts missed due to safe/sick time, unreasonable notice
requirements, requirements that workers provide medical documentation of
absences of three consecutive days or fewer, or other unlawful limits on use;
      (ii)   Probation periods, waiting periods, blackout days, or other
measures that prevent employees from using safe/sick time as it is accrued;
      (iii)   Prohibitions on use of safe/sick time for purposes authorized by
law, whether written or unwritten, such as prohibitions on use of safe/sick
time for leave to care for a family member pursuant to § 20-914(a)(1)(b) of the
Administrative Code;
      (iv)   Failure to pay employees entitled to paid safe/sick time for time
off due to safe/sick time authorized reasons;
      (v)   Failure to provide for the accrual of safe/sick time at the rate
required by § 20-913(b) of the Administrative Code;
      (vi)   Failure to properly carry over safe/sick time hours at the end of
an employer's calendar year, if the employer does not properly utilize a
frontloading system;
      (vii)   Official or unofficial absence control policies that penalize the
use of safe/sick time, such as points systems that do not differentiate between
safe/sick time absences and other absences; or
      (viii)   Failure to inform employees that safe/sick time is available.
Example 1: An employer with 83 employees does not maintain or distribute a
written safe/sick time policy and does not provide employees with paystubs or
other written documentation showing their safe/sick time accruals. Employees
may take time off due to illness on an ad hoc basis and are paid for this time
off at their supervisors' discretion. As a result, some employees are paid for
sick time and others are not. The employer has a policy or practice of not
providing or refusing to allow the use of accrued safe/sick time in violation
of § 20-913 of the Administrative Code. Each employee is entitled to relief in
the amount of $500 per calendar year the unlawful policy or practice remains in
effect under § 20-924(d)(v) of the Administrative Code.
Example 2: An employer with 10 employees maintains a written safe/sick time
policy that provides that covered employees will have "at least 40 hours of
sick leave available at the beginning of a given year." However, the policy is
not distributed to all employees. The employer does not provide employees with
paystubs or other written documentation showing their safe/sick time accruals.
Employees are generally only paid for sick leave if they provide medical
documentation of the reason for their absence, regardless of the length of the
absence. This employer has a policy or practice of not providing or refusing to
allow the use of accrued safe/sick time in violation of § 20-913 of the
Administrative Code, and each employee is entitled to relief in the amount of
$500 per calendar year the unlawful policy or practice remains in effect under
§ 20-924(d)(v) of the Code.
   (e)   If an employer, as a matter of official or unofficial policy or
practice, does not provide or refuses to allow the use of accrued safe/sick
time in violation of § 20-913 of the Administrative Code, the relief granted to
each and every employee affected by the policy or practice must include
application of the number of hours of safe/sick time the employee should have
accrued to the employee's safe/sick time balance, provided that such balance
does not exceed two times the maximum number of hours available for use in a
calendar year, in addition to monetary relief in the amount of $500 per
employee per calendar year the policy or practice was in effect, as provided in
§ 20-924(d)(v).
   (f)   For the purposes of this section, an employer's calendar year shall be
the 12-month period from January 1 through December 31, unless the employer has
determined a different calendar year, uses this calendar year in its
administration of its safe/sick time policy, and has communicated this to
employees in its written policy and in the notice required by § 20-919 of the
Administrative Code.
   (g)   Requirements relating to paid prenatal leave under this subchapter
will be enforced in the manner set forth in subdivisions a, b, and c of § 20-
924 of the Administrative Code.
   (h)   For a violation of one of the paid prenatal leave requirements under
this subchapter, an employee or former employee shall be entitled to the relief
set forth in sections 198, 215, 218, and 219 of the Labor Law, including but
not limited to:
      (1)   the full amount of any underpayment of wages owed pursuant to this
subchapter and interest at the rate of interest then in effect as prescribed by
the superintendent of financial services pursuant to section fourteen-a of the
banking law per annum from the date of the underpayment to the date of the
payment;
      (2)   liquidated damages up to one hundred percent of the total amount of
wages found to be due, unless the employer proves a good faith basis for
believing that its underpayment of wages was in compliance with the law; and
      (3)   for prohibited retaliation, all appropriate relief, including
injunctive relief, liquidated damages not more than twenty thousand dollars,
rehiring or reinstatement to a former position or an equivalent position, and
an award of lost compensation or an award of front pay in lieu of reinstatement
and an award of lost compensation.
   (i)   For a violation of one of the paid prenatal leave requirements under
this subchapter, an employer or person shall be liable for the penalties set
forth in sections 197, 215, and 218 of the labor law, including but not limited
to:
      (1)   for prohibited retaliation, a civil penalty of not less than one
thousand nor more than ten thousand dollars; and
      (2)   for underpayment of wages, a civil penalty of five hundred dollars
for each failure to pay wages owed.
(Amended City Record 2/3/2016, eff. 3/4/2016; amended City Record 8/21/2018,
eff. 9/20/2018; amended City Record 9/15/2023, eff. 10/15/2023; amended City
Record 6/2/2025, eff. 7/2/2025)
§ 7-214 Accrual, Hours Worked, Hours Used and Carry Over.
   (a)   If an employee is scheduled and available to work for an on-call shift
and is compensated for the scheduled time regardless of whether the employee
works, the scheduled time constitutes hours worked for the purposes of accrual
under the Earned Safe and Sick Time Act.
   (b)   For employees who are paid on a piecework basis, accrual of safe/sick
time is measured by the actual length of time spent performing work.
   (c)   For employees who are paid on a commission basis, accrual of safe/sick
time is measured by the actual length of time spent performing work.
   (d)   Per diem employees may use safe/sick time or paid prenatal leave for
hours they were scheduled to work or for hours they would have worked absent a
need to use safe/sick time or paid prenatal leave. For per diem employees or
employees with indeterminate shift lengths (e.g., a shift whose length is
defined by business needs), an employer shall base the hours of safe/sick time
or paid prenatal leave used upon the hours worked by the replacement employee
for the same shift. If this method is not possible, the hours of safe/sick time
or paid prenatal leave must be based on the hours worked by the employee when
the employee most recently worked the same shift in the past.
   (e)   An employer shall base the amount of safe/sick time or paid prenatal
leave used upon the amount of time the employee would have worked on the day
they were absent for a covered reason.
   (f)   An employee of an employer with ninety-nine or fewer employees may
carry over up to 40 hours of unused safe/sick time from one calendar year to
the next, and an employee of an employer with one hundred or more employees may
carry over up to 56 hours of unused safe/sick time from one calendar year to
the next, unless the employer has a policy of paying employees for unused safe/
sick time at the end of the calendar year in which such time is accrued and
providing the employee with an amount of paid safe/sick time that meets or
exceeds the requirements of the Earned Safe and Sick Time Act for such employee
for the immediately subsequent calendar year on the first day of such year in
accordance with § 20-913(h) of the Administrative Code. Regardless of the
number of hours an employee carried over from the previous calendar year, an
employer with ninety-nine or fewer employees is only required to allow
employees to accrue up to 40 additional hours of safe/sick time in a calendar
year, and an employer with one hundred or more employees is only required to
allow employees to accrue up to 56 additional hours of safe/sick time in each
calendar year. If an employee's safe/sick time balance exceeds 40 or 56 hours
in a single calendar year, as applicable, an employer is only required to allow
the employee to use up to 40 or 56 hours in such calendar year.
Example 1: An employee of an employer with 50 employees accrues 40 hours of
safe/sick time in calendar year one and uses 20 hours of safe/sick time in
calendar year one. She carries over 20 hours from calendar year one to calendar
year two, accrues 40 hours in calendar year two, and does not use any hours in
calendar year two. Her safe/sick time balance at the end of calendar year two
is 60 hours (20 hours carried over from calendar year one plus 40 hours accrued
in calendar year two). She may carry over 40 of those 60 hours into calendar
year three and accrue another 40 hours in calendar year three. However, she may
only use 40 hours in calendar year three.
Example 2: An employee of an employer with 300 employees accrues 56 hours of
safe/sick time in calendar year one and uses six hours of safe/sick time in
calendar year one. She carries over 50 hours from calendar year one to calendar
year two, accrues 56 hours in calendar year two, and does not use any hours in
calendar year two. Her safe/sick time balance at the end of calendar year two
is 106 hours (50 hours carried over from calendar year one plus 56 hours
accrued in calendar year two). She may carry over 56 of those 106 hours into
calendar year three and accrue another 56 hours in calendar year three.
However, she may only use 56 hours in calendar year three.
   (g)   Employee accrual of safe/sick time must account for all time worked,
regardless of whether time worked is less than a 30-hour increment. For the
purposes of calculating accrual for time worked in increments of less than 30
hours, employers may round accrued safe/sick time to the nearest five minutes,
or to the nearest one-tenth or quarter of an hour, provided that it will not
result, over a period of time, in a failure to provide the proper accrual of
safe/sick time to employees for all the time they have actually worked.
(Added City Record 2/3/2016, eff. 3/4/2016; amended City Record 8/21/2018, eff.
9/20/2018; amended City Record 9/15/2023, eff. 10/15/2023; amended City Record
6/2/2025, eff. 7/2/2025)
§ 7-215 Employee Abuse of Safe/Sick Time or Paid Prenatal Leave.
   (a)   An employer may take disciplinary action, up to and including
termination, against an employee who:
      (1)   uses safe/sick time provided under the Earned Safe and Sick Time
Act for purposes other than those described in §§ 20-914(a) and 20-914(b) of
the Administrative Code; or
      (2)   uses paid prenatal leave provided under 6 RCNY §
7-216 for purposes other than those described in section 196-b(4-a) of the
labor law.
   (b)   Indications of abuse of safe/sick time or paid prenatal leave may
include, but are not limited to a pattern of: (1) use of unscheduled safe/sick
time or paid prenatal leave on or adjacent to weekends, regularly scheduled
days off, holidays, vacation or pay day, (2) taking scheduled safe/sick time or
paid prenatal leave on days when other leave has been denied, and (3) taking
safe/sick time or paid prenatal leave on days when the employee is scheduled to
work a shift or perform duties perceived as undesirable.
(Added City Record 2/3/2016, eff. 3/4/2016; amended City Record 8/21/2018, eff.
9/20/2018; amended City Record 9/15/2023, eff. 10/15/2023; amended City Record
6/2/2025, eff. 7/2/2025)
§ 7-216 Paid Prenatal Leave.
   (a)   All employers subject to the requirements of chapter 8 of title 20 of
the Administrative Code are required to comply with the requirements for paid
prenatal leave set forth in subdivisions 4-a, 7, and 10, and paragraph (a) of
subdivision 5 of section 196-b of the labor law.
   (b)   In addition to the safe/sick time that employers must provide pursuant
to subdivision b of § 20-913 of the Administrative Code, every employer,
regardless of employer size, must allow an employee to use, and receive pay
for, up to 20 hours of paid prenatal leave during any 52-week calendar period.
   (c)   An employer must provide paid prenatal leave when an employee
communicates to the employer that the employee needs time off for health care
services to be received by such employee during their pregnancy or related to
such pregnancy, unless an employee specifically requests to use other leave in
lieu of paid prenatal leave. Unless otherwise in conflict with state or federal
law or regulations, an employer shall not require an employee to use other
leave in lieu of paid prenatal leave, exhaust other leave before using paid
prenatal leave, or use or exhaust paid prenatal leave before using other leave.
An employer shall not request or require that an employee disclose such
employee’s medical condition or the nature of the health care services as a
condition of providing paid prenatal leave.
   (d)   Consistent with § 20-915 of the Administrative Code, upon mutual
consent of the employee and the employer, an employee’s schedule may be changed
in lieu of using paid prenatal leave, and an employer shall not require an
employee, as a condition of taking paid prenatal leave, to work additional
hours to make up for the original hours for which such employee used paid
prenatal leave or to search for or find a replacement employee to cover the
hours during which the employee uses paid prenatal leave.
(Added City Record 6/2/2025, eff. 7/2/2025)
Subchapter C: Transportation Benefits
§ 7-301 Definitions.
   As used in this chapter and, where applicable, in the Transportation
Benefits Law, the following terms have the following meanings:
   "Chain business" means a group of establishments that share a common owner
or principal who owns a majority of each establishment where such
establishments (i) engage in the same business or (ii) operate pursuant to
franchise agreements with the same franchisor as defined in general business
law section 681.
   "Commuter highway vehicle" means a "commuter highway vehicle" as such term
is defined in § 132(f)(5)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code.
   "Cure period" means the ninety-day period immediately following a finding of
a first violation.
   "Department" means the Department of Consumer Affairs of the City of New
York.
   "Employee" means an "employee," "manual worker," "railroad worker,"
"commission salesman," or "clerical or other worker" as such terms are defined
in § 190 of the New York State Labor Law. "Employee" does not include partners,
sole proprietors, independent contractors, or two-percent shareholders of S-
corporations.
   "Employer" means an "employer" as such term is defined in § 190 of the New
York State Labor Law and that employs twenty or more full-time employees in New
York City. The common owner or principal of a chain business shall be
considered the employer of the full-time employees of such chain business.
   "First violation" means the first finding by the administrative tribunal
that a particular employer has violated the Transportation Benefits Law since
July 1, 2016.
   "Full-time employee" means an employee who has worked an average of 30 hours
or more per week in the most recent four weeks as of any date of counting, any
portion of which was in New York City, for a single employer.
   "Earnings" shall have the same meaning as the term "gross income" as used in
§ 132 of the Internal Revenue Code.
   "Month" means an employer's regularly established fiscal month.
   "Recidivist violation" means any new finding by the administrative tribunal
that a particular employer has violated the Transportation Benefits Law, after
the first finding by the administrative tribunal that the employer had violated
the Transportation Benefits Law since July 1, 2016.
   "Subsequent violation" means each continuous thirty-day period after the
expiration of the cure period, or after the finding of a recidivist violation
by the administrative tribunal, in which the employer has not demonstrated to
the department's satisfaction that it is complying with the Transportation
Benefits Law.
   "Temporary help firm" means an employer that recruits, hires and supplies
employees to perform work or services for another organization to: (i) support
or supplement the other organization's workforce; (ii) provide assistance in
special work situations including, but not limited to, employee absences, skill
shortages or seasonal workloads; or (iii) perform special assignments or
projects.
   "Transportation Benefits Law" means Chapter 9 of Title 20 of the
Administrative Code of the City of New York.
   "Transportation fringe benefits" means qualified transportation fringe
benefits, other than qualified parking, that may be purchased using pre-tax
earnings in accordance with § 132 of the Internal Revenue Code.
   "Week" means an employer's regularly established payroll week.
(Added City Record 11/18/2015, eff. 1/1/2016; amended City Record 8/8/2016,
eff. 9/7/2016; amended City Record 8/21/2018, eff. 9/20/2018)
§ 7-302 Determination of Size of Employer.
   (a)   An employer's number of full-time employees is determined by
calculating the average number of full-time employees for the most recent
consecutive three- month period, provided that for an employer that has
operated for less than three months, the number of full-time employees is
determined by calculating the average number of full-time employees per week
for the period of time in which the employer has been in operation.
   (b)   Full-time employees at all of an employer's or a chain business's
locations in New York City shall be counted in determining the number of full-
time employees of the employer.
(Added City Record 11/18/2015, eff. 1/1/2016; amended City Record 8/8/2016,
eff. 9/7/2016; amended City Record 8/21/2018, eff. 9/20/2018)
§ 7-303 Temporary Help Firms.
   (a)   Where a temporary help firm supplies a full-time employee to another
organization, the temporary help firm shall be the employer of the full-time
employee for purposes of the Transportation Benefits Law and must comply with
its provisions, regardless of the size of the other organization.
   (b)   To determine the number of hours worked each week by an employee
working for a temporary help firm, the employer must aggregate the number of
hours worked by the employee in the most recent four weeks at all placements.
(Added City Record 11/18/2015, eff. 1/1/2016; amended City Record 8/8/2016,
eff. 9/7/2016; amended City Record 8/21/2018, eff. 9/20/2018)
§ 7-304 Employee Eligibility.
   (a)   An employer must offer its full-time employees the opportunity to use
pre-tax earnings to purchase transportation fringe benefits by January 1, 2016,
or four weeks after such employee's commencement of employment as a full-time
employee of the employer, whichever is later.
   (b)   If an employer's work force is reduced to fewer than 20 full-time
employees, the employer must continue to offer the opportunity to use pre-tax
earnings to purchase transportation fringe benefits to full-time employees who
were employer's full-time employees before the work force was reduced.
(Added City Record 11/18/2015, eff. 1/1/2016; amended City Record 8/8/2016,
eff. 9/7/2016; amended City Record 8/21/2018, eff. 9/20/2018)
§ 7-305 Maximum Deductions.
   Employers must offer full-time employees the opportunity to use the maximum
amount of pre-tax earnings permitted under federal law for the purchase of
transportation fringe benefits.
(Added City Record 11/18/2015, eff. 1/1/2016; amended City Record 8/8/2016,
eff. 9/7/2016; amended City Record 8/21/2018, eff. 9/20/2018)
§ 7-306 Recordkeeping Requirements.
   Employers must retain records for two years sufficient to demonstrate (i)
that each full-time employee eligible for transportation fringe benefits
pursuant to the Transportation Benefits Law and this chapter was offered the
opportunity to use pre-tax earnings to purchase transportation fringe benefits
in accordance with this chapter; or (ii) records sufficient to demonstrate that
the employer provides, at the employer's expense, a transit pass or similar
form of payment for transportation on public or privately-owned mass transit or
in a commuter highway vehicle at the maximum federal transportation fringe
benefit amount that may be excluded from pre-tax earnings. Employers may use
the form provided by the department and available on the department's website
to document compliance.
(Added City Record 11/18/2015, eff. 1/1/2016; amended City Record 8/8/2016,
eff. 9/7/2016; amended City Record 8/21/2018, eff. 9/20/2018)
§ 7-307 Employer-Funded Transportation Benefits.
   (a)   As an alternative to offering the opportunity to use pre-tax earnings
to purchase transportation fringe benefits, an employer may provide at the
employer's expense a transit pass or similar form of payment for transportation
on public or privately-owned mass transit or in a commuter highway vehicle.
   (b)   If the employer-provided transit pass or similar form of payment is
less than the maximum transportation fringe benefit that may be excluded from
pre-tax earnings under federal law, then the employer must offer employees the
opportunity to use pre-tax earnings to purchase transportation fringe benefits
for an amount equal to the difference between the value of the employer-
provided transit pass or similar form of payment and the maximum amount that
may be excluded from gross earnings under federal law.
(Added City Record 11/18/2015, eff. 1/1/2016; amended City Record 8/8/2016,
eff. 9/7/2016; amended City Record 8/21/2018, eff. 9/20/2018)
§ 7-308 Financial Hardship Exemption.
   (a)   The department may waive the requirements of the Transportation
Benefits Law for an employer if such employer demonstrates to the department's
satisfaction that offering the opportunity to use pre-tax earnings to purchase
transportation fringe benefits would be a financial hardship for such employer.
   (b)   To qualify for a waiver, an employer must present compelling evidence
that complying with the Transportation Benefits Law would be impracticable and
create a severe financial hardship.
(Added City Record 11/18/2015, eff. 1/1/2016; amended City Record 8/8/2016,
eff. 9/7/2016; amended City Record 8/21/2018, eff. 9/20/2018)
§ 7-309 Enforcement and Penalties.
   (a)   The department may issue a notice of violation pursuant to § 20-926(b)
of the Administrative Code.
   (b)   Any employer found to be in violation of the Transportation Benefits
Law will be liable for a civil penalty of two-hundred fifty dollars payable to
the city of New York for the first violation, for any and each subsequent
violation, and for any and each recidivist violation.
   (c)   A civil penalty will not be imposed on an employer for the first
violation if the employer demonstrates to the satisfaction of the department
within the cure period that it is complying with the Transportation Benefits
Law.
   (d)   For the purposes of this section, "satisfaction of the department"
with reference to an employer's compliance with the Transportation Benefits Law
means proof that the employer has offered its full time employees the
opportunity to use pre-tax earnings to purchase transportation fringe benefits
or that the employer provides, at the employer's expense, a transit pass, or
similar form of payment, for transportation on public or privately-owned mass
transit or in a commuter highway vehicle at the maximum federal transportation
benefit amount that may be excluded from pre-tax earnings.
   (e)   An employer seeking to demonstrate that it is complying with the
Transportation Benefits Law may do so by submitting the compliance form
provided by the department and available on the department's website. The
department may require submission of additional information, including
documentary evidence, reasonably necessary to prove that a first violation was
cured within the cure period.
(Added City Record 8/8/2016, eff. 9/7/2016; amended City Record 8/21/2018, eff.
9/20/2018)
Subchapter D: Displaced Grocery Workers
§ 7-401 Definitions.
   (a)   As used in this chapter, the following terms have the same meanings as
set forth in § 22-507 of the Administrative Code: "change in control," "city,"
"department," "eligible grocery employee," "grocery establishment," "incumbent
grocery employer," "person," "successor grocery employer," and "transitional
employment period."
   (b)   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
      "Continuous employment" means uninterrupted employment. Separations from
employment six months or less in duration for any reason, including, but not
limited to, transfer from a grocery establishment that is subject to a change
in control to a grocery establishment with the same incumbent grocery employer,
paid or unpaid leaves of absence, paid or unpaid time off, and work schedule
changes, shall not constitute interruptions in employment.
      "Grocery employer" means incumbent grocery employers and successor
grocery employers.
      "Grocery Worker Retention Act" means § 22-507 of the Administrative Code.
(Added City Record 10/11/2016, eff. 11/10/2016; amended City Record 8/21/2018,
eff. 9/20/2018)
§ 7-402 Eligible Grocery Employees.
   (a)   For purposes of the definition of "eligible grocery employee" in § 22-
507(a) of the Administrative Code, "a period" means "a period of continuous
employment."
   (b)   For purposes of section 22-507(a) of the Administrative Code,
"confidential employee" means "confidential employee" as defined in the federal
Labor Management Relations Act, 22 U.S.C. § 4102(6).
   (c)   An employee's length of continuous employment at a grocery
establishment with the same incumbent grocery employer as the grocery
establishment subject to a change in control preceding an employee's transfer
to the grocery establishment subject to a change in control shall count towards
that employee's continuous employment at the grocery establishment subject to
the change in control.
(Added City Record 10/11/2016, eff. 11/10/2016; amended City Record 8/21/2018,
eff. 9/20/2018)
§ 7-403 Determining Seniority.
   For purposes of § 22-507(b)(3) of the Administrative Code, an employee
attains seniority as a result of that employee's length of continuous
employment in the grocery establishment subject to a change in control,
regardless of job position and regardless of full-time or part-time status, or,
in the case of an employee transferred to a grocery establishment subject to a
change in control, that employee's total length of continuous employment in any
of the incumbent grocery employer's grocery establishments.
(Added City Record 10/11/2016, eff. 11/10/2016; amended City Record 8/21/2018,
eff. 9/20/2018)
§ 7-404 Recordkeeping.
   (a)   Grocery employers must retain records demonstrating compliance with
the requirements of the Grocery Worker Retention Act for a period of three
years unless otherwise required by any other law, rule, or regulation.
   (b)   Incumbent grocery employers must maintain, in an accessible format,
contemporaneous, true, and accurate records that document:
      (1)   The list of eligible grocery employees required under § 22-507(b)
(1)(A) of the Administrative Code, the date the list was provided to the
successor grocery employer, and written proof that the list was provided to the
successor grocery employer; and
      (2)   The notice of change in control required under § 22-507(b)(1)(B) of
the Administrative Code, the date it was posted, and proof of posting.
   (c)   Successor grocery employers must maintain, in an accessible format,
contemporaneous, true, and accurate records that document:
      (1)   The list of eligible grocery employees received by the successor
grocery employer pursuant to § 22-507(b)(1)(A) of the Administrative Code and
the date it was received, and the names of those eligible employees retained
for the transitional employment period pursuant to § 22-507(b)(2) of the
Administrative Code;
      (2)   The preferential hiring list required under § 22-507(b)(3) of the
Administrative Code, the date eligible employees on the preferential hiring
list were given the right of first refusal to jobs that become available during
the transitional employment period, and proof that the right of first refusal
was given; and
      (3)   The written performance evaluations as required under § 22-507(b)
(5) of the Administrative Code.
(Added City Record 10/11/2016, eff. 11/10/2016; amended City Record 8/21/2018,
eff. 9/20/2018)
§ 7-405 Enforcement.
   (a)   If the grocery employer fails to timely respond to, written request
for information or records from the department, a grocery employer must provide
the department with access to records and at a mutually agreeable time of day
at the employer's place of business.
   (b)   The department will make two attempts by any combination of letter,
email, or telephone to arrange a mutually agreeable time of day for the grocery
employer to provide access to its records in accordance with subdivision (b) of
this section. If these attempts are not successful, the department may set a
time to access records at the grocery employer's place of business during
regular business hours, upon two days' notice to the grocery employer.
   (c)   The grocery employer may cure a notice of violation issued to a
grocery employer for failure to provide requested information, records or
access to records as required by 6 RCNY §
7-405 without penalty by producing the requested information or records on or
before the first scheduled hearing date.
   (d)   The department may settle a complaint at any time prior to the
conclusion of an adjudication. Prior to settling any complaint filed by an
eligible grocery employee, pursuant to § 22-507(d)(1), the department shall
provide each complainant with notice of the proposed settlement.
   (e)   A complainant who intends to opt out of a settlement, pursuant to §
22-507(d)(1)(E) of the Administrative Code must do so in writing to the
department. A complainant who intends to withdraw his or her complaint with the
department, pursuant to § 22-507(d)(2) of the Administrative Code must do so in
writing to the department prior to bringing a civil action.
(Added City Record 10/11/2016, eff. 11/10/2016; amended City Record 8/21/2018,
eff. 9/20/2018)
Subchapter E: Freelance Workers
§ 7-501 Definitions.
   (a)   As used in this chapter, the terms "director," "freelance worker," and
"hiring party" shall have the same meanings as set forth in § 20-927 of the
Administrative Code.
   (b)   As used in this chapter, the term "adverse action" means any action by
a hiring party, their actual or apparent agent, or any other person acting
directly or indirectly on behalf of a hiring party, that would constitute a
threat, intimidation, discipline, harassment, denial of a work opportunity, or
discrimination, or any other act that penalizes a freelance worker for, or is
reasonably likely to deter a freelance worker from, exercising or attempting to
exercise any right guaranteed under Chapter 10 of Title 20 of the
Administrative Code ("the Freelance Isn't Free Act").
(Added City Record 6/22/2017, eff. 7/22/2017; amended City Record 8/21/2018,
eff. 9/20/2018)
§ 7-502 Coverage.
A freelance worker is entitled to the protections of the Freelance Isn't Free
Act regardless of immigration status.
(Added City Record 6/22/2017, eff. 7/22/2017; amended City Record 8/21/2018,
eff. 9/20/2018)
§ 7-503 Contract Value.
   (a)   For purposes of § 20-928(a) of the Administrative Code, the value of a
contract between a freelance worker and hiring party, either by itself or when
aggregated with all other agreements for services between the same hiring party
and freelance worker during the 120 days immediately preceding the agreement
that constitutes the contract, shall include the reasonable value of all actual
or anticipated services, costs for supplies, and any other expenses under the
contract.
   (b)   For purposes of § 20-933(b) of the Administrative Code, the value of
the underlying contract between a freelance worker and hiring party shall
include the reasonable value of all services performed and/or anticipated, and
reasonable costs for supplies and any other expenses reasonably incurred by the
freelance worker.
(Added City Record 6/22/2017, eff. 7/22/2017; amended City Record 8/21/2018,
eff. 9/20/2018)
§ 7-504 Retaliation.
   (a)   Retaliation shall include but is not limited to any adverse action
relating to perceived immigration status or work authorization.
   (b)   A freelance worker may establish a causal connection between the
exercise of rights guaranteed under the Freelance Isn't Free Act and a hiring
party's adverse action either circumstantially, such as with evidence that the
protected activity was followed closely by the adverse action, or directly,
with evidence of an intention by a hiring party to retaliate against a
freelance worker. For purposes of § 20-930 of the Administrative Code,
retaliation may be established when a freelance worker shows that the exercise
or attempt to exercise any right under the Freelance Isn't Free Act was a
motivating factor for an adverse action, even if other factors also motivated
the adverse action.
   (c)   Any person who denies a work opportunity to a freelance worker who
exercises or attempts to exercise any right guaranteed under the Freelance
Isn't Free Act, or that takes any action reasonably likely to deter a freelance
worker from exercising or attempting to exercise any such right, shall be
liable for retaliation regardless of whether that person previously has been a
party to a contract with the freelance worker or has been the subject of a
complaint by the freelance worker.
(Added City Record 6/22/2017, eff. 7/22/2017; amended City Record 8/21/2018,
eff. 9/20/2018)
§ 7-505 Waivers of Rights.
   (a)   Any contract entered into by a hiring party and freelance worker shall
not include any prospective waiver or limitation of rights under the Freelance
Isn't Free Act. Any such waiver or limitation shall be invalid as a matter of
law.
   (b)   If a contract includes language that waives or limits a freelance
worker's right to participate in or receive money or any other relief from any
class, collective, or representative proceeding, said waiver or limitation is
void.
   (c)   Wherever a hiring party asks a freelance worker to waive or limit, via
contract, any other procedural right normally afforded to a party in a civil or
administrative action, any such contractual waivers and limitations are void
under § 20-935 of the Administrative Code. Such rights include but are not
limited to procedural rights of parties to a civil action established by the
New York Civil Practice Law and Rules, the Federal Rules of Evidence, and the
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
   (d)   A freelance worker has the right to disclose the terms of a contract
with a hiring party to the director. Any private contractual agreement that
purports to waive or limit a freelance worker's right to communicate the terms
of such a contract to the director is void as against public policy
(Added City Record 6/22/2017, eff. 7/22/2017; amended City Record 8/21/2018,
eff. 9/20/2018)
Subchapter F: Fair Workweek
Part 1: General Provisions
§ 7-601 Definitions.
   (a)   As used in Title 20, Chapter 12 of the New York City Administrative
Code and this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings,
except as otherwise provided:
      "Accept" when used in reference to a shift or shifts at a fast food
establishment means a fast food employee's communication to a fast food
employer of their desire to work such shift or shifts in response to the notice
of available shifts provided by the fast food employer.
      "Applied consistently," as that phrase is used in § 20-1272(b)(3) of the
Fair Workweek Law, means that fast food employees with similar job duties who
are subject to the same progressive discipline policy received comparable
treatment under that policy for similar infractions in similar circumstances.
      "Award" has the same meaning as "distribute," as that term is used in the
Fair Workweek Law. When the term "award" is used in reference to a shift at a
fast food establishment, it means a fast food employer has added the shift to a
fast food employee's regular schedule.
      "Baseline regular schedule" means the highest total hours contained in a
fast food employee's regular schedule within the previous 12 months, or the
highest total hours contained in any subsequent reduced regular schedule to
which such employee consented, which such employee requested, or which was made
for just cause or a bona fide economic reason.
      "Clopening" means two shifts with fewer than 11 hours between the end of
the first shift and the beginning of the second shift when the first shift ends
the previous calendar day or spans two calendar days.
      "Clopening premium" means the $100 payment required for each clopening
shift worked pursuant to § 20-1231 of the Fair Workweek Law.
      "Consent" means an employee's agreement after having a meaningful
opportunity to decline, free from any interference, coercion, or risk of
adverse action from the employer.
      "Contact information" means the last-known phone number, email address,
and mailing address provided to the employer.
      "Current fast food employee" as that term is used in § 20-1241 of the
Fair Workweek Law and these rules means a fast food employee who has worked at
least eight hours in the preceding 30 days or is otherwise currently on the
fast food employer's payroll, and has not been terminated from employment.
      "Directly notify" as that term is used in subdivision (b) of § 20-1252 of
the Fair Workweek Law means to deliver to an individual employee.
      "Engaged primarily in the sale of consumer goods" as that term is used in
the definition of "retail employer" in § 20-1201 of the Fair Workweek Law means
greater than fifty percent of sale transactions in the City during the previous
12 months were of consumer goods to retail consumers.
      "Fair Workweek Law" means Chapter 12 of Title 20 of the Administrative
Code of the City of New York.
      "New fast food employee" means an employee who, at the time of hire, has
not previously been employed by or worked any hours for the fast food employer
or who has no seniority due to an interruption in service of more than six
months as set forth in § 20-1271 of the Fair Workweek Law. A "new fast food
employee" becomes a "current fast food employee" once they have performed at
least 8 hours of work for the fast food employer.
      "Notice of discharge" means the written explanation that fast food
employers are required to provide to discharged fast food employees pursuant to
§ 20-1272(d) of the Fair Workweek Law.
      "Offer" when used in reference to a shift or shifts at a fast food
establishment means the process by which a fast food employer notifies fast
food employees of the availability of such shift or shifts pursuant to § 20-
1241 of the Fair Workweek Law. While an "offer" of a particular shift may be
made to a number of employees and/or former employees, the shift will be
"awarded" to one employee (unless it is divided among two or more employees).
      "Overtime pay" means payment (i) at a rate not less than one and one-half
times the fast food employee's regular rate of pay under subsection (a) of
Section 207 of Title 29 of the United States Code; or (ii) at a rate governed
by the overtime requirements of the labor law or the overtime requirements of
any minimum wage order promulgated by the New York commissioner of labor,
pursuant to labor law article 19 or 19-A.
      "Recurring shift" means a shift that the fast food employer anticipates
needing a fast food employee to fill indefinitely.
      "Regular schedule" means a predictable, regular set of recurring shifts
that a fast food employee will work each week.
      "Relevant and adequate training," as that phrase is used in § 20-1272(b)
(2) of the Fair Workweek Law, means instruction on how to perform the job
duties, standards of conduct in the fast food establishment, or workplace
policies and procedures. This may include training on: preparing and serving
food, cleaning, using tools and equipment, handling payments, interacting with
customers, and other typical job duties of fast food employees; workplace
policies and procedures relating to attendance, punctuality, cooperation, and
other standards of conduct required by the fast food employer; and any specific
job duties or conduct for which a discharged fast food employee has previously
failed to meet the fast food employer's expectations.
      "Retail consumer" means an individual who buys or leases consumer goods
and that individual's co-obligor or surety. Retail consumer shall not include
manufacturers, wholesalers, or others who purchase or lease consumer goods for
resale as new to others.
      "Salaried," as that term is used in the definition of "fast food
employee" in § 20-1201 of the Fair Workweek Law, means paid on a salary basis
and meets all of the criteria for one or more of the exemptions from the
minimum wage and overtime provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act set forth
in Title 29, Part 541 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
      "Scheduling application" means a computer application used by an employer
to create or manage employee schedules.
      "Shift" means an on-call shift or a regular shift.
      "Subset of shifts" means one or more shifts or shift increments.
      "Times" as that term is used in relation to any shift or schedule, means
start and end times of shifts.
   (b)   As used in this subchapter, the following terms have the same meanings
as set forth in §§ 20-1201 and 20-1271 of the Fair Workweek Law: "bona fide
economic reason," "department," "discharge," "employee," "employer," "fast food
employee," "fast food employer," "fast food establishment," "just cause," "on-
call shift," "probation period," "progressive discipline," "reduction in
hours," "regular shift," "retail employee," "retail employer," "schedule change
premium," "seniority," "utility safety employee," "utility safety employer,"
and "work schedule."
(Added City Record 11/28/2017, eff. 11/28/2017; amended City Record 5/24/2022,
eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-602 Notice of Rights.
The notice of rights required to be posted pursuant to § 20-1205 of the Fair
Workweek Law shall be printed on and scaled to fill an 11x17 inch sheet of
paper.
(Added City Record 11/28/2017, eff. 11/28/2017; amended City Record 5/24/2022,
eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-603 Recordkeeping.
   (a)   Fast food, retail, and utility safety employers must create and
maintain contemporaneous, true, and accurate records documenting compliance
with the requirements of the Fair Workweek Law for a period of three years, as
specified below.
      1.   Required records for fast food, retail, and utility safety
employers. For fast food, retail, and utility safety employers, such records
shall include documents that show:
         i.   Each employee's first and last name, dates of employment and the
last-known phone number, email address, and mailing address provided to the
employer;
         ii.   Actual hours worked by each employee each week, including the
date, times, and location of all such hours;
         iii.   Each work schedule, including the dates, times, and methods by
which each work schedule was provided to each employee; and
         iv.   Each agreement among employees to trade shifts, including the
shifts being traded and the names of the employees involved.
      2.   Required records for fast food employers. For fast food employers
only, such records also must include documents that show:
         i.   Each regular schedule, including the dates, times, and methods of
provision to each employee;
         ii.   Each written request by an employee for a change to a work
schedule or for a reduction in hours on the regular schedule, including the
date, time, and method of transmission to the employer.
         iii.   Each written consent by a fast food employee to an addition of
hours to a work schedule or to a reduction in hours on the regular schedule,
including the date and time when the record was made;
         iv.   Each instance a schedule change premium was not owed to a fast
food employee due to the fast food employee's lateness or absence, including
the date of the shift and the reason;
         v.   Each instance a schedule change premium was not owed to a fast
food employee because the employer's operations could not begin or continue as
set forth in § 20-1222(c)(1) of the Fair Workweek Law or because the employee
received overtime pay for a changed shift, as set forth in § 20-1222(c)(4) of
the Fair Workweek Law.
         vi.   Each schedule change premium and each clopening premium paid to
each fast food employee, the shift, work week, or pay period to which the
premium corresponds, and the date and amount of each payment;
         vii.   Each written request or consent by a fast food employee to work
a clopening shift, including the date and time when the record was made;
         viii.   Each regular or on-call shift offered to, accepted by, or
awarded to current fast food employees, including the contents of each offer,
and the dates, times, and methods by which such shifts were offered, accepted,
and awarded.
         ix.   Each instance an employer was not required to offer a shift to a
current fast food employee before hiring new fast food employees because the
employer would have been required to pay the current fast food employee
overtime pay for the additional shift.
         x.   All written policies on progressive discipline maintained in
accordance with § 20-1272(c) of the Fair Workweek Law and the date and manner
in which they were provided to fast food employees, and proof that such
policies were received by each fast food employee;
         xi.   Records of discipline of fast food employees, including to whom
the discipline relates, a description of any employment actions associated with
the discipline and the dates these actions were taken (for example, application
of a disciplinary point, training, increased supervision), the conduct for
which the fast food employee was disciplined and any date associated with the
conduct, either the fast food employee's acknowledgement of having been
informed of the discipline or a supervisor's affirmation that the fast food
employee was informed of the discipline and refused to acknowledge it, and the
employee's response, if any.
         xii.   Each Notice of Discharge provided to a fast food employee in
accordance with § 20-1272(d) of the Fair Workweek law and the date and method
by which the Notice of Discharge was provided to the fast food employee.
         xiii.   For each discharge based on a bona fide economic reason,
records sufficient to show that the discharge was in response to a reduction in
volume of production, sales or profits at the fast food establishment, such as
documents showing:
            (1)   The fast food establishment's financial condition, including
tax returns, income statements, profit and loss statements, monthly gross
revenue schedules, and balance sheets;
            (2)   The fast food establishment's compliance with government-
issued capacity reduction orders or health and safety guidelines or a full or
partial closure by order of a government official; or
            (3)   The fast food employer's inability to operate due to:
               (A)   Threats to the fast food employees or the fast food
employer's property;
               (B)   The failure of a public utility or the shutdown of public
transportation;
               (C)   A fire, flood or other natural disaster;
               (D)   A state of emergency declared by the President of the
United States, Governor of the state of New York, or Mayor of the City; or
               (E)   Severe weather conditions that posed a threat to employee
safety.
         xiv.   For each fast food employee discharged based on a bona fide
economic reason, their seniority relative to any other such discharged
employees, and each offer of reinstatement or restoration of hours pursuant to
§§ 20-1241(a)(1) and 20-1272(h) of the Fair Workweek Law, including the date
and the method of contact or attempted contact, the days, times and location of
the shift(s) offered, and whether the offer was accepted.
      3.   Required records for retail and utility safety employers. For retail
and utility safety employers only, such records also must include documents
that show:
         i.   Each written request by a retail or utility safety employee for
time off including the date and time the request was made, and the days and
times off requested;
         ii.   Each written consent by a retail or utility safety employee to
work with fewer than 72 hours' notice; and
         iii.   Each change to a retail employee's work schedule with less than
72 hours' notice that occurred because the employer's operations could not
begin or continue as set forth in § 20-1251(b)(3) of the Fair Workweek Law.
         iv.   Each change to a utility safety employee's work schedule with
less than 72 hours' notice that occurred because the utility safety employer
was responding to or could not begin or continue operations due to one of the
circumstances set forth in § 20-1251(b)(4) of the Fair Workweek Law.
   (b)   Upon request, a fast food, retail, or utility safety employer must
provide a fast food, retail, or utility safety employee with such employee's
work schedule for any previous week worked for the past three years within 14
days of the employee's request.
   (c)   Upon request, a fast food, retail, or utility safety employer must
provide a fast food, retail, or utility safety employee with the most current
version of the complete work schedule for all employees who work at the same
location within one week of the employee's request, provided that an employer
may not disclose the work schedule of any employee who has been granted an
accommodation based on the employee's status as a survivor of domestic
violence, stalking, or sexual assault, where such disclosure would conflict
with such accommodation.
   (d)   A fast food, retail, or utility safety employer may create or maintain
any of the records required by this Section in a scheduling application or
other electronic recordkeeping system. Such employer must ensure:
      1.   That such records are maintained and preserved for at least three
years;
      2.   That such records can be readily exported in non-proprietary,
machine-readable data formats, as may be needed to meet the obligation to
produce such records to the department;
      3.   That the scheduling application or other electronic recordkeeping
system is not subject, in whole or in part, to any agreement or restriction
that would, directly or indirectly, compromise or limit the employer's ability
to comply with any obligation to produce such records to the department; and
      4.   That the scheduling application or other electronic recordkeeping
system is not configured to overwrite or destroy any of the information
required by this section, or that it is supplemented by an alternative system
for retaining true and accurate copies of information and records that might
otherwise be destroyed or overwritten.
   (e)   To electronically provide a regular schedule or an updated copy of a
regular schedule under § 20-1221(a), or to electronically transmit a work
schedule or a revised work schedule under §§ 20-1221(c)(1) or 20-1221(c)(2) of
the Fair Workweek Law, the electronic communication delivered by the employer
must include the days, times, and locations of all shifts in such schedule.
   (f)   To provide a notice of available shifts electronically under § 20-1241
(b) of the Fair Workweek Law, the electronic communication delivered by the
employer to the employee must include: (i) the contents of the offer, or (ii)
an alert that an offer is available and an attachment or a link to where the
employee can readily view the contents of the offer.
(Added City Record 11/28/2017, eff. 11/28/2017; amended City Record 5/24/2022,
eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-604 Private Right of Action.
   (a)   A person who filed a complaint with the department pursuant to the
Fair Workweek Law and who intends to withdraw the complaint to pursue a civil
action shall withdraw the complaint in writing to the department prior to
commencing a civil action that includes claims based on the Fair Workweek Law
in accordance with paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of § 20-1211 of the Fair
Workweek Law.
   (b)   A person who filed a civil action that includes any claims based on
the Fair Workweek Law may file a complaint with the department upon a showing
that the Fair Workweek Law claims in the civil action have been withdrawn or
dismissed without prejudice to further action.
   (c)   The withdrawal of a complaint filed with the department or the
commencement of a civil action by a person does not preclude the department
from investigating the fast food, retail, or utility safety employer, or
commencing, prosecuting, or settling a case against the employer based on some
or all of the same violations.
(Added City Record 11/28/2017, eff. 11/28/2017; amended City Record 5/24/2022,
eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-605 Waiver of Rights.
Any agreement by an employee with the intent to prospectively waive or limit
the employee's rights pursuant to the Fair Workweek Law shall be invalid as a
matter of law, except as provided in the Fair Workweek Law.
(Added City Record 11/28/2017, eff. 11/28/2017; amended City Record 5/24/2022,
eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-606 Consent.
   (a)   When an employer must seek an employee's written consent as set forth
in the Fair Workweek Law §§ 20-1221(a) (consent for reduction of hours in
regular schedule), 20-1221(d) (consent to work or be available to work for
additional hours), 20-1231 (consent to work a clopening), and 20-1251(a)(3)
(retail or utility safety employee's consent to work with fewer than 72 hours'
notice), the employee must have a meaningful opportunity to decline, free from
any interference, coercion, or risk of adverse action from the employer. The
record of such employee's written consent must show that the employer obtained
it in advance and must reference a specific schedule change or shift; general
or ongoing consent is insufficient to meet this requirement. If an employer
cannot obtain an employee's written consent before the additional time begins,
such as when the schedule change involves an unscheduled addition of time at
the end of a shift, the employee's written consent must be obtained no later
than 15 minutes after the employee begins to work additional time.
   (b)   An employer is not required to obtain or maintain a written record of
an employee's choice to decline to give consent as set forth in §§ 20-1221(a),
20-1221(d), 20-1231, and 20-1251(a)(3) of the Fair Workweek Law.
(Added City Record 11/28/2017, eff. 11/28/2017; amended City Record 5/24/2022,
eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-607 De Minimis Schedule Changes.
A schedule change of 15 minutes or less is de minimis if neither the start time
nor the end time changes by more than 15 minutes. An employer making only a de
minimis schedule change is not required to comply with the consent requirements
of § 20-1221 or 20-1231, the schedule change premium requirements of § 20-1222,
or the schedule change provisions of § 20-1251(a).
(Added City Record 11/28/2017, eff. 11/28/2017; amended City Record 5/24/2022,
eff. 6/23/2022)
Part 2: Fast Food
§ 7-620 Regular Scheduling.
   (a)   The requirement for a regular schedule is intended to provide a fast
food employee with long-term scheduling predictability. The requirement to
provide a "regular schedule" is separate and distinct from the requirement to
post and transmit "work schedules" setting forth specific work shifts on
specific dates. A regular schedule should set forth a fast food employer's
actual expectation of a fast food employee's long-term schedule. An employer
must update the regular schedule regular schedule in writing to document any
long-term or indefinite change to any recurring shift on it, and must provide a
copy to the employee.
   (b)   A fast food employer must at all times have a regular schedule in
effect for each fast food employee employed or hired on or after July 4, 2021.
Each regular schedule provided by a fast food employer must include the date
such regular schedule takes effect.
   (c)   A regular schedule provided to a fast food employee is considered to
be in effect unless and until a new regular schedule is provided to the
employee.
   (d)   Reserved.
   (e)   A fast food employer's failure to provide a regular schedule to a fast
food employee is a violation of § 20-1221(b) of the Fair Workweek Law for each
week the employee works until a regular schedule is provided.
   (f)   1.   A fast food employer may, but is not required to, have a policy
or practice of collecting information from fast food employees about the hours
they are available or unavailable to work, and using such information for
scheduling purposes. A fast food employer may, but is not required to, have a
policy or practice of requiring fast food employees to be available for a
minimum number of hours per week, so long as such policy or practice is applied
consistently and in a nondiscriminatory manner.
      2.   If a fast food employer does have a policy or practice of collecting
information about fast food employees' availability to work for use in
scheduling, and a fast food employee has informed the employer, in a manner
complying with the fast food employer's policy or practice, that they are
unavailable to work at specified times, the fast food employer may not add or
change a recurring shift on an the fast food employee's regular schedule to a
shift time that the fast food employee has specified they are unavailable to
work, unless the fast food employee consents to the addition or change in
writing as provided in § 20-1221(a) of the Fair Workweek Law. Without the fast
food employee's written consent, the fast food employer's action would
constitute a constructive discharge.
      3.   If a fast food employee provides a fast food employer written notice
that they are no longer available to work all or part of a shift on their
regular schedule, that constitutes such fast food employee's written consent to
a reduction in hours on the regular schedule corresponding to that shift. In
this scenario, the fast food employer has discretion to remove the entire
recurring shift, or just the conflicting portion of it, from the regular
schedule.
Example 1: A fast food employer's employee handbook provides that fast food
employees must provide at least 30 days' notice of a change in availability.
The fast food employer gives fast food employee Martha a regular schedule that
includes 27 hours per week. After two months, Martha informs her employer in
writing that starting in six weeks, she will no longer be able to work one 5-
hour recurring shift on Tuesday evenings due to a conflict with a college
class. Martha also requests that her employer assign her a new recurring shift
to keep her total hours at 27. Her employer gives her an updated regular work
schedule reflecting the removal of the recurring Tuesday evening shift, with 22
total work hours, but does not add another shift to keep her total work hours
at 27. Martha's baseline regular schedule is 22 hours because she requested the
reduction. The employer is not required to accommodate Martha's request for a
new morning recurring shift.
Example 2: In the above scenario, after one month, Martha sees a six-hour
recurring shift recurring shift on Saturdays on her employer's notice of
available shifts. She accepts it and her employer awards it to her by placing
it on her regular schedule. Martha's baseline regular schedule is now 28 hours.
Example 3: In the above scenarios, after a month, Martha's employer removes the
6-hour Saturday recurring shift from Martha's regular schedule and places a new
recurring shift of the same length on her for Tuesday evenings. The employer
has violated the Fair Workweek Law by scheduling Martha to work a shift outside
of the availability she provided in accordance with her employer's policies.
In addition, the employer's removal of the Saturday shift has reduced Martha's
hours by 21%. Unless the employer had a bona fide economic reason, this is a
discharge in violation of the Fair Workweek Law, since it has reduced her hours
by more than 15% (note that "discharges" are defined in § 20-1271 of the Fair
Workweek Law to include "reductions in hours," which are in turn defined as "a
reduction totaling at least 15 percent of the employee's regular schedule or 15
percent of any weekly work schedule").
Example 4: In the above scenarios, Martha's employer does not remove the
Saturday recurring shift from her schedule but does place a new Tuesday evening
recurring shift on her schedule. Martha's employer has violated the Fair
Workweek Law by scheduling Martha to work a shift outside of the availability
she provided in accordance with her employer's policies. If Martha does not
work the newly scheduled Tuesday evening recurring shift, her employer cannot
rely on her absence to support a purported just cause discharge under § 20-
1272.
Example 5: Martha informs her employer that she will not be available to work
for the next 28 days, effective immediately. Assuming Martha is not taking
leave that is protected under any provision of federal, state, or local law,
Martha's employer has a variety of lawful responses. For example, the employer
may issue progressive discipline to Martha for changing her hours of
availability with less than 30 days' notice, and/or for not working shifts on
her work schedule, as long as issuing such discipline is consistent with the
employer's progressive discipline policy. The employer may also assign her
shifts on a temporary basis to other employees. Unless she is terminated in a
manner consistent with the provisions of §§ 20-1271 and 20-1272 of the Fair
Workweek Law, or unless her leave is protected by another category of law,
Martha retains her status as a "current fast food employee" until she quits, or
she has failed to work at least 8 hours in a 30 day period.
Example 6: Martha's co-worker, Fran, who currently works Mondays, Tuesdays, and
Fridays, informs her employer that in five weeks she will only be available to
work on Saturdays. Her employer removes all recurring shifts from Fran's
regular schedule effective as of the date of her unavailability. Fran's
baseline regular schedule is now zero hours. Over the next month, Fran does not
accept any recurring shifts on her employer's notice of available shifts. After
30 days, Fran is considered to have quit her job, as discussed in 6 RCNY §
7-630. She is no longer a "current fast food employee" because she has not
worked at least 8 hours in the previous 30 days.
   (g)   Subject to the provisions of subdivision (f) of 6 RCNY §
7-620 concerning employee availability, a fast food employer can change a fast
food employee's regular schedule for any reason without their consent, so long
as a fast food employer does not reduce the total hours in a fast food
employee's regular schedule by more than 15% from the baseline regular
schedule, and so long as the employer provides the employee with an updated
copy of the regular schedule at least 14 days before the first day on the first
work schedule following the change.
Example 1: A fast food employer gives fast food employee Rebecca a regular
schedule totaling 25 hours per week. After a month, Rebecca's employer gives
her a new regular schedule totaling 23 hours per week, a reduction of 8%.
Rebecca did not request this reduction, and she does not want it because it
reduces her income. However, Rebecca's employer was not required to obtain her
consent because the reduction was less than 15%. Rebecca's baseline regular
schedule remains at 25 hours because she did not request or consent to the
change.
Example 2: In the above scenario, after two months, Rebecca's employer gives
her a new regular schedule totaling 21 hours per week, and does not give her a
notice of discharge indicating the discharge was for a bona fide economic
reason or just cause. Rebecca did not request this reduction, and she is
unhappy about it. There is a violation of the Fair Workweek Law because the
employer has reduced Rebecca's regular schedule by 16% (25 hours to 21 hours)
without her consent. Rebecca's baseline regular schedule remains at 25 hours
because she did not request or consent to the change.
Note that in either of the above examples, the outcome is the same if Rebecca's
employer instructed her that she had to sign a form consenting to the
reductions, and Rebecca did so. Rebecca's signature would not reflect her
consent because she did not want the reductions and was not free to decline
them.
Example 3: Fast food employee Carlos has given his fast food employer open
availability for 7 days a week. Carlos' employer gives him a regular schedule
totaling 24 hours a week, containing the following recurring shifts: Mondays
and Tuesdays from 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m., Wednesdays from 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
p.m., and Fridays from 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. After three months, Carlos'
employer gives him a new regular schedule totaling 35 hours per week,
containing the following recurring shifts in afternoons and evenings: Tuesdays
and Wednesdays from 12:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m., Fridays from 4:00 p.m. to 12:00
a.m., and Saturdays from 5:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m. Carlos received the new
regular schedule by email on Sunday, November 7. Carlos also received a work
schedule by email on Sunday, November 7 for the workweek beginning Monday,
November 22 that contained shifts consistent with the new regular schedule.
Carlos did not request these changes, and he is unhappy about them because
although he provided open availability, he preferred to work in the morning.
There is no violation of the Fair Workweek Law because the employer is not
required to obtain Carlos' request or consent to changes to the regular
schedule that do not reduce his total work time by more than 15%, and the
employer gave Carlos the updated regular schedule and the first work schedule
reflecting the change 14 days before the first day on the work schedule.
Carlos' baseline regular schedule is now 35 hours.
(Added City Record 5/24/2022, eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-621 Work Schedules.
   (a)   For purposes of the requirement to provide notice of the work schedule
no later than 14 days before the first day of any new schedule in § 20-1221(b)
of the Fair Workweek Law, the first day of the work schedule begins at 12:00
a.m. "14 days" means at least 336 hours before the first day on the work
schedule. Each shift in each work schedule provided to a fast food employee
must include a date, location, and the start time and end time.
   (b)   For purposes of § 20-1221(b) of the Fair Workweek Law, variation in
shifts between the regular schedule and a work schedule refers to changes to
the day of the shift, the start or end times of a shift, the removal of a
shift, or the addition of any shift not included on the regular schedule. A
variation of more than 15% refers to the entire regular schedule and not to
changes of more than 15% to individual shifts on the regular schedule.
   (c)   It shall not be considered a variation from the regular schedule for
purposes of § 20-1221(b) when: (1) a fast food employer obtained a fast food
employee's written request for or written consent to a change before issuing a
work schedule or revised work schedule reflecting the change, or (2) a fast
food employer's operations are closed at the location of a shift on the fast
food employee's regular schedule due to a scheduled holiday or one of the
exigent circumstances set forth in § 20-1222(c) of the Fair Workweek Law.
Nothing in this subdivision impacts a fast food employer's obligation to pay
premium pay as required under § 20-1222 of the Fair Workweek Law or 6 RCNY §
7-622.
   (d)   A fast food employer is not required to provide a work schedule to a
fast food employee for any workweek that the fast food employee is on leave for
the entirety of the period covered by the work schedule.
(Added City Record 5/24/2022, eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-622 Schedule Changes.
   (a)   For purposes of § 20-1222(a) of the Fair Workweek Law, the amount of
each schedule change premium owed is based on hours elapsed between the first
day on the work schedule, which begins at 12:00 a.m., and the date and time the
fast food employer transmits the revised written schedule to the affected
employees or re-posts the schedule, as required by § 20-1221(c)(2), whichever
is later. The amount of notice to the employee is computed on an hourly basis.
"7 days' notice" means at least 168 hours before the first day on the work
schedule. "14 days' notice" means at least 336 hours before the first day on
the work schedule. Any schedule change the fast food employer makes on or after
the day before the first day on the work schedule is a change with less than 24
hours' notice. Any schedule change that is not documented on a revised written
schedule provided to the affected employees or re-posted as required by § 20-
1221(c)(2) is presumed to be a change made with less than 24 hours' notice.
Example 1: The first day on a work schedule is Monday, July 27. The employer
posts and emails the work schedule 14 days in advance, on Sunday, July 12 at
10:00 p.m. On Sunday, July 26 at 9:00 a.m., the employer posts and emails the
employee a revised schedule cancelling a shift originally scheduled for
Thursday, July 30. This is a schedule change made with less than 24 hours'
notice from the first day on the work schedule: the revised schedule was posted
and emailed 15 hours before the work schedule begins at 12:00 a.m. on Monday,
January 27. The employer owes the employee a schedule change premium of $75.
Example 2: The first day on work schedule is Monday, July 27. The employer
posts and emails the work schedule 14 days in advance, on Sunday, July 12 at
10:00 p.m. The schedule states that a fast food employee is scheduled to work a
shift on Thursday, July 30. On Monday, July 20 at 5:00 p.m., the employer posts
and emails the employee a revised schedule canceling the Thursday, July 30
shift. This is a schedule change made with less than 7 days' notice from the
first day on the work schedule: the revised scheduled was emailed and posted
151 hours (6.2 days) before 12:00 a.m. on Monday, July 27. The employer owes
the employee a schedule change premium of $45.
Example 3: The first day on a work schedule is Monday, July 27. A fast food
employee is scheduled to work a shift on Thursday, July 30. The employer posts
and emails the work schedule 14 days in advance, on Sunday, July 12 at 10:00
p.m. On Tuesday, July 14 at 12:00 p.m., the employer posts and emails the
employee a revised schedule moving the Thursday, July 30 shift to Friday, July
31. This is a date change with no loss of hours made with less than 14 days'
notice but at least 7 days' notice from the first day on the work schedule: the
revised schedule was emailed and posted 300 hours (12.5 days) before 12:00 a.m.
on Monday, July 27. The employer owes the employee a schedule change premium of
$10.
Example 4: The first day on a work schedule is Monday, July 27. The employer
provides the work schedule 14 days in advance, on Sunday, July 12 at 10:00 p.m.
On Wednesday, July 29, the employer sends a fast food employee home 3 hours
early from his scheduled shift. The employer does not post and or email the
employee a revised schedule, or pay the employee at his regular rate of pay for
the 3 hours cut from his shift. This is a schedule change made with less than
24 hours' notice. The employer owes the employee a schedule change premium of
$75.
Example 5: The first day on a work schedule is Monday, July 27. The employer
provides the work schedule 16 days in advance, on Friday, July 10 at 5:00 p.m.
On Sunday, July 12 at 10:00 p.m., the employer posts and emails employees a
revised schedule on which several employees' start times and end times
throughout the week are different. These are schedule changes made with at
least 14 days' notice from the first day on the work schedule. The employer
does not owe the employees schedule change premium for these schedule changes.
   (b)   A fast food employee who consents to a schedule change, including the
addition of a shift awarded to an employee pursuant to § 20-1241(d), does not
waive the right to a schedule change premium owed under § 20-1222 of the Fair
Workweek Law. A fast food employee's consent to a schedule change does not give
rise to any exception to the requirement to pay a schedule change premium.
   (c)   Where there is a discrepancy of more than 15 minutes between (i) a
work schedule and an updated work schedule posted less than 14 days before the
first day on the schedule or (ii) times a fast food employee worked and the
corresponding shift on the last-updated work schedule, and there is no document
showing that the employee requested the change or that another exception to
schedule change premiums set forth in § 20-1222(c) of the Fair Workweek Law
applied, then the fast food employer owes the corresponding schedule change
premium.
   (d)   Notwithstanding subdivision c of this section, no schedule change
premium is owed under § 20-1222 of the Fair Workweek Law to a fast food
employee who is absent from work, including but not limited to arriving late to
work, not reporting to work, leaving early without approval, calling out sick
or using other leave. In this circumstance, the employee's supervisor may
provide documentation of the exception to the requirements of the Fair Workweek
Law; documentation created by the employee is not required.
   (e)   Unless another exception to schedule change premiums set forth in §
20-1222(c) of the Fair Workweek Law applies, pursuant to § 20-1222(c)(2) of the
Fair Workweek Law there is no exception to the requirement to pay a schedule
change premium to a fast food employee for a schedule change made with less
than 14 days' advance notice for a change that the fast food employee has not
requested, including when:
      1.   A fast food employee continues to perform work for more than 15
minutes past the end of the scheduled shift;
      2.   A fast food employer makes a change to the work schedule that the
fast food employee did not request;
      3.   A fast food employer asks a fast food employee to come to work more
than 15 minutes early for a scheduled shift or to work an additional
unscheduled shift;
      4.   A fast food employer asks a fast food employee to leave work more
than 15 minutes early;
      5.   A fast food employer asks a fast food employee to fill in for
another employee;
      6.   A fast food employer seeks volunteers to work more or less time and
a fast food employee then volunteers to work more or less time;
      7.   A fast food employee picks up an open shift that a fast food
employer posted in a scheduling application, provided that the shift is not
subject to the exception for voluntary trades described in subdivision (h) of 6
RCNY §
7-622; or
      8.   A fast food employer terminates a fast food employee's employment
for any reason, as provided in § 20-1274 of the Fair Workweek Law.
   (f)   A fast food employee's acceptance of an offer of available shifts
pursuant to § 20-1241(c) of the Fair Workweek Law is not a fast food employee's
request for a schedule change, as provided in § 20-1241(e).
   (g)   A fast food employer does not owe premium pay under § 20-1222(a)(2),
20-1222(a)(4), or 20-1222(a)(5) of the Fair Workweek Law for subtracting hours
from a shift or cancelling a shift if the fast food employer (i) pays the fast
food employee for all work hours in the regular shift or on-call shift in the
work schedule prior to the change, without drawing down any bank of paid leave
available to the fast food employee, and (ii) maintains a record reflecting the
date and time of the scheduled hours that were paid but not worked.
Example: A fast food employee, Haley, is scheduled to work on Monday, April 4
from 10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., a 6-hour shift. When business is slow that day,
Haley's manager changes Haley's schedule with less than 24 hours' notice by
asking Haley to leave at 3:00 p.m. The fast food employer pays Haley for 6
hours of work for Monday, April 4, even though she only worked 5 hours, and
maintains a record indicating that compensation she received for one hour on
Monday, April 4 was for time in the scheduled shift not worked for Fair
Workweek compliance purposes. Haley's employer does not owe her a $75 premium
payment for the schedule change on Monday, April 4.
   (h)   A fast food employer does not owe premium pay under § 20-1222(c)(3)
when two fast food employees voluntarily trade shifts with one another. This
exception also applies when a fast food employee posts or "drops" a scheduled
shift that they do not wish to work in a scheduling application, and another
fast food employee "picks up" the shift.
   (i)   Documentation of a fast food employee's written request for a schedule
change or a shift trade must reference a specific schedule change or shift and
the date the request or trade was made. When the schedule change involves an
addition of time, a schedule change premium is owed unless the documentation
shows that the fast food employee requested the additional time in writing
before the employee began to work the additional time.
   (j)   When a fast food employer does not provide an employee a work schedule
at least 14 days before the first day of a work week, as required by § 20-1221
(b) of the Fair Workweek Law, the employee's work schedule for that work week
shall be the employee's regular schedule.
      1.   The employer is not required to pay a schedule change premium as
long as there is no variation between the shifts on the work schedule and the
shifts on the employee's regular schedule.
      2.   If the employer subsequently posts or transmits a revised work
schedule, the employer must pay the employee a schedule change premium for each
schedule change, consistent with the requirements set forth in § 20-1222 of the
Fair Workweek Law and subdivision (a) of 6 RCNY §
7-622.
      3.   If the employer has not provided the employee a regular schedule, in
violation of § 20-1221(a) of the Fair Workweek Law, and also has not provided
the employee a work schedule at least 14 days before the first day of a work
week, in violation of § 20-1221(b) of the Fair Workweek Law, then the employer
must pay the employee a schedule change premium for each regular shift or on-
call shift that it subsequently adds to the work schedule for that work week.
Example 1: Brandon's regular schedule provides that he works on Mondays,
Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Saturdays from 6:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. His employer's
workweek begins on Monday, November 22. The deadline to post the work schedule
is 12:00 a.m. on Monday, November 8 (14 days before November 22). The employer
posts and electronically transmits the work schedule for the work week
beginning November 22 on Tuesday, November 9 at 5:00 p.m. The work schedule
matches the regular schedule, except Brandon is scheduled to start work at 9:00
a.m. on Tuesday, November 23. The fast food employer owes Brandon a $20
schedule change premium for the subtraction of hours.
Example 2: A fast food employer has never given Jimmy a regular schedule. The
fast food employer usually posts the work schedule each week six days before
the first day on the schedule, on which Jimmy is unpredictably scheduled to
work anywhere from two to six shifts per week. The fast food employer owes
Jimmy a schedule change premium of $15 for each shift on each of Jimmy's work
schedules, in addition to other relief as set forth in the Fair Workweek Law.
   (k)   For any pay period in which a fast food employee was paid schedule
change premiums, the number of schedule change premiums paid and each premium
amount must be included on the wage stub or other written documentation
provided to the employee.
(Added City Record 5/24/2022, eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-623 Clopenings.
   (a)   A fast food employer's failure to pay a fast food employee the
required $100 premium for working a clopening and a fast food employer's
failure to obtain a fast food employee's written consent to work a clopening
shall each constitute a separate violation of § 20-1231 of the Fair Workweek
Law.
   (b)   For any pay period in which a fast food employee earned clopening
premiums, the number of premiums paid and their amounts must be separately
noted on the wage stub or other written form of documentation provided to the
employee for that pay period.
   (c)   If a fast food employee consents to work an unscheduled clopening, the
fast food employer must obtain the employee's written consent at least 11 hours
before the start of the second shift of the clopening.
(Added City Record 5/24/2022, eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-624 Offering Shifts to Fast Food Employees.
   (a)   The provisions of § 20-1241 of the Fair Work Week Law only apply when
a fast food employer is contemplating the hiring of a new fast food employee. A
fast food employer is not required to follow any of the requirements of § 20-
1241 to fill any available shift unless it hires, or anticipates hiring, a new
fast food employee to fill the shift.
   (b)   When a shift is available, the employer may award it to any current
fast food employee, in any non-discriminatory way the employer chooses, without
publicizing the availability of the shift to current fast food employees and
without offering it to employees who have been discharged for bona fide
economic reasons, as long as the employer does not hire, or anticipate hiring,
a new fast food employee to fill the shift.
   (c)   When a shift is available, the fast food employer may not hire a new
fast food employee to fill it, unless: (i) the employer has first made
reasonable efforts to offer reinstatement or restoration of hours to any
employees who have been discharged for bona fide economic reasons within the
past 365 days, in accordance with 6 RCNY §
7-629 of this chapter, and (ii) if the position has not been awarded to such a
discharged employee, the employer has offered the shift to current fast food
employees in accordance with §§ 20-1241(a)(2) and 20-1241(b) of the Fair
Workweek Law by posting a notice of available shifts in the workplace and
providing it to each current fast food employee electronically. If the fast
food employer has followed these steps and no current fast food employee has
accepted the offer, then the fast food employer may hire a new fast food
employee to fill the shift.
   (d)   For purposes of § 20-1241(b) of the Fair Workweek Law and 6 RCNY §§
7-603,
7-624, and
7-629, a shift becomes available any time a fast food employer decides to
schedule a fast food employee to work the shift. It does not matter whether the
shift is a newly-created shift or one that another fast food employee was
previously scheduled to work.
   (e)   When a fast food employer is required to give notice of an available
shift, the employer must include in the notice of available shifts the
following information for each shift offered:
      1.   Location.
      2.   Start time.
      3.   End time.
      4.   Whether the shift is a temporary shift or recurring shift. If the
shift is temporary, the notice must state the specific dates for which coverage
is needed.
      5.   The number of employees needed to cover the shift.
      6.   How the employee should tell the employer that they want to pick up
the shift and the deadline for doing so.
      7.   The criteria the employer will apply to distribute the shift, if
multiple employees express interest.
      8.   A statement that priority will be given to employees who already
work at the location where the shift is available.
   (f)   The fast food employer must post the notice of available shifts for at
least three consecutive calendar days when it contains recurring shifts.
Pursuant to § 20-1241(f) of the Fair Workweek Law, the fast food employer may
post a notice of available shifts for a shift that is less than three days away
for fewer than three days.
   (g)   Pursuant to § 20-1241(a) and (d) of the Fair Workweek Law, if the fast
food employer is not required to award an available shift to a discharged
employee who has accepted the shift, the fast food employer must award an
available shift to a current fast food employee who has accepted the shift and
already works at the location where the shift will be worked. If multiple
current fast food employees from that location have accepted the shifts, the
fast food employer must follow its own distribution criteria as described in
the notice of available shifts to make the award. If no current fast food
employee from that location has accepted the shifts, then pursuant to § 20-1241
(f) of the Fair Workweek Law the employer may award the shift to any current
fast food employee from another location who accepted the shift.
      1.   An employer must award a recurring shift by placing the recurring
shift on the fast food employee's updated regular schedule and timely
transmitting it to the fast food employee.
      2.   An employer must award a temporary shift by updating the relevant
work schedule and complying with the posting and transmission requirements for
updated work schedules.
      3.   In scenario 1 or 2, above, if the fast food employee receives an
award of a shift less than 14 days before the first day on the corresponding
work schedule and then works the shift, the fast food employer must pay the
fast food employee a schedule change premium, as provided in § 20-1241(e) of
the Fair Workweek Law.
      4.   If no current fast food employee has accepted the shifts, then the
employer may hire a new fast food employee to work the shift.
   (h)   A fast food employer may only hire a new fast food employee or place a
recurring shift on a new fast food employee's regular schedule if, after the
employer's offering the same shift as a recurring shift to discharged employees
in accordance with 6 RCNY §
7-629 and to current fast food employees for at least three days in accordance
with § 20-1241(b) of the Fair Workweek Law, no discharged employee or current
fast food employee has accepted it.
In the following examples, no employees have been discharged for bona fide
economic reasons within the past year. The employer anticipates hiring a new
fast food employee, but is required to first offer the available shifts to
current fast food employees.
Example 1: On its notice of available shifts, a fast food employer posts and
emails recurring shift s for hours from 4:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m. on Friday,
Saturday, and Sunday nights. No current fast food employee accepts any of the
recurring shifts. The fast food employer hires a new fast food employee and
places on his regular schedule recurring shifts from 4:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m. on
Friday, Saturday and Sunday nights.
The fast food employer has complied with the Fair Workweek Law by offering the
shifts to current fast food employees, and after none were accepted, hiring a
new fast food employee to perform the work described in the notice.
On occasion, the employer also schedules the fast food employee just hired
(whose status has changed from "new fast food employee" to "current fast food
employee" because they have now worked for 8 hours) to fill shifts during the
day or on other evenings, to meet increased demand or fill in for absent
employees. The employer pays premiums to the employee for accepting these
shifts, when required by § 20-1222 of the Fair Workweek Law. This also complies
with the Fair Workweek Law.
Example 2: On its notice of available shifts, a fast food employer posts
recurring shifts for hours from 4:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m. on Friday, Saturday,
and Sunday nights. No current fast food employee accepts any of the recurring
shifts. The fast food employer hires a new fast food employee and places on his
regular schedule recurring shifts from 9:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. on Fridays,
Saturdays, and Sundays instead of the hours described in the notice. The
employer has not complied with the Fair Workweek Law because the hours in the
notice do not match the hours actually assigned to the new fast food employee
and the new fast food employee is assigned hours that were not previously
offered to current fast food employees. The employer has also failed to email
the notice of available shifts to all current fast food employees.
Example 3: On its notice of available shifts, a fast food employer posts and
emails recurring shifts for hours from 4:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m. on Friday,
Saturday, and Sunday nights. No current fast food employee accepts any of the
recurring shifts. The employer hires three new fast food employees: Amalia,
Brandon, and Christina. The employer places on Amalia's regular schedule
recurring shifts from 4:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m. on Friday, Saturday and Sunday.
The employer places on Brandon's and Christina's regular schedule s recurring
shift s from 9:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. on Fridays, Saturdays, and Sundays instead
of the hours described in the notice. The assignment of shifts to Brandon and
Christina violates the Fair Workweek Law because they are not performing the
work described in the notice and their regular schedules contain recurring
shift s that were not previously offered to current fast food employees.
Example 4: On its notice of available shifts, a fast food employer posts and
emails current fast food employees about temporary shifts available on specific
dates that current fast food employees have left vacant on the schedule due to
call-outs or terminations from employment. The fast food employer hires three
new fast food employees and on their first day of work provides them regular
schedules containing recurring shifts that were identified as temporary in the
notice of available shifts. The hiring of each new fast food employee violates
the Fair Workweek Law because their regular schedules contain recurring shifts
that were not previously offered to current fast food employees.
   (i)   There is an instance of a violation of § 20-1241 of the Fair Workweek
Law for each shift that a fast food employer assigns or awards to a new fast
food employee without first offering the shift as required by § 20-1241 of the
Fair Workweek Law. Monetary relief for each violation as provided in § 20-1208
(a)(3)(e) shall be equitably distributed among the fast food employees who
should have received offers of shifts.
   (j)   The department or a court may grant compensatory damages for
violations of § 20-1241 of the Fair Workweek Law pursuant to § 20-1208(a)(1)
(administrative remedies) and § 20-1211(a)(5) (private cause of action).
Compensatory damages may include the wages current fast food employees did not
have an opportunity to earn due to the fast food employer's failure to comply
with § 20-1241 of the Fair Workweek Law.
   (k)   A fast food employer is not required to offer or award available
shifts to a current fast food employee who is on a leave of absence, unless the
current fast food employee is scheduled to return to work within 14 days of the
date of the offer.
   (l)   A fast food employer that owns 50 or more fast food establishments in
New York City may choose to make offers of shifts required by subdivisions (a),
(b), (f) and (g) of § 20-1241 and in compliance with subdivisions (d) and (e)
of this section only to fast food employees at its fast food establishments in
the same borough as the location of the available shifts.
   (m)   When a fast food employer is required to provide current fast food
employees notice of an available shift, the employer must first award shifts to
current fast food employees of the location where the shifts will be worked.
(Added City Record 5/24/2022, eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-625 Probation Period.
The number of days in a fast food employee's probation period shall be
determined based on the number of calendar days that have elapsed since the
employee's first day of employment.
(Added City Record 5/24/2022, eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-626 Progressive Discipline.
   (a)   A fast food employer must maintain a written policy on progressive
discipline that meets or exceeds the requirements of the Fair Workweek Law and
this subchapter and must follow such written policy, except in cases of
egregious failure by the fast food employee to perform their job duties or in
cases of egregious misconduct. A fast food employer's progressive discipline
policy must include either the accrual of disciplinary points, strikes, or some
comparable system of graduated discipline for subsequent infractions.
   (b)   A fast food employer must inform a fast food employee to whom
progressive discipline is being applied in writing of the conduct for which the
fast food employee is being disciplined and the consequence, if any, and must
give the fast food employee an opportunity to respond.
   (c)   A fast food employer must distribute its written policy on progressive
discipline to fast food employees by a method that reasonably ensures personal
receipt upon commencement of employment, within 14 calendar days of the
effective date of any changes to the policy, and upon request by the fast food
employee.
   (d)   Upon request by a fast food employee, a fast food employer must
provide the fast food employee with a copy of any discipline issued to the
employee within the previous 365 days.
   (e)   If an employer issues a regular schedule or work schedule that
violates a provision of the Fair Workweek Law, the fast food employer may not
discipline or discharge the employee based on the employee's noncompliance with
the portions of the that regular schedule or work schedule that violate the
Fair Workweek Law.
(Added City Record 5/24/2022, eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-627 Egregious Conduct.
   (a)   A fast food employer may discharge a fast food employee for an
egregious failure to perform their duties or for egregious misconduct without
utilizing progressive discipline.
   (b)   An egregious failure by the employee to perform their duties means an
employee's willful refusal to perform work for the majority of time on a shift.
   (c)   Egregious misconduct means workplace conduct that is so outrageous,
dangerous, or illegal that an employer cannot reasonably expect to correct it
through progressive discipline. Depending on the circumstances, examples may
include violence or threats of violence, theft, sexual harassment, race
discrimination, or willful destruction of property.
   (d)   An employee's lateness or failure to appear for a scheduled work shift
is not an egregious failure to perform job duties or egregious misconduct.
(Added City Record 5/24/2022, eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-628 Notice of Discharge.
   (a)   The Notice of Discharge provided to a fast food employee must contain
the following information:
      1.   The date of discharge;
      2.   Whether the discharge was for just cause or a bona fide economic
reason;
      3.   The precise reason(s) the fast food employee was discharged. If the
discharge was for just cause, the fast food employer must also itemize each
disciplinary step taken and the dates of such discipline, unless the discharge
was for egregious conduct as set forth in 6 RCNY §
7-627;
      4.   If the discharge was for a bona fide economic reason, a statement
informing the employee of the right to reinstatement or restoration of hours if
shifts become available, the procedure the employer will follow for offering
shifts to the employee, including whether the employee will be contacted by
phone, text, or email; the last-known phone number and email address on file;
and how the employee may inform the employer of updates; and
      5.   The date the Notice of Discharge is issued.
   (b)   The Notice of Discharge must be provided to the discharged fast food
employee by email, except that if the discharged fast food employee does not
have an operational email address, the Notice of Discharge must be mailed to
the fast food employee's most up to date mailing address known to the employer
using trackable mail.
   (c)   If a discharge is based on a bona fide economic reason, the fast food
employer must request updated contact information from the fast food employee
at the same time that it issues the Notice of Discharge.
(Added City Record 5/24/2022, eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-629 Bona Fide Economic Discharges.
   (a)   A fast food employer that has discharged a fast food employee based on
a bona fide economic reason within the previous 365 days must make reasonable
efforts to offer such employee reinstatement or restoration of hours before the
fast food employer may offer recurring shifts to current fast food employees or
hire any new fast food employees in accordance with 6 RCNY §
7-624. A fast food employer is not required to offer temporary (i.e. not
recurring shifts) to discharged fast food employees unless no current fast food
employee has accepted the shifts and the employer would otherwise hire a new
fast food employee to fill them.
   (b)   A fast food employer must contact eligible discharged employees by
email, text, or phone and using the most updated contact information provided
by the discharged employee, and must disclose to employees the procedures and
contact information it will use in the Notice of Discharge, as discussed in 6
RCNY §
7-628(a)(4). Regardless of the method used, or the number of employees
contacted, discharged employees with the most seniority have priority for
reinstatement or restoration of hours. Eligible discharged employees shall have
seven days to accept an offer of reinstatement or restoration of hours made in
accordance with this section.
Example: A fast food employer with four locations in New York City, Location A,
Location B, Location C, and Location D, closes Location D because sales have
been declining. The fast food employer discharges all ten employees at Location
D. In the Notice of Discharge, the employer informs each of the ten employees
that they will all be informed by email of available shifts at Locations A, B,
and C for the next 12 months, and that the employee with the most seniority
will have priority to receive any shift awards. Two months later, the fast food
employer has several recurring shifts to fill at Location A. The fast food
employer emails all employees discharged from Location D. After 7 days, two
discharged employees respond requesting all of the available recurring shifts.
The employer must award the shifts to the discharged employee with the most
seniority.
   (c)   When a fast food employer is required to notify eligible discharged
employees of the recurring shifts being offered, the notice must include the
days, times and locations that the shifts will occur; how the fast food
employee may notify the fast food employer of their acceptance of the shifts;
that the fast food employee has seven days to accept any of the shifts, and, if
the same shift is being offered to more than one eligible employee, that the
shift will be awarded to the most senior former employee who accepts any of the
shifts.
   (d)   A fast food employer is not required to offer reinstatement or
restoration of hours to an employee discharged based on a bona fide economic
reason when:
      1.   the employee was discharged more than 365 days prior,
      2.   the employee has notified the fast food employer in writing that the
employee does not want to receive offers of reinstatement or restoration of
hours,
      3.   the hours would be on specific days or times or at locations that
the fast food employee has informed the employer that they are not available to
work,
      4.   the employee has not provided updated contact information and their
telephone number and email address on file are no longer operational,
      5.   the employee has been reinstated to or had hours restored to no less
than 85% of the baseline regular schedule they worked immediately prior to the
discharge, or)
      6.   the employee has turned down an offer of reinstatement or
restoration of hours to the same regular schedule at the same location that
they worked immediately prior to the discharge.
   (e)   A fast food employer may not condition reinstatement or restoration of
hours on a fast food employee's ability to return to work or work the
additional hours less than 14 days from the date of the offer. If the fast food
employer has a need to fill such shifts temporarily before the discharged fast
food employee can begin work, the fast food employer may schedule a current
fast food employee to work the shift.
Example: In September 2021, the fast food employee at a fast food restaurant
location with the least seniority, Christina, was terminated due to a
documented reduction in volume of sales. No other fast food employee was
discharged. Christina's last regular schedule before her discharge provided
that she worked 32 hours per week. In December 2021, two six-hour recurring
shifts became available, and the fast food employer offered them to Christina
and current employees at her location who were not discharged. Christina
accepted the available shifts, as did two other current employees. The employer
properly awarded both shifts to Christina, in compliance with the requirement
that discharged employees have priority over current employees for awards of
available shifts. Thereafter, Christina's regular schedule contained 12 hours.
In January 2022, two additional six-hour recurring shifts became available. The
fast food employer again offered them to Christina and current employees at her
location who were not discharged. Both Christina and one other current employee
accepted the shifts. Because Christina's hours were not yet restored to at
least 85% of the 32-hour baseline regular schedule she worked before her
discharge, the fast food employer was required to award both available
recurring shifts to Christina.
(Added City Record 5/24/2022, eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-630 Circumstances That Are Not a Discharge.
   (a)   When an employee quits under circumstances that do not constitute a
constructive discharge, there has not been a discharge for purposes of § 20-
1272 of the Fair Workweek law.
   (b)   When a fast food employee requests or consents to a reduction in hours
in advance, it is not a discharge for purposes of § 20-1272 of the Fair
Workweek Law.
(Added City Record 5/24/2022, eff. 6/23/2022)
Part 3: Retail and Utility Safety
§ 7-650 Work Schedules.
   (a)   A work schedule provided pursuant to § 20-1252 of the Fair Workweek
Law must span a period of no less than seven days.
   (b)   Where a retail or utility safety employer is required to
electronically transmit a work schedule to a retail or utility safety employee
pursuant to subdivision (a) or (b) of § 20-1252 of the Fair Workweek Law, such
work schedule must be conspicuously posted at the work location and transmitted
electronically no later than 72 hours before the employee's first shift on the
work schedule. Updates to the work schedule must also be conspicuously posted
and transmitted electronically to the affected employees.
   (c)   Where a retail or utility safety employer is not required to
electronically transmit a work schedule to a retail or utility safety employee
pursuant to subdivision (a) or (b) of § 20-1252 of the Fair Workweek Law, a
paper copy of the work schedule must be conspicuously posted at the work
location and personally provided to the employee no later than 72 hours before
the employee's first shift on the work schedule. Updates must also be
conspicuously posted and personally provided to the affected employees.
(Added City Record 5/24/2022, eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-651 Schedule Changes.
   (a)   Where a retail or utility safety employer subtracts more than 15
minutes from a retail or utility safety employee's scheduled shift without at
least 72 hours of advance notice before the start time of the scheduled shift,
such change is a cancellation under § 20-1251(a)(2) of the Fair Workweek Law.
   (b)   For a cancellation under § 20-1251(a)(2) of the Fair Workweek Law,
"relief required to make the employee or former employee whole" as provided in
§ 20-1208 and "relief required to make the employee whole" as provided in § 20-
1211 must include the difference between the employee's scheduled work time and
the employee's actual work time.
   (c)   Where a retail or utility safety employer adds more than 15 minutes to
a retail or utility safety employee's scheduled shift without at least 72 hours
of advance notice before the start time of the scheduled shift, such change
constitutes "requir[ing] a retail or utility safety employee to work" under §
20-1251(a)(3) of the Fair Workweek Law.
(Added City Record 5/24/2022, eff. 6/23/2022)
Subchapter G: Pay Deductions
(Repealed City Record 5/24/2022, eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-701 Definitions. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 11/28/2017, eff. 11/28/2017; amended City Record 8/21/2018,
eff. 9/20/2018; repealed City Record 5/24/2022, eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-702 Valid Authorization. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 11/28/2017, eff. 11/28/2017; repealed City Record 5/24/2022,
eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-703 Electronic Authorization to Deduct and Remit Wages. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 11/28/2017, eff. 11/28/2017; repealed City Record 5/24/2022,
eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-704 Authorization to Deduct and Remit Wages. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 11/28/2017, eff. 11/28/2017; repealed City Record 5/24/2022,
eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-705 Required Disclosures by Not-For-Profits to Fast Food Employees.
[Repealed]
(Added City Record 11/28/2017, eff. 11/28/2017; repealed City Record 5/24/2022,
eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-706 Not-For-Profit Registration. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 11/28/2017, eff. 11/28/2017; repealed City Record 5/24/2022,
eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-707 Method of and Costs Associated with Remitting Deductions. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 11/28/2017, eff. 11/28/2017; repealed City Record 5/24/2022,
eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-708 Revocations. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 11/28/2017, eff. 11/28/2017; repealed City Record 5/24/2022,
eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-709 Petition to Re-examine or Revoke a Not-for-Profit's Registration.
[Repealed]
(Added City Record 11/28/2017, eff. 11/28/2017; repealed City Record 5/24/2022,
eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-710 Retaliation. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 11/28/2017, eff. 11/28/2017; repealed City Record 5/24/2022,
eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-711 Enforcement and Penalties. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 11/28/2017, eff. 11/28/2017; repealed City Record 5/24/2022,
eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-712 Civil Actions. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 11/28/2017, eff. 11/28/2017; repealed City Record 5/24/2022,
eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-713 Pattern of Violations. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 11/28/2017, eff. 11/28/2017; repealed City Record 5/24/2022,
eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-714 Recordkeeping. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 11/28/2017, eff. 11/28/2017; repealed City Record 5/24/2022,
eff. 6/23/2022)
§ 7-715 Waiver of Rights. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 11/28/2017, eff. 11/28/2017; repealed City Record 5/24/2022,
eff. 6/23/2022)
Subchapter H: Third-Party Service Workers
§ 7-801 Definitions.
   (a)   As used in this subchapter, the following terms have the following
meanings:
      (1)   "Cancellation" or "Cancelled", when used with respect to a trip or
delivery, means that the trip or delivery ends prior to drop-off of an order
with the consumer. When used with respect to trips including multiple
deliveries, the terms mean that the trip ends prior to the completion of all
planned drop-offs on the trip. The terms encompass cancellation initiated by a
consumer, a food delivery worker, or a third-party food delivery service or
third-party courier service.
      (2)   "Deactivation" means a third-party food delivery service or third-
party courier service ceases to offer shifts or trips to a food delivery worker
on a temporary or permanent basis.
      (3)   "Internal identifier" means a character string comprised of
letters, numbers, or symbols that a third-party food delivery service or third-
party courier service assigns to a food delivery worker for purposes of
uniquely identifying such worker within its records.
      (4)   "On-call time" means the time a food delivery worker is connected
to a third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service's
electronic system for arranging or monitoring trips in a status where the food
delivery worker is available to receive or accept trip offers or assignments
with a pickup or drop-off location in New York City and excludes all trip time.
      (5)   "Pay period" means a fixed and regularly recurring period of 168
hours or seven consecutive 24-hour periods.
      (6)   "Trip" has the same meaning as set forth in § 20-1501 of the
Administrative Code, provided that a single trip may encompass multiple
deliveries.
      (7)   "Trip time" means the span of time between the moment a food
delivery worker accepts an offer from a third-party food delivery service or
third-party courier service to perform a trip with a pickup or drop-off
location in New York City, or receives an assignment to perform such a trip,
through the moment such trip is completed or cancelled.
      (8)   "Utilization rate" means a third-party food delivery service or
third-party courier service's total trip time divided by the sum of its trip
time and on-call time.
   (b)   As used in this subchapter, the following terms have the same meanings
as set forth in § 20-1501 of the Administrative Code: "Food delivery worker,"
"food service establishment," "third-party courier service," and "third-party
food delivery service."
(Added City Record 6/9/2022, eff. 7/9/2022; amended City Record 6/12/2023, eff.
7/12/2023)
§ 7-802 Coverage.
   (a)   If a third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service
offers a trip to a food delivery worker that involves pickup or delivery of
goods solely from a business or businesses other than a food service
establishment, such trip is covered by Title 20, Chapter 15 of the
Administrative Code and this subchapter, except that the requirements of § 20-
1521(a)(1) shall not apply to that trip.
   (b)   If a third-party food delivery service offers a trip to a food
delivery worker on behalf of a different third-party food delivery service, a
food service establishment, or other business, such trip is covered by Title
20, Chapter 15 of the Administrative Code and this subchapter.
   (c)   If a third-party courier service offers a trip to a food delivery
worker on behalf of a person other than a third-party food delivery service,
such trip is covered by Title 20, Chapter 15 of the Administrative Code and
this subchapter.
   (d)   If a third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service
offers a trip to a food delivery worker who is physically located in New York
City at the time of the offer, for purposes of Title 20, Chapter 15 of the
Administrative Code, such trip originates in New York City.
(Added City Record 6/9/2022, eff. 7/9/2022)
§ 7-803 Retaliation.
   (a)   "Denial of work opportunities" under § 20-1504 of the Administrative
Code and "denial of future work opportunities" under § 20-1508 of the
Administrative Code include deactivations or any other act that results in a
food delivery worker not being offered a trip, provided however that such terms
do not include any act or omission required of a third-party food delivery
service or third-party courier service in order to comply with a food delivery
worker's maximum distance, bridge, and tunnel specifications in accordance with
§ 20-1521(c) of the Administrative Code.
   (b)   If a third-party food delivery service or a third-party courier
service maintains a system in which food delivery worker deactivations or trip
or shift offers depend, in whole or in part, on food delivery workers' internal
or public ratings, it is a retaliatory denial of work opportunity under § 20-
1504 of the Administrative Code and a retaliatory denial of a future work
opportunity under § 20-1508 of the Administrative Code when such third-party
food delivery service or third-party courier service downgrades a food delivery
worker's rating based on the exercise or attempted exercise of a right
protected under Title 20, Chapter 15 of the Administrative Code.
   (c)   It shall constitute retaliation under § 20-1504 of the Administrative
Code if a third-party food delivery service, a third-party courier service, or
any other person takes an adverse action against a food delivery worker on
account of such worker refusing a trip offered in violation of Section 20-1521
of the Administrative Code.
   (d)   Each downgrading of a food delivery worker's internal or public rating
as a result of such worker's exercise or attempted exercise of a right
protected under Chapter 15 of Title 20 of the Administrative Code shall
constitute a separate instance of retaliation and a separate instance of a
violation of § 20-1508(a)(3)(a) of the Administrative Code.
(Added City Record 6/9/2022, eff. 7/9/2022)
§ 7-804 Notice of Rights.
   (a)   A third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service
must provide the notice of rights required by § 20-1505 of the Administrative
Code to a food delivery worker no later than August 1, 2022 or prior to the
food delivery worker's first trip, whichever is later.
   (b)   The notice of rights required by § 20-1505 of the Administrative Code
must be provided by email and as a link within a text message sent to the food
delivery worker. In addition to provision by text and email, such notice must
also be made continuously available to all active food delivery workers through
any website, mobile application, or other internet service used by a food
delivery worker to perform work for a third-party food delivery service or
third-party courier service.
   (c)   When a third-party food delivery service or third-party courier
service downloads or otherwise uses a notice of rights prepared by the
commissioner and made available on the city's website, such third-party food
delivery service or third-party courier service must provide such notice in
accordance with any accessibility requirements set forth by the commissioner on
the city's website.
   (d)   If the commissioner updates the information in the notice of rights
pursuant to § 20-1505(a) of the Administrative Code, no later than thirty (30)
days following the effective date of such update, a third-party food delivery
service or third-party courier service must provide such updated notice to all
food delivery workers in the manner provided in subdivisions (a) through (c) of
this section.
(Added City Record 6/9/2022, eff. 7/9/2022; amended City Record 6/12/2023, eff.
7/12/2023)
§ 7-805 Recordkeeping.
   (a)   (1)   A request or subpoena for information or records from the
Department must be served on a third-party food delivery service or third-party
courier service in writing in person, via mail, or via email. When the
Department issues a written request or subpoena for data, information or
documents under § 20-1506(a) of the Administrative Code, a third-party food
delivery service or third-party courier service must provide all responsive
data, information, or documents to the Department within thirty (30) days of
receiving such request or subpoena. The Department may issue such written
request or subpoena for purposes of discharging any of its responsibilities
under §§ 20-1507 or 20-1522 of the Administrative Code.
      (2)   A deadline of more than 30 days may be agreed to on consent by the
Department and the third-party food delivery service or third-party courier
service.
      (3)   A third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service
must provide data, information or documents to the Department in their original
format or, if so requested, in the comma-delimited formats and layouts
prescribed by the Department in such written request or subpoena.
      (4)   The Department may issue a notice of violation to a third-party
food delivery service or third party courier service who fails to provide true
and accurate electronic records or information by the deadline provided in the
written request or subpoena or the deadline agreed to by the parties, provided
that any monetary penalties authorized by law for a violation of § 20-1506 of
the Administrative Code shall not apply while such written request or subpoena
is the subject of a timely-filed pre-compliance review proceeding.
   (b)   A third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service
must create and maintain contemporaneous, true, and accurate records
documenting compliance with the requirements of Chapter 15 of Title 20 of the
Administrative Code and any rules promulgated thereunder for a period of three
years. If, in the ordinary course of business, any record required to be
maintained under this subdivision is created by a person other than such third-
party food delivery service or third-party courier service, it is the
responsibility of such third-party food delivery service or third-party courier
service to obtain a copy of such record.
   (c)   A third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service
must maintain the following data and records:
      (1)   With respect to all food delivery workers, first name, last name,
phone number, email address, internal identifier, taxpayer identification
number if required to maintain such number under federal or state law,
preferred language, first date hired, retained or engaged, and last date hired,
retained or engaged.
      (2)   With respect to the notice of rights, data sufficient to show each
email and text message containing the notice of rights that was sent to a food
delivery worker, the date and time such email or text message was sent, the
first name, last name, and internal identifier of the recipient, and the phone
number and email address of the recipient.
      (3)   With respect to the maximum distance, bridge, or tunnel parameters
set or updated under § 20-1521(a) - (b) of the Administrative Code, the date,
time, and content of every selection of or update to such parameters and the
first name, last name, and internal identifier of the food delivery worker who
selected or updated such parameters.
      (4)   With respect to each trip offered to a food delivery worker:
         (i)   All information disclosed to a food delivery worker before such
worker accepts a trip under § 20-1521(d) of the Administrative Code, including:
            a.   The address(es) where the food, beverage or other goods must
be picked up;
            b.   The estimated distance for the trip;
            c.   The estimated time for the trip or, if disclosed in lieu of
estimated time for the trip pursuant to 6 RCNY §
7-806(f), the expected or required time of the last drop-off on the trip;
            d.   The amount of any gratuity(ies) specified by the consumer(s);
and
            e.   The amount of compensation excluding gratuity to be paid to
the food delivery worker for the trip or, if disclosed in lieu of compensation
excluding gratuity pursuant to 6 RCNY §
7-806(h), the hourly pay rate applicable to the trip;
         (ii)   The date and time that the trip offer was made to the food
delivery worker;
         (iii)   If different from the date and time that the trip offer was
made to the food delivery worker, the date(s) and time(s) that the information
required to be disclosed by § 20-1521(d) of the Administrative Code was first
disclosed to a food delivery worker;
         (iv)   Whether the offer was accepted, declined, or expired, and the
date and time at which this status was recorded;
         (v)   The route used to generate the estimated trip distance disclosed
to a food delivery worker pursuant to § 20-1521(d)(2) of the Administrative
Code and the date and time it was generated. Such route must include a sequence
of latitude and longitude coordinates;
         (vi)   The route distance between the first food service establishment
from which the food, beverage or other goods must be picked up on the trip and
the last delivery address on the trip;
         (vii)   The address(es) of where the food, beverage or other goods
must be picked-up and, for the location(s) to which the food, beverage, or
other goods must be delivered, the zip code and the latitude and longitude,
accurate to a precision of three decimal places;
         (viii)   The gratuity the third-party food delivery service or third-
party courier service charged to the consumer(s) for the order(s) on the trip;
         (ix)   The gratuity the third-party food delivery service or third-
party courier service paid to the food delivery worker for the trip;
         (x)   The compensation, excluding gratuity, paid to the food delivery
worker for the trip. If a third-party food delivery service or third-party
courier service compensates a food delivery worker on an hourly basis, the
amount of compensation for a trip is the time between the acceptance of an
offered trip and its completion or cancellation, multiplied by the hourly
payment rate for that trip;
         (xi)   Whether the trip was completed or cancelled, and the date and
time of completion or cancellation; and if cancelled, whether the cancellation
was initiated by the food delivery worker, the customer, the business from
which the food, beverage, or other good was to be picked-up, or the third-party
food delivery service or third-party courier service;
         (xii)   The first name, last name, and internal identifier of the food
delivery worker to whom the offer was made; and
         (xiii)   Whether each business from which the food, beverage or other
goods must be picked up was a food service establishment.
      (5)   With respect to each pay period during which a food delivery worker
engaged in any trip time or on-call time:
         (i)   The first name, last name, and internal identifier of the food
delivery worker;
         (ii)   The date, time, and amount of any payment made to the food
delivery worker for the pay period, or any part thereof;
         (iii)   The start date and time and end date and time of the pay
period;
         (iv)   The minutes of trip time worked by the food delivery worker;
         (v)   The minutes of on-call time worked by the food delivery worker;
         (vi)   The compensation, excluding gratuities, paid to the food
delivery worker and the basis for such compensation, including rates of pay and
units of pay. Such records must distinguish between compensation creditable
towards a third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service's
obligations under 6 RCNY §
7-810 and any other compensation the third-party food delivery service or
third-party courier service may have paid to the food delivery worker;
         (vii)   The gratuities paid to the food delivery worker for trips with
a pickup or drop off location in New York City;
         (viii)   All deductions from, additions to, or adjustments of
compensation owed or paid to the food delivery worker, itemized by type.
         (ix)   The minimum pay method chosen for the pay period pursuant to 6
RCNY §
7-810(c).
      (6)   With respect to each pay period:
         (i)   The start date and time and end date and time of the pay period;
         (ii)   The total minutes of trip time for all food delivery workers;
         (iii)   The total minutes of on-call time for all food delivery
workers;
         (iv)   The total compensation paid to all food delivery workers. Such
records must distinguish between (a) compensation creditable towards a third-
party food delivery service or third-party courier service's obligation under 6
RCNY §
7-810 and any other compensation the third-party food delivery service or
third-party courier service may have paid to the food delivery worker;
         (v)   The minimum pay method chosen for the pay period pursuant to 6
RCNY §
7-810(c).
      (7)   With respect to each insulated food delivery bag provided to a food
delivery worker:
         (i)   The first name, last name, and internal identifier of the worker
to whom the delivery bag was provided; and
         (ii)   The date of provision, and whether provision was by pickup or
whether the third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service
sent the insulated delivery bag to the food delivery worker.
      (8)   With respect to each deactivation of a food delivery worker:
         (i)   The first name, last name, and internal identifier of the worker
who was deactivated;
         (ii)   The date and time of deactivation;
         (iii)   The date and time of reactivation, if applicable;
         (iv)   The reason for the deactivation; and
         (v)   Whether the deactivation was effected through an automatic or a
manual process.
      (9)   With respect to each instance in which a food delivery worker
engages in trip time or on-call time:
         (i)   The first name, last name, and internal identifier of the food
delivery worker;
         (ii)   The start date and time and end date and time of each span of
on-call time;
         (iii)   The start date and time and end date and time of each span of
trip time; and
         (iv)   The manufacturer, name, and model number of the phone that the
food delivery worker used to engage in trip time or on-call time.
   (d)   In accordance with applicable law and upon receipt of appropriate
notice, a third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service must
produce reports to the Department concerning such third-party food delivery
service or third-party courier service's operations in New York City for all
periods on or after January 1, 2022; provided however, that for all periods
between January 1, 2022 and the effective date of this subdivision, a third-
party food delivery service or third-party courier service must produce reports
only to the extent that such third-party food delivery service or third-party
courier service maintained all or part of such records. The reports required to
be produced pursuant to this subdivision may be required by the Department no
more frequently than monthly and must be produced in accordance with a format,
layout, and procedure prescribed by the Department, provided that this
subdivision shall not be construed as requiring a third-party food delivery
service or third-party courier service to submit reports on orders for which it
had no responsibility for facilitating or arranging the delivery or pickup of
food, beverages, or other goods by a food delivery worker. A third-party food
delivery service or third-party courier service must maintain the records used
to produce such reports for a period of three years. Such reports may include
the following information for each pay period aggregated citywide and by zip
code of the pickup or drop-off location in New York City, food delivery worker
mode of transportation, and merchant line of business:
      (1)   The number of food delivery workers who engaged in any trip time;
      (2)   The number of food delivery workers who engaged in any on-call
time;
      (3)   The number of trips with a pickup or drop-off location in New York
City;
      (4)   The minutes of trip time;
      (5)   The minutes of on-call time;
      (6)   The total amount paid to food delivery workers, excluding
gratuities, creditable towards a third-party food delivery service or third-
party courier service's obligation under 6 RCNY §
7-810;
      (7)   The total gratuities paid to food delivery workers for trips with a
pickup or drop-off location in New York City;
      (8)   The minimum pay method chosen for the pay period pursuant to 6 RCNY
§
7-810(c);
      (9)   The number of consumers who received at least one delivery with a
pickup or drop-off location in New York City;
      (10)   The number of completed deliveries with a pickup or drop-off
location in New York City;
      (11)   The total amount charged to consumers for the food, beverage, or
other goods on deliveries with a pickup or drop-off location in New York City;
      (12)   The fees charged to consumers on orders for delivery with a pickup
or drop-off location in New York City;
      (13)   The subscription and membership fees charged to consumers in New
York City;
      (14)   The number of merchants who prepared at least one order for
delivery with a pickup or drop-off location in New York City;
      (15)   The delivery fees, payment processing fees, and other fees charged
to merchants on orders for delivery with a pickup or drop-off location in New
York City, itemized by type.
   (e)   The Department may prescribe data specifications, including field
definitions, record layouts, and uniform codes, for any record required to be
maintained pursuant to subdivision (c) or (d) of this section. If prescribed by
the Department, a third-party food delivery service or third-party courier
service must maintain the required records in accordance with such
specifications.
(Added City Record 6/9/2022, eff. 7/9/2022; amended City Record 6/12/2023, eff.
7/12/2023)
§ 7-806 Delivery Distance and Route.
   (a)   For purposes of § 20-1521(a)(1) of the Administrative Code, maximum
distance per trip refers to the route to be travelled from the first pick-up
from a food service establishment on a trip to the last drop-off on such trip.
   (b)   Pursuant to Subdivisions (a) and (b) of § 20-1521 of the
Administrative Code, a third-party food delivery service or third-party courier
service must provide a food delivery worker with the ability to set and update
the maximum distance parameter and preferences in respect to the bridges and
tunnels listed in subdivisions c and d of this section using the third-party
food delivery or third-party courier service's website, mobile application, or
other internet service through which trips are offered to such worker. Such
distance, bridge, and tunnel parameters, when set or updated, shall take effect
automatically and as soon as practicable, without requirement for review,
approval, or any other act by a natural person employed by or acting on behalf
of the third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service. The
functions to set and modify such parameters must be included within a user
interface easily accessible to workers through the website, mobile application,
or other internet service and no less accessible than other settings or profile
information a food delivery worker can select or input. A food delivery worker
must be able to select and deselect the bridges and tunnels listed in
subdivisions c and d of this section using a list or map within the user
interface.
   (c)   A third-party food delivery service or a third-party courier service
must include the following selectable bridges in the user interface provided to
a food delivery worker pursuant to subdivision b:
      (1)   Ed Koch Queensboro Bridge;
      (2)   Brooklyn Bridge;
      (3)   Williamsburg Bridge;
      (4)   Manhattan Bridge;
      (5)   Broadway Bridge;
      (6)   University Heights Bridge;
      (7)   Washington Bridge;
      (8)   Alexander Hamilton Bridge;
      (9)   Macombs Dam Bridge;
      (10)   145th Street Bridge;
      (11)   Madison Avenue Bridge;
      (12)   Third Avenue Bridge;
      (13)   Willis Avenue Bridge;
      (14)   Pulaski Bridge;
      (15)   Greenpoint Avenue Bridge;
      (16)   Kosciuszko Bridge;
      (17)   Robert F Kennedy Bridge (Triborough Bridge);
      (18)   Bronx Whitestone Bridge;
      (19)   Throgs Neck Bridge;
      (20)   Verrazzano-Narrows Bridge;
      (21)   Marine Parkway-Gil Hodges Memorial Bridge;
      (22)   Joseph P. Addabbo Memorial Bridge (North Channel Bridge);
      (23)   Henry Hudson Bridge;
      (24)   High Bridge;
      (25)   George Washington Bridge;
      (26)   Bayonne Bridge;
      (27)   Goethals Bridge; and
      (28)   Outerbridge Crossing.
   (d)   A third-party food delivery service or a third-party courier service
must include the following selectable tunnels in the user interface provided to
a food delivery worker pursuant to subdivision b:
      (1)   Lincoln Tunnel;
      (2)   Holland Tunnel;
      (3)   Queens Midtown Tunnel; and
      (4)   Hugh L. Carey Tunnel (Brooklyn Battery Tunnel).
   (e)   If a third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service
maintains a policy and practice of never offering trips that require travel
over or through a particular bridge or tunnel identified in subdivisions (c)
and (d) of this section, such bridge or tunnel may be omitted from the user
interface the third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service
provides pursuant to subdivision (b) of this section.
   (f)   Pursuant to § 20-1521(d)(2) of the Administrative Code, the estimated
time and distance for a trip must include the total time and the total distance
for a food delivery worker to complete the trip, including travel to a business
from the location where the worker accepted the trip offer, picking up the
food, beverage, or other goods for delivery, taking and depositing such
delivery at a different location as requested, any waiting time, and any time
spent placing the order with a food service establishment or other business,
transmitting payment for the order to a food service establishment or other
business, or assembling the order. The expected or required time of the last
drop-off on a trip may be disclosed in lieu of the estimated time for the trip.
   (g)   Pursuant to § 20-1521(d)(3) of the Administrative Code, a third-party
food delivery service or third-party courier service that engages a food
delivery worker to perform a delivery must disclose to the food delivery worker
the amount of any gratuity, if specified by the consumer, even if such third-
party food delivery service or third-party courier service is not the party who
received the order directly from the consumer.
   Example: If a consumer places an order for delivery with a third-party food
delivery service, and such third-party food delivery service transfers the
order to a third-party food courier service that then facilitates the delivery,
such third-party food courier service must disclose to the food delivery worker
the amount of gratuity, if any, specified by the consumer.
   Example: If a consumer places an order for delivery with a food service
establishment or other business, and such food service establishment or other
business transfers the order to a third-party food delivery service or third-
party courier service that then facilitates the delivery, such third-party food
delivery service or third-party courier service must disclose to the food
delivery worker the amount of gratuity, if any, specified by the consumer.
   (h)   A third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service
must pay a food delivery worker for a completed trip no less than the amount it
discloses pursuant to § 20-1521(d)(4) of the Administrative Code, in addition
to any gratuity owed for such trip. If, pursuant to subdivision (h) of this
section, a third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service
discloses an hourly pay rate to a food delivery worker, such third-party food
delivery service or third-party courier service must pay such food delivery
worker for the time such food delivery worker spends on the trip a rate no less
than such hourly pay rate.
   (i)   If a third-party food delivery service or a third-party courier
service compensates a food delivery worker on an hourly basis, such third-party
food delivery service or third-party courier service must satisfy the
requirements of § 20-1521(d)(4) of the Administrative Code by disclosing the
hourly pay rate that will be applied to the time such food delivery worker
spends performing the offered trip.
   (j)   For purposes of § 20-1521(a)(1) - (3) of the Administrative Code and
this section, a trip offered to a food delivery worker by a third-party food
delivery service or third-party courier service requires travel across a bridge
or through a tunnel if the shortest route generated by a routing engine
selected by the Department for such trip involves passage over such bridge or
through such tunnel, unless such third-party food delivery service or third-
party courier service produces contemporaneous records showing that it provided
an alternative route not requiring passage over such bridge or through such
tunnel to such food delivery worker and that such route was consistent with the
time and distance disclosed under § 20-1521(d) of the Administrative Code.
(Added City Record 6/9/2022, eff. 7/9/2022; amended City Record 6/12/2023, eff.
7/12/2023)
§ 7-807 Payments to Workers.
   (a)   For purposes of § 20-1523(a) of the Administrative Code, a third-party
food delivery service or third-party courier service shall be considered to
have charged or imposed a fee on a food delivery worker for the use of a form
of payment selected by such service if (1) the service does not offer a form of
payment to a food delivery worker free from any fees charged or imposed by a
financial intermediary or other person or (2) a fee for payment is charged or
imposed on a food delivery worker by any parent, affiliate, or subsidiary
entity of the third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service.
   (b)   A third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service
must calculate compensation owed to a food delivery worker for each pay period.
The pay period need not coincide with the calendar week but may begin on any
day and at any hour of the day. A third-party food delivery service or third-
party courier service must establish a single pay period for all food delivery
workers it engages. Once the beginning time of the pay period is established,
it must remain fixed, and may be changed only if the change is intended to be
permanent.
   (c)   A third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service
must pay all compensation owed to each food delivery worker for a pay period no
later than seven (7) calendar days after the end of such pay period.
(Added City Record 6/9/2022, eff. 7/9/2022; amended City Record 6/12/2023, eff.
7/12/2023)
§ 7-808 Insulated Food Delivery Bags.
   (a)   A third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service
must no later than seven (7) days following the day of a worker's sixth
delivery for that third-party food delivery service or third-party courier
service: (1) make an insulated food delivery bag required by § 20-1524(a)(1) of
the Administrative Code available for pickup by a food delivery worker or (2)
at the request of a food delivery worker deliver such a bag to the worker.
   (b)   In cases of loss, damage, theft, or deterioration, a third-party
delivery service or third-party courier service must make available replacement
insulated food delivery bags for a food delivery worker at no expense to such
food delivery worker. However, in no case is a third-party food delivery
service or third-party courier service required to provide more than one
replacement bag during a six-month period.
(Added City Record 6/9/2022, eff. 7/9/2022)
§ 7-809 Reserved.
§ 7-810 Minimum Pay.
   (a)   When the Department issues a subpoena for data, information or
documents under § 20-1522(a)(2) of the Administrative Code, a third-party food
delivery service or third-party courier service must provide all responsive
data, information or documents to the Department within 30 days of receiving
such subpoena and, if so requested, in the comma-delimited formats and layouts
prescribed by the Department in such subpoena.
   (b)   Standard Method. A third-party food delivery service or third-party
courier service must make payments to food delivery workers for their trip time
and on-call time in a pay period that meet the individual and aggregate
requirements of subparagraphs 1 and 2 of this subdivision.
      (1)   Individual requirement. A third-party food delivery service or
third-party courier service must pay to a food delivery worker who engages in
trip time in a pay period no less than the sum of such food delivery worker's
trip time in that pay period multiplied by the following minimum pay rates:
         (i)   $17.96 per hour, for pay periods that start on or after the
effective date of this section;
         (ii)   $18.96 per hour, adjusted for inflation as set forth in
subdivision (g) of this section, for pay periods that start on or after April
1, 2024; and
         (iii)   $19.96 per hour, adjusted for inflation annually as set forth
in subdivisions (h) and (i) of this section, for pay periods that start on or
after April 1, 2025.
      (2)   Aggregate requirement. A third-party food delivery service or
third-party courier service must pay, in aggregate, to the food delivery
workers who engage in trip time or on-call time in a pay period no less than
the sum of all such food delivery workers' trip time and on-call time in that
pay period multiplied by the following minimum pay rates:
         (i)   $17.96 per hour, for pay periods that start on or after the
effective date of this section;
         (ii)   $18.96 per hour, adjusted for inflation as set forth in
subdivision (g) of this section, for pay periods that start on or after April
1, 2024; and
         (iii)   $19.96 per hour, adjusted for inflation annually as set forth
in subdivisions (h) and (i) of this section, for pay periods that start on or
after April 1, 2025.
   (c)   Alternative Method. Notwithstanding the requirements of subdivision
(b) of this section, an eligible third-party food delivery service or third-
party courier service may use the alternative method specified in this
subdivision to determine the minimum payments it must make to food delivery
workers for their trip time and on-call time in a pay period.
      (1)   For pay periods that begin prior to April 1, 2024, any third-party
food delivery service or third-party courier service may use the alternative
method specified in this subdivision. For pay periods that begin on or after
April 1, 2024, a third-party food delivery service or third-party courier
service may use the alternative method for any pay period in which its
utilization rate is greater than or equal to 0.53 and in up to two pay periods
per year in which its utilization rate is less than 0.53. For purposes of this
subdivision, a year begins with the first pay period that begins on or after
April 1 of a calendar year and ends with the last pay period that begins on or
before March 31 of the following calendar year. If an eligible third-party food
delivery service or third-party courier service chooses this alternative
method, the method applies to each and every food delivery worker who engages
in trip time in the pay period. An eligible third-party food delivery service
or third-party courier service that chooses the alternative method for a pay
period must document its utilization rate and choice of method no later than
when payment is due pursuant to § 20-1523(b) of the Administrative Code and 6
RCNY §
7-807.
      (2)   An eligible third-party food delivery service or third-party
courier service that chooses the alternative method must pay to each food
delivery worker who engages in trip time in a pay period no less than such food
delivery worker's trip time in that pay period multiplied by the alternative
minimum pay rate. Such alternative minimum pay rate is calculated by dividing
the minimum pay rate otherwise required by subdivision (b) of this section by
0.60. Such third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service is
not required to pay a food delivery worker for the pay period if the food
delivery worker engages in on-call time but no trip time.
   (d)   Bases of Pay. A third-party food delivery service or third-party
courier service may fulfill its obligation under subdivision (b) or subdivision
(c) of this section using any basis of pay it chooses, including paying an
hourly rate, a per-trip rate or other piece rate, a bonus or other lump-sum
payment, or any other basis.
Example: In a pay period that begins on April 1, 2024, 5,000 food delivery
workers, in aggregate, engage in 55,000 hours of trip time and 45,000 hours of
on-call time. Worker A, individually, engages in 30 hours of trip time and 5
hours of on-call time. Following a 2% inflation adjustment performed by the
Department pursuant to subdivision (g) of this section, the minimum pay rate is
$19.34. The alternative minimum pay rate is $19.34 divided by 0.60.
Standard Method: The third-party food delivery service meets the requirements
of both subdivision (b)(1) and subdivision (b)(2) of this section if it pays
its food delivery workers as follows:
   1.   Each food delivery worker is paid at least an amount equal to their
trip time multiplied by $19.34. For instance, worker A receives at least
$580.20, which is $19.34 multiplied by 30 hours; and
   2.   The total the third-party food delivery service pays for the pay period
meets or exceeds the aggregate amount of trip time and on-call time (100,000
hours) multiplied by $19.34, which equals $1,934,000. Worker A's payment of at
least $580.20 for trip time is credited towards the aggregate requirement and
Worker A may, or may not, receive an additional payment.
Alternative Method: The third-party food delivery service has a utilization
rate of 0.55, which is its trip time (55,000) divided by the sum of its trip
time and on-call time (100,000). Since 0.55 is greater than 0.53, the third-
party food delivery service is eligible under subdivision (c)(1) to use the
alternative method to determine the minimum payments it must make to its food
delivery workers for the pay period. If the third-party food delivery service
uses the alternative method, it meets the requirements of subdivision (c) if
each food delivery worker is paid at least an amount equal to their trip time
multiplied by $19.34 divided by .60. For instance, worker A receives $967.00,
which is $19.34 divided by .60 multiplied by 30 hours.
   (e)   A third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service may
not use gratuities paid to a food delivery worker to offset such third-party
food delivery service or third-party courier service's obligation to pay the
food delivery worker the minimum pay required by this section.
   (f)   A third-party food delivery service or third-party courier service may
not use amounts paid to a food delivery worker for trips with a pickup and
drop-off location outside of New York City to offset such third-party food
delivery service or third-party courier service's obligation to pay to the food
delivery worker the minimum pay required by this section.
   (g)   The Department shall perform the inflation adjustment required by
subdivisions (b)(1)(ii) and (b)(2)(ii) of this section by multiplying $18.96 by
the percent change in the All Items Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners
and Clerical Workers for the NY-NJ-PA metro area between December 2022 and
December 2023 and rounding to the nearest cent, provided that if the percentage
change is zero or negative, the adjustment shall be zero. The Department shall
post the Consumer Price Index adjusted minimum pay rate on its website on or
before the first day of February 2024.
   (h)   For pay periods beginning on or after April 1, 2025 and before April
1, 2026, the Department shall perform the inflation adjustment required by
subdivisions (b)(1)(iii) and (b)(2)(iii) of this section by multiplying $19.96
by the percent change in the All Items Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage
Earners and Clerical Workers for the NY-NJ-PA metro area between December 2022
and December 2024 and rounding to the nearest cent, provided that if the
percentage change is zero or negative, the adjustment shall be zero. The
Department shall post the Consumer Price Index adjusted minimum pay rate on its
website on or before the first day of February 2025.
   (i)   Beginning with the minimum pay rate for pay periods that start on or
after April 1, 2026, and continuing each calendar year thereafter, the
Department shall post the inflation-adjusted minimum pay rate required by
subdivisions (b)(1)(iii) and (b)(2)(iii) of this section on or before the first
day of February of the calendar year in which the rate will take effect. Such
inflation adjustments will be performed by multiplying the minimum pay rate in
effect prior to adjustment by the most recent December to December percent
change in the All Items Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and
Clerical Workers for the NY-NJ-PA metro area and rounding to the nearest cent,
provided that if the percentage change is zero or negative, the adjustment
shall be zero.
   (j)   In the report the Department must submit to the council and the mayor
no later than September 24, 2024 pursuant to § 20-1522(d) of the Administrative
Code, the Department will review the base pay, workers' compensation, expense,
and multi-apping components of the minimum pay rate, the utilization
eligibility threshold for the Alternative Method, and the calculation used to
determine the alternative minimum pay rate to determine if adjustments need to
be made to the rates set forth in subdivision (b) of this section. As part of
such review, the Department may utilize any records and reports that a third-
party food delivery service or third-party courier service is required to
maintain, produce, or submit to the Department pursuant to 6 RCNY §
7-805, as well as any other information the Department deems relevant.
(Added City Record 1/19/2022, eff. 2/18/2022; amended City Record 6/12/2023,
eff. 7/12/2023)
Chapter 8: Biometric Identifier Information
Editor's note: former Chapter 8, relating to Transportation benefits, was
renumbered as
6 RCNY Chapter 7, Subchapter C. See City Record 8/21/2018, eff. 9/20/2018.
§ 8-01 Biometric Identifier Information Signage.
To comply with § 22-1202 of Chapter 12 of Title 22 of the New York City
Administrative Code, a commercial establishment covered by such section must
post a sign in a clear and conspicuous manner at every entrance used by
customers in a size of at least 8.5 inches by 11 inches that discloses if
customers' biometric identifier information is being collected, retained,
converted, stored, or shared. The requirements of this section may be fulfilled
by posting a color copy of the Biometric Identifier Information Disclosure, as
made publicly available on the Department's website, in a clear and conspicuous
manner at every entrance used by customers in a size of at least 8.5 inches by
11 inches.
(Added City Record 12/16/2021, eff. 1/15/2022)
Chapter 9: Prevailing Wage Law
Subchapter A: General
§ 9-01 Definitions.
   (a)   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms mean:
      Building Service Contractor. The term "Building Service Contractor" means
any partnership, association, joint venture, limited liability company,
corporation or any other form of doing business providing Building Service Work
for a Covered Lessor or Covered Developer.
      Building Service Employee. The term "Building Service Employee" has the
same meaning as set forth in the Prevailing Wage Law.
      Building Service Work. The term "Building Service Work" has the same
meaning as set forth in the Prevailing Wage Law.
      Case. The term "Case" means an enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Department before OATH based upon an alleged violation of the Prevailing Wage
Law.
      City. The term "City" means the City of New York or any City Economic
Development Entity.
      City Economic Development Entity. The term "City Economic Development
Entity" has the same meaning as set forth in the Prevailing Wage Law.
      City Development Project. The term "City Development Project" has the
same meaning as set forth in the Prevailing Wage Law.
      Commissioner. The term "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of the
Department or his or her designee.
      Comptroller. The term "Comptroller" means the Office of the Comptroller
of the City of New York.
      Covered Employer. The term "Covered Employer" means any Covered Lessor or
Covered Developer.
      Covered Developer. The term "Covered Developer" has the same meaning as
set forth in the Prevailing Wage Law.
      Covered Lessor. The term "Covered Lessor" has the same meaning as set
forth in the Prevailing Wage Law.
      Department. The term "Department" means the New York City Department of
Consumer Affairs.
      Financial Assistance. The term "Financial Assistance" has the same
meaning as set forth in the Prevailing Wage Law.
      Lease. The term "Lease" has the same meaning as set forth in the
Prevailing Wage Law.
      Payroll Records. The term "Payroll Records" means all time cards,
cancelled checks, cash receipts, books, documents, schedules, forms, reports,
receipts or other evidence that reflect job assignments, work schedules by days
and hours, and the disbursement of funds to an employee by cash, check, or in
any other form or manner.
      Person. The term "Person" means any individual, sole proprietorship,
partnership, association, joint venture, limited liability company, corporation
or any other form of doing business.
      Prevailing Wage. The term "Prevailing Wage" has the same meaning as set
forth in the Prevailing Wage Law.
      Prevailing Wage Law. The term "Prevailing Wage Law" means § 6-130 of
Chapter 1 of Title 6 of the New York City Administrative Code, entitled
"Prevailing Wage for Building Service Employees in City Leased or Financially
Assisted Facilities."
   (b)   Other Terms. The terms "Administrative Law Judge," "OATH," "Petition,"
"Petitioner," and "Respondent" have the same meanings as set forth in 48 RCNY §
1-01.
(Added City Record 5/24/2016, eff. 6/23/2016)
§ 9-02 Compliance by Building Service Contractors.
   Every Covered Employer must require that all Building Service Contractors
pay no less than the prevailing wage to all such Building Service Contractors'
employees performing Building Service Work at the premises to which a lease
pertains or in connection with a City Development Project.
(Added City Record 5/24/2016, eff. 6/23/2016)
§ 9-03 Employee Notices.
   (a)   Within 15 days after the City provides copies of the adjusted employee
notices required by the Prevailing Wage Law, Covered Employers must post the
notices in a prominent and accessible location and deliver the notices to all
Building Service Employees at each work location. Prominent and accessible
locations for posting of the notice include areas frequented by employees such
as break rooms, pantries and employee lounges. Covered Employers must promptly
replace any posted notice that is damaged, defaced, illegible or removed for
any reason.
   (b)   The notices must be delivered to employees in a manner that reasonably
ensures that employees receive the notice, including delivery by the Covered
Employer by hand, electronic mail or certified mail, return receipt requested.
   (c)   Covered Employers must post and deliver versions of the notices in
English, Spanish and any other languages that are spoken by Building Service
Employees at each work location if the City has prepared forms of the notice in
those languages and provided them to the Covered Employer. The City may make
copies of the notice available to Covered Employers on one or more websites
maintained by the City.
(Added City Record 5/24/2016, eff. 6/23/2016)
§ 9-04 Records.
   (a)   Employee Notices. Covered Employers must maintain written records of
their delivery of the employee notices required by the Prevailing Wage Law.
Acceptable records include logs with signed employee acknowledgments, and/or
email receipts reflecting delivery of the notices. Failure to maintain these
records shall create a rebuttable presumption that the Covered Employer did not
deliver the required notices to the Building Service Employees.
   (b)   Building Service Contracts. Covered Employers must maintain copies of
all agreements with Building Service Contractors.
   (c)   Employee Claims. Covered Employers must maintain all records related
to any complaint or any pending, threatened, or resolved legal action or
grievance by or from any employee concerning the Prevailing Wage Law.
   (d)   Termination or Adverse Employment Action. Covered Employers must
maintain all records related to the discharge, demotion, suspension, reduction
of hours, or other adverse employment action against any employee subject to
the Prevailing Wage Law. Failure to maintain these records shall create a
rebuttable presumption that any adverse employment action was in retaliation
for the applicable employee exercising his or her rights under the Prevailing
Wage Law.
   (e)   Obligation to Produce on Demand. Covered Employers must furnish copies
of any of the records specified in this section to the City within 15 days of a
request by the City.
   (f)   Retention Period. Covered Employers must retain all records specified
in this section for six years after the applicable Building Service Work is
performed.
(Added City Record 5/24/2016, eff. 6/23/2016)
§ 9-05 Employee Addresses.
   Covered Employers must provide the Department with the name and last known
address of all employees subject to the Prevailing Wage Law within 15 days of a
request by the Department.
(Added City Record 5/24/2016, eff. 6/23/2016)
Subchapter B: Construction
§ 9-10 Successors and Assignees.
   The definition of the term "Covered Developer" set forth in section 8 of
subdivision a of the Prevailing Wage Law shall be construed to include any
successor in interest, whether through merger, pledge, transfer, assignment,
operation of law or otherwise, of any Covered Developer.
(Added City Record 5/24/2016, eff. 6/23/2016)
§ 9-11 Building Service Work.
   For purposes of the Prevailing Wage Law, "Building Service Work" shall be
construed to include occupations relating to the collection of garbage or
refuse, the transportation of office furniture and equipment, and the delivery
of fossil fuel.
(Added City Record 5/24/2016, eff. 6/23/2016)
Subchapter C: Enforcement
§ 9-20 Cure Notice.
   (a)   Prior to commencing a Case, the Department shall deliver a written
notice to the applicable Covered Employer informing the Covered Employer that
the Department may commence a Case unless the Covered Employer demonstrates, to
the reasonable satisfaction of the Department, within 30 days, that the Covered
Employer has cured its violations of the Prevailing Wage Law. The notice shall
indicate that the Covered Employer may contact the Department if it wishes to
settle the alleged violation(s) of the Prevailing Wage Law, and note that any
settlement is at the discretion of the Department.
   (b)   Cure may be in the form of (1) payment of back wages or the monetary
value of health benefits withheld, including interest from the date of the
underpayment to the Building Service Employee; (2) payment of civil penalties
pursuant to the Prevailing Wage Law; (3) filing or disclosure of any records
that were not filed or made available to the public; (4) reinstatement or other
appropriate relief for any employee subjected to retaliation or discrimination
in violation of the Prevailing Wage Law; or (5) any other relief reasonably
calculated to remedy the violation of the Wage Laws. The Department may, in its
discretion, extend the time for the Covered Employer to cure.
(Added City Record 5/24/2016, eff. 6/23/2016)
§ 9-21 Petition.
   (a)   Charges in Petition. The Department shall commence Cases by service
and filing of a Petition in accordance with 48 RCNY §
1-23. The Department shall concurrently serve a copy of the Petition on any
employee complainants.
   (b)   Delivery of Complaint. Concurrent with service of a Petition, the
Department shall deliver copies to the Respondent of any employee complaints
concerning the Respondent's alleged non-compliance with the Prevailing Wage
Law.
(Added City Record 5/24/2016, eff. 6/23/2016)
§ 9-22 Settlements.
   (a)   General. The Department may settle a complaint at any time after it is
referred to the Department. The Department is authorized to determine the terms
of settlement, taking into account (1) the facts of the complaint, (2) the
interests of the City in ensuring compliance with the Prevailing Wage Law, (3)
the interests of the complainant(s), (4) the Covered Employer's history of
compliance with the Prevailing Wage Law, (5) the size of the Covered Employer,
(6) the good faith of the Covered Employer, (7) the Covered Employer's
compliance with record-keeping and notice requirements, and (8) any other
factors relevant to achieving a fair and reasonable settlement. Prior to
settling any complaint, the Department shall provide each complainant with
notice of the proposed settlement.
   (b)   Filing of Settlement Agreements. Every agreement settling a Case,
complaint or investigation shall be in writing and shall be deemed an "order"
for purposes section 7 of subdivision d of the Prevailing Wage Law.
   (c)   Complainants. The Department may settle a complaint or Case with a
Covered Employer with or without the consent of the applicable complainant(s).
The Department may dismiss a Case in the event the complainant refuses to
accept the relief in a proposed settlement, but such dismissal shall not
preclude a complainant from commencing a civil action.
   (d)   Private Settlements. A complainant and a Covered Employer may resolve
a complaint through a private settlement without authorization from the
Department, but the settlement shall not preclude (1) the Department from
commencing, prosecuting or settling a Case concerning the complaint or other
potential violations by the Covered Employer of the Prevailing Wage Law, or (2)
the City or City Economic Development Entity from enforcing its remedies under
any agreement or lease with the Covered Employer.
(Added City Record 5/24/2016, eff. 6/23/2016)
§ 9-23 Order and Determination.
   (a)   Decision on the Record. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary
in 48 RCNY §
1-51.1, Administrative Law Judges shall issue a decision on the record in all
Cases. Provided that no party has commenced a challenge to the decision
pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules of New York, and the
time to commence such a challenge shall have expired, the decision shall
constitute an "order" for purposes of this chapter and section 7 of subdivision
d of the Prevailing Wage Law.
   (b)   Judicial Challenge. If a party commences a timely challenge to a
decision on the record, then the final, non-appealable disposition of the
appeal, whether by order of a court of competent jurisdiction or settlement,
shall constitute an "order" for purposes of this chapter and section 7 of
subdivision d of the Prevailing Wage Law.
   (c)   Entry of Order. If an order (including any settlement deemed to be an
order for purposes of this chapter) sustains some or all of the charges in the
Petition, and provided that (1) the Person found violating the Prevailing Wage
Law has failed to comply with the payment or other terms of the order, and (2)
no proceeding for judicial review is pending and the time for initiation of
such proceeding has expired, the Department shall, as soon as is practicable,
file a copy of the order with the clerk of the county of residence or place of
business of the Respondent.
(Added City Record 5/24/2016, eff. 6/23/2016)
§ 9-24 Calculation of Back Wages.
   If a Covered Employer has failed to maintain original Payroll Records as
required by the Prevailing Wage Law, an Administrative Law Judge may determine
the amount of the unpaid wages and benefits based on the Payroll Records and
other evidence that are available, making reasonable inferences based upon the
customary staffing practices of, and wages and benefits paid by, the Covered
Employer.
(Added City Record 5/24/2016, eff. 6/23/2016)
§ 9-25 Private Right of Action.
   The commencement or pendency of a civil action by one or more employees of a
Covered Employer for violation the Prevailing Wage Law shall not preclude the
Department from commencing, prosecuting or settling a Case against the Covered
Employer based upon some or all of the same violations.
(Added City Record 5/24/2016, eff. 6/23/2016)
§ 9-26 Other Appropriate Relief.
   For purposes of section 4 of subdivision d of the Prevailing Wage Law,
"other appropriate relief" shall include an order to (i) reinstate an employee
or offer the employee a position comparable to their former position, (ii)
reverse any adverse employment action, including demotion, reassignment or
reduction in hours, (iii) cease retaliatory practices and institute measures to
prevent such conduct in the future, (iv) pay the wages and, if applicable, the
monetary equivalent of the benefits that the employee subjected to retaliation
or discrimination would have been granted or paid but for the adverse
employment actions by the Covered Employer, or (v) pay additional amounts to
the extent necessary to compensate employees for additional tax liability
resulting from a lump sum payment of back wages in a single year.
(Added City Record 5/24/2016, eff. 6/23/2016)
Chapter 10: Displaced Grocery Workers
Editor's note: renumbered as 6 RCNY
Chapter 7, Subchapter D. See City Record 8/21/2018, eff. 9/20/2018.
Chapter 11: Living Wage Law
Subchapter A: General
§ 11-01 Definitions.
   (a)   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms mean:
      Additional Covered Employer. The term "Additional Covered Employer" has
the same meaning as set forth in the Living Wage Executive Order.
      Case. The term "Case" means an enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Department before OATH based upon an alleged violation of the Living Wage Law
and the Living Wage Executive Order.
      City. The term "City" means the City of New York or any City Economic
Development Entity.
      City Economic Development Entity. The term "City Economic Development
Entity" has the same meaning as set forth in the Living Wage Law.
      Commissioner. The term "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of the
Department or his or her designee.
      Comptroller. The term "Comptroller" means the Office of the Comptroller
of the City of New York.
      Covered Employer. The term "Covered Employer" has the same meaning as set
forth in the Living Wage Law.
      Department. The term "Department" means the New York City Department of
Consumer Affairs.
      Employee. The term "Employee" means any person employed by a Covered
Employer or an Additional Covered Employer. This definition includes persons
performing work on a full-time, part-time, temporary or seasonal basis, and
includes employees, independent contractors, and contingent or contracted
workers, including persons made available to work through the services of a
temporary services, staffing or employment agency or similar entity. Provided,
however, that if the financial assistance is targeted to particular real
property, then only persons employed at the real property to which the
financial assistance pertains shall be deemed employees.
      Financial Assistance. The term "Financial Assistance" has the same
meaning as set forth in the Living Wage Law.
      Living Wage. The term "Living Wage" has the same meaning as set forth in
the Living Wage Law.
      Living Wage Executive Order. The term "Living Wage Executive Order" means
Executive Order No. 7 of 2014, dated September 30, 2014, entitled "Living Wage
for City Economic Development Projects."
      Living Wage Law. The term "Living Wage Law" means § 6-134 of Chapter 1 of
Title 6 of the New York City Administrative Code, entitled "Living Wage for
Employees in City Financially Assisted Facilities."
      Payroll Records. The term "Payroll Records" means all time cards,
cancelled checks, cash receipts, books, documents, schedules, forms, reports,
receipts or other evidence that reflect job assignments, work schedules by days
and hours, and the disbursement of funds to an employee by cash, check, or in
any other form or manner.
   (b)   Other Terms. The terms "Administrative Law Judge," "OATH," "Petition,"
"Petitioner," and "Respondent" have the same meanings as set forth in 48 RCNY §
1-01.
(Added City Record 9/15/2016, eff. 10/15/2016)
§ 11-02 Compliance by Covered Employers and Additional Covered Employers.
   Every Covered Employer and Additional Covered Employer must pay their
Employees no less than the Living Wage.
(Added City Record 9/15/2016, eff. 10/15/2016)
§ 11-03 Employee Notices.
   (a)   Covered Employers and Additional Covered Employers must post the
notices required by the Living Wage Law in a prominent and accessible location
and deliver the notices to all Employees at each work location. Prominent and
accessible locations for posting of the notice include areas frequented by
Employees such as break rooms, pantries and employee lounges. Covered Employers
and Additional Covered Employers must promptly replace any posted notice that
is damaged, defaced, illegible or removed for any reason. 
   (b)   The notices must be delivered to Employees in a manner that reasonably
ensures that Employees receive the notice, including delivery by the Covered
Employer or Additional Covered Employer by hand, electronic mail or certified
mail, return receipt requested.
   (c)   Covered Employers and Additional Covered Employers must post and
deliver versions of the notices in English, Spanish and any other languages
that are spoken by Employees at each work location if the City has prepared
forms of the notice in those languages and provided them to the Covered
Employer or Additional Covered Employer. The City may make copies of the notice
available to Covered Employers and Additional Covered Employers on one or more
websites maintained by the City.
(Added City Record 9/15/2016, eff. 10/15/2016)
§ 11-04 Records.
   (a)   Employee Notices. Covered Employers and Additional Covered Employers
must maintain written records of their delivery of the employee notices
required by the Living Wage Law. Acceptable records include logs with signed
employee acknowledgments, and/or email receipts reflecting delivery of the
notices. Failure to maintain these records creates a rebuttable presumption
that the Covered Employer or Additional Covered Employer did not deliver the
required notices to the Employees.
   (b)   Employee Claims. Covered Employers and Additional Covered Employers
must maintain all records related to any complaint or any pending, threatened,
or resolved legal action or grievance by or from any Employee concerning the
Living Wage Law.
   (c)   Termination or Adverse Employment Action. Covered Employers and
Additional Covered Employers must maintain all records related to the
discharge, demotion, suspension, reduction of hours, or other adverse
employment action against any Employee subject to the Living Wage Law. Failure
to maintain these records creates a rebuttable presumption that any adverse
employment action was in retaliation for the applicable Employee exercising his
or her rights under the Living Wage Law.
   (d)   Obligation to Produce on Demand. Covered Employers and Additional
Covered Employers must furnish copies of any of the records specified in this
section to the City within 15 days of a request by the City.
   (e)   Retention Period. Covered Employers and Additional Covered Employers
must retain all records specified in this section for six years after the
applicable work is performed.
(Added City Record 9/15/2016, eff. 10/15/2016)
§ 11-05 Employee Addresses.
   Covered Employers and Additional Covered Employers must provide the
Department with the name and last known address of all Employees subject to the
Living Wage Law within 15 days of a request by the Department.
(Added City Record 9/15/2016, eff. 10/15/2016)
Subchapter B: Construction
§ 11-10 Successors and Assignees.
   The definition of the term "Financial Assistance Recipient" as set forth in
the Living Wage Law and the definition of the term "Subsidy Recipient" as set
forth in the Living Wage Executive Order shall be construed to include any
successor in interest, whether through merger, pledge, transfer, assignment,
operation of law or otherwise, of any Financial Assistance Recipient or Subsidy
Recipient.
(Added City Record 9/15/2016, eff. 10/15/2016)
Subchapter C: Enforcement
§ 11-20 Cure Notice.
   (a)   Prior to commencing a Case, the Department shall deliver a written
notice to the applicable Covered Employer or Additional Covered Employer
informing the Covered Employer or Additional Covered Employer that the
Department may commence a Case unless the Covered Employer or Additional
Covered Employers demonstrates, to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Department, within 30 days, that the Covered Employer or Additional Covered
Employers has cured its violations of the Living Wage Law. The notice shall
indicate that the Covered Employer or Additional Covered Employer may contact
the Department to settle the alleged violation(s) of the Living Wage Law, and
note that any settlement is at the discretion of the Department.
   (b)   Cure may be in the form of:
      (1)   payment of wages and/or the monetary equivalent of benefits wrongly
denied to the Employee(s), including interest from the date of underpayment to
the Employee(s), based on the interest rate then in effect as prescribed by the
superintendent of banks pursuant to section 14-a of the state banking law, but
in any event at a rate no less than six percent per year;
      (2)   payment of a further sum as a civil penalty to the City in an
amount not exceeding two hundred percent of the total amount found to be due in
violation of this section;
      (3)   the filing or disclosure of any records that were not filed or made
available to the public as required by this section;
      (4)   the reinstatement of, or other appropriate relief for, any person
found to have been subjected to retaliation or discrimination in violation of
the Living Wage Law;
      (5)   payment of the sums withheld from the financial assistance
recipient by the City pursuant to Section 6-134(g)(1) of the Living Wage Law at
the commencement of the investigation and the interest that has accrued thereon
to the Employee(s); or
      (6)   any other relief reasonably calculated to remedy the violation of
the Living Wage Laws.
   (c)   The Department may, in its discretion, extend the time for the Covered
Employer or Additional Covered Employer to cure.
(Added City Record 9/15/2016, eff. 10/15/2016)
§ 11-21 Petition.
   (a)   Charges in Petition. The Department shall commence Cases by service
and filing of a Petition in accordance with 48 RCNY §
1-23. The Department shall concurrently serve a copy of the Petition on any
Employee complainants.
   (b)   Delivery of Complaint. Concurrent with service of a Petition, the
Department shall deliver copies to the Respondent of any Employee complaints
concerning the Respondent's alleged non-compliance with the Living Wage Law.
(Added City Record 9/15/2016, eff. 10/15/2016)
§ 11-22 Settlements.
   (a)   General. The Department may settle a complaint at any time after it is
referred to the Department. The Department is authorized to determine the terms
of settlement, taking into account:
      (1)   the facts of the complaint,
      (2)   the interests of the City in ensuring compliance with the Living
Wage Law,
      (3)   the interests of the complainant(s),
      (4)   the Covered Employer or Additional Covered Employer's history of
compliance with the Living Wage Law,
      (5)   the size of the Covered Employer or Additional Covered Employer,
      (6)   the good faith of the Covered Employer or Additional Covered
Employer,
      (7)   the Covered Employer or Additional Covered Employer's compliance
with record-keeping and notice requirements, and,
      (8)   any other factors relevant to achieving a fair and reasonable
settlement.
   Prior to settling any complaint, the Department shall provide each
complainant with notice of the proposed settlement.
   (b)   Filing of Settlement Agreements. Every agreement settling a Case,
complaint or investigation shall be in writing and shall be deemed an "order"
for purposes section 5 of subdivision g of the Living Wage Law.
   (c)   Complainants. The Department may settle a complaint or Case with a
Covered Employer or Additional Covered Employer with or without the consent of
the applicable complainant(s). The Department may dismiss a Case in the event
the complainant refuses to accept the relief in a proposed settlement, but such
dismissal shall not preclude a complainant from commencing a civil action.
   (d)   Private Settlements. A complainant and a Covered Employer or
Additional Covered Employer may resolve a complaint through a private
settlement without authorization from the Department, but the settlement shall
not preclude (1) the Department from commencing, prosecuting or settling a Case
concerning the complaint or other potential violations by the Covered Employer
or Additional Covered Employer of the Living Wage Law, or (2) the City or City
Economic Development Entity from enforcing its remedies under any contract with
the Covered Employer.
(Added City Record 9/15/2016, eff. 10/15/2016)
§ 11-23 Order and Determination.
   (a)   Decision on the Record. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary
in 48 RCNY §
1-51.1, Administrative Law Judges shall issue a decision on the record in all
Cases. Provided that no party has commenced a challenge to the decision
pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules of New York, and the
time to commence such a challenge shall have expired, the decision shall
constitute an "order" for purposes of this chapter and section 5 of subdivision
g of the Living Wage Law.
   (b)   Judicial Challenge. If a party commences a timely challenge to a
decision on the record, then the final, non-appealable disposition of the
appeal, whether by order of a court of competent jurisdiction or settlement,
shall constitute an "order" for purposes of this chapter and section 5 of
subdivision g of the Living Wage Law.
   (c)   Entry of Order. If an order (including any settlement deemed to be an
order for purposes of this chapter) sustains some or all of the charges in the
Petition, and provided that (1) the Respondent found violating the Living Wage
Law has failed to comply with the payment or other terms of the order, and (2)
no proceeding for judicial review is pending and the time for initiation of
such proceeding has expired, the Department shall, as soon as is practicable,
file a copy of the order with the clerk of the county of residence or place of
business of the Respondent.
(Added City Record 9/15/2016, eff. 10/15/2016)
§ 11-24 Calculation of Back Wages.
   If a Covered Employer or Additional Covered Employer has failed to maintain
original Payroll Records as required by the Living Wage Law, an Administrative
Law Judge may determine the amount of the unpaid wages and benefits based on
the available Payroll Records and other available evidence, making reasonable
inferences based upon the customary staffing practices of, and wages and
benefits paid by, the Covered Employer or Additional Covered Employer.
(Added City Record 9/15/2016, eff. 10/15/2016)
§ 11-25 Private Right of Action.
   The commencement or pendency of a civil action by one or more Employees of a
Covered Employer or Additional Covered Employer for violation the Living Wage
Law shall not preclude the Department from commencing, prosecuting or settling
a Case against the Covered Employer or Additional Covered Employer based upon
some or all of the same violations.
(Added City Record 9/15/2016, eff. 10/15/2016)
§ 11-26 Other Appropriate Relief.
   For purposes of section 2 of subdivision g of the Living Wage Law, "other
appropriate relief" may include an order to:
   (i)   reinstate an Employee or offer the Employee a position comparable to
their former position,
   (ii)   reverse any adverse employment action, including demotion,
reassignment or reduction in hours,
   (iii)   cease retaliatory practices and institute measures to prevent such
conduct in the future,
   (iv)   pay the wages and, if applicable, the monetary equivalent of the
benefits that the Employee subjected to retaliation or discrimination would
have been granted or paid but for the adverse employment actions by the Covered
Employer or Additional Covered Employer, or
   (v)   pay additional amounts to the extent necessary to compensate Employees
for additional tax liability resulting from a lump sum payment of back wages in
a single year.
(Added City Record 9/15/2016, eff. 10/15/2016)
Chapter 12: Freelance Workers
Editor's note: renumbered as 6 RCNY
Chapter 7, Subchapter E. See City Record 8/21/2018, eff. 9/20/2018.
Chapter 13: Petitions for Rulemaking
§ 13-01 Definitions.
   (a)   Person. "Person" means a natural person or a business entity,
including but not limited to a corporation, trust, estate, partnership,
cooperative, association, firm, club or society.
   (b)   Petition. "Petition" means a request or application for the Department
to adopt a Rule.
   (c)   Petitioner. "Petitioner" means the person who files a Petition.
   (d)   Rule. "Rule" shall have the meaning set forth in § 1041 of the City
Administrative Procedure Act.
(Added City Record 10/8/2021, eff. 11/7/2021)
§ 13-02 Procedures for Submitting Petitions.
   (a)   Any Person may petition the Department to consider the adoption of a
Rule. The Petition may be denied if it fails to include the following
information:
      (1)   The Rule to be considered, with proposed language for adoption;
      (2)   Petitioner's arguments in support of adoption of the Rule;
      (3)   Petitioner's proposal for the time period the Rule should be in
effect, if applicable;
      (4)   The name, address, telephone number, and email address of the
Petitioner or his or her authorized representative; and
      (5)   The signature of Petitioner or his or her authorized
representative.
   (b)   Any change in the name, address or telephone number of the Petitioner
or his or her authorized representative must be reported to the Department.
   (c)   All Petitions should be typewritten, if possible, but handwritten
Petitions will be accepted provided they are legible.
   (d)   Petitions must be submitted via the email address identified on the
Department's website or by mailing or delivering the Petition to the
Department's Deputy General Counsel, 42 Broadway, 8th Fl., New York, NY 10004.
(Added City Record 10/8/2021, eff. 11/7/2021)
§ 13-03 Procedures for Consideration of and Responses to Petitions.
If a Petition is submitted in proper form, the Department will deny or approve
the Petition within 60 days from the date it was received. The Department will
either deny such Petition in a written statement or state in writing the
Department's intention to grant the Petition and to initiate rulemaking by a
specified date. The Department is not required to grant the entirety of a
Petition and is not bound by the language proposed by Petitioner but may amend
or modify such proposed language at the Department's discretion.
(Added City Record 10/8/2021, eff. 11/7/2021)
