Chapter 67: Department of Cultural Affairs
Section 2501. Department; commissioner.
There shall be a department of cultural affairs, the head of which shall be the
commissioner of cultural affairs.
Section 2502. Deputies.
The commissioner may appoint a deputy.
Section 2503. Powers and duties of commissioner.
Except as otherwise provided by law, the commissioner shall have the power and
duty:
   (a)   to plan, acquire, design, construct, improve and manage facilities for
the conduct of cultural activities by the city and, to the extent possible, to
use the resources of other agencies to perform design and planning functions
subject to the approval of such agencies;
   (b)   to plan, develop, conduct and supervise such cultural activities; and
   (c)   to foster coordination among city, state and federal agencies, other
organizations and institutions with respect to cultural activities in the city.
Section 2504. Budget estimates of cultural institutions.
The capital and expense budget estimates, to the extent involving expenditures
to be paid from the city treasury, of all institutions or other organizations
engaging in cultural activities in the city, shall be submitted to the
commissioner, who shall submit such expense budget estimates to the director of
management and budget and such capital budget estimates to the mayor, the
borough presidents, the council, and the city planning commission in accordance
with law, together with the commissioner's recommendations.
Section 2505. Cultural affairs advisory commission.
   1.   There shall be in the department a cultural affairs advisory commission
consisting of not fewer than fifteen nor more than twenty-one members,
exclusive of a deputy mayor, the commissioner of cultural affairs, and the
commissioner of parks and recreation, who shall serve as ex-officio members.
The members of the advisory commission shall serve without compensation.
   2.   a.   Members other than ex-officio members shall be appointed by the
mayor for a term of three years and provided that of those members first taking
office one-third shall serve for one year, one-third shall serve for two years
and the remainder shall serve for three years. Notwithstanding the date of
appointment, the terms of members first taking office shall be deemed to
commence on the effective date of this chapter.
      b.   The mayor shall designate one of the members of the commission to be
chairman and one to be vice-chairman.
   3.   The commission shall advise the commissioner and the mayor with respect
to cultural activities in the city and in furtherance of this function shall:
      a.   formulate and recommend goals with regard to cultural activities and
policy;
      b.   foster coordination among city, state and federal agencies and other
organizations and institutions with respect to cultural activities;
      c.   compile data and reports and submit its findings to the commissioner
and the mayor; and
      d.   perform such other related functions and duties which may, from time
to time, be deemed appropriate by the mayor.
   4.   All city agencies are directed to cooperate with the commission,
consistent with the law, in order to coordinate and promote cultural activities
in this city.
Section 2506. Cultural plan.
   1.   On or before July 1, 2017, the commissioner shall submit to the mayor
and speaker of the council and post on the department's website a comprehensive
cultural plan. The department shall be the primary agency responsible for
developing, implementing, and overseeing the cultural plan.
   2.   The cultural affairs advisory commission shall advise the department
with respect to the cultural plan in accordance with section
twenty-five hundred five of this charter.
   3.   The department shall establish a citizens' advisory committee to advise
the department with respect to the development of the cultural plan, gathering
community input for such plan, and how to implement such plan. The commissioner
shall determine the size and composition of such committee consistent with the
provisions set forth in paragraph a of this subdivision.
      a.   The citizens' advisory committee shall consist of a minimum of
twelve members. Each borough president shall appoint one member, the speaker of
the council shall appoint at least three members, and the mayor shall appoint
at least three members, provided that the speaker and mayor shall have an equal
number of appointments, exclusive of the chair of such committee who shall be
appointed by the commissioner. Such committee shall consist of members whose
backgrounds and experiences are relevant to the plan and who collectively
represent a variety of interests relevant to the plan. The members appointed by
the speaker of the council shall include at least one representative of a
cultural institution that is a member of the Cultural Institutions Group and at
least two members meeting the following description: a representative of a
community-based organization whose principal purpose is the promotion or
support of cultural activities; an individual with background and experience in
business; an individual with background and experience in real estate; a
representative of a charitable organization; an individual with background and
experience in public housing; or a representative of a borough arts council.
All committee members shall serve without compensation.
      b.   Appointments to the citizens' advisory committee shall occur not
more than ninety days after the effective date of this section. Any vacancy in
membership shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
      c.   Prior to the submission of the cultural plan, the citizens' advisory
committee shall meet as often as needed, as determined by the committee in
consultation with the department, but not less than quarterly. Following the
submission of the cultural plan, and subject to the provisions of paragraph d
of this subdivision, the citizens' advisory committee shall meet as needed, but
not more than semiannually, to review the biannual reports required pursuant to
subdivision nine of this section.
      d.   The citizens' advisory committee shall cease to exist following its
submission to the commissioner of any recommendations it may make following its
review of the second biannual report required pursuant to subdivision nine of
this section, or five years following the submission of the cultural plan,
whichever is shorter.
   4.   The cultural plan shall address, but not be limited to:
      a.   the availability and distribution of cultural activities throughout
the city;
      b.   the relationship between cultural activities and social and economic
health and welfare in the city;
      c.   the role of the community outreach process in the development of the
plan;
      d.   feedback from a robust community outreach process;
      e.   the needs of artists with respect to affordable housing and
affordable long-term and temporary studio, office, and rehearsal space;
      f.   increasing arts education and cultural activities in the schools of
the city school district;
      g.   how cultural activities can be incorporated into community
development, economic development and land use planning processes and policies;
      h.   the needs of artists and communities with respect to the creation of
public art in public settings; and
      i.   a plan of how city agencies will coordinate with respect to cultural
activities, as consistent with the law.
   5.   The cultural plan may refer to data sets relevant to the plan.
   6.   The cultural plan shall, where feasible, utilize technology to enhance
outreach and communication of the planning process.
   7.   All recommendations, initiatives, and priorities included in the
cultural plan shall be designated, if known, as short-, medium-, or long-term.
   8.   The department and other relevant agencies shall consider the
conclusions and recommendations in the cultural plan and may act upon such
recommendations as appropriate.
   9.   Beginning two years following the submission of the cultural plan and
every two years thereafter, the department shall submit to the mayor and the
speaker a report detailing progress made on the recommendations, initiatives
and priorities that result from such plan. The cultural affairs advisory
commission and the citizens' advisory committee, during such committee's
existence, shall review such biannual report and may make recommendations to
the commissioner. The commissioner shall consider any recommendations received
from the cultural affairs advisory commission and the citizens' advisory
committee.
   10.   The cultural plan may be revised as appropriate every ten years.
(L.L. 2015/046, 5/18/2015, eff. 5/18/2015)
Section 2507. Data on cultural institutions group.
   1.   For purposes of this section:
      Cultural institutions group. The term "cultural institutions group" means
the group of cultural institutions that operate on city-owned property and are
recognized by the department as members of such group.
      Public school student. The term "public school student" means any pupil
under the age of 21 who does not have a high school diploma and who is enrolled
in a school of the city school district of the city of New York or a charter
school that is located within the city of New York, not including pre-
kindergarten students.
      Non-public school student. The term "non-public school student" means any
pupil under the age of 21 who does not meet the definition of public school
student in this paragraph, who does not have a high school diploma, and who is
enrolled in a school serving students in the elementary, middle or high school
grades, or any combination thereof, that is located within the city of New
York, not including pre-kindergarten students.
   2.   No later than September 17, 2017, and annually no later than September
17 of each year, the department shall send to the council, or shall include in
the mayor's management report prepared pursuant to section
12 of the charter, data in the aggregate regarding the cultural institutions
group to the extent such data is made available to the department, including at
a minimum:
      a.   total visitor attendance;
      b.   number of free or reduced-price visits;
      c.   total attendance by public school students through school-organized
visits;
      d.   total attendance by non-public school students through school-
organized visits;
      e.   number of partnerships with public schools;
      f.   total number of free admission hours;
      g.   number of programs, such as performances, exhibitions, and lectures,
related to the cultural institution's mission or discipline and targeted to a
general audience; and
      h.   number of programs that are targeted to or designed to reach
specific groups of people including, but not limited to, seniors or youth.
(L.L. 2017/009, 2/15/2017, eff. 2/15/2017)
Section 2508. City canvas program.
   a.   The department shall implement a program to approve, subject to
appropriations, from qualified not-for-profit organizations, including borough
arts councils, the submission of works of art for display on temporary
protective structures. Any such works of art approved pursuant to this section
must be consistent with the Zoning Resolution and comply with the rules of the
department. The department, in consultation with the department of buildings,
shall, to the extent received, biennially approve at least 40 such works of art
for such display. The not-for-profit organization that proposed a work of art
for display shall secure the prior consent of the owner of the protective
structure to display such proposed work.
   b.   The department shall annually disseminate information about the program
established by this chapter, including language soliciting submissions of works
of art for display on temporary protective structures, to city agencies and
entities, including the following, which may share such information with
members of the public served by such agencies or entities:
      1.   the city university of New York;
      2.   the commission on human rights;
      3.   the department for the aging;
      4.   the department of consumer and worker protection;
      5.   the department of correction;
      6.   the department of education;
      7.   the department of health and mental hygiene;
      8.   the department of homeless services;
      9.   the department of veterans' services;
      10.   the department of youth and community development;
      11.   the New York city health and hospitals corporation;
      12.   the New York public library;
      13.   the Brooklyn public library;
      14.   the Queens public library; and
      15.   residents of the New York city housing authority
   From among the works of art received in response to such solicitation, the
department, in consultation with the department of buildings, shall biennially
approve no less than 10 such works of art for such display purposes.
   c.   No later than September 1, 2025, and annually thereafter, the
commissioner shall post information about works of art approved pursuant to
subdivision a, subdivision b, and section 3307.11.2.1 of the New York city
building code on the department's website. Such information shall include an
artist credit for each work of art, and may also include information about any
entity that has agreed to defray the costs of developing and posting such
artwork, including a developer, builder or an outside organization. Such
website shall also include information about artists available to participate
in the program, as well as information for property owners seeking to
commission artwork pursuant to section 3307.11.2.1 of the New York city
building code.
(L.L. 2021/163, 12/24/2021, eff. 9/1/2023)
Section 2509. Open culture program.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Artistic or cultural event. The term “artistic or cultural event” means
an event or programming sponsored by an eligible institution, including, but
not limited to, cultural performances, rehearsals, and classes, that is open to
the public and offers services or information to the community.
      City artist corps. The term “city artist corps” means the initiative
established by the department in May 2021 to provide funding to the arts
community during the COVID-19 pandemic.
      Cultural institutions group. The term “cultural institutions group” has
the same meaning as set forth in section
2507.
      Eligible institution. The term “eligible institution” means a person or
entity that:
         (i)   is an art or cultural group, organization, or institution within
the city that is a member of the cultural institutions group or that is
eligible to apply for a grant through the cultural development fund
administered by the department;
         (ii)   provides documentation of funding from a borough arts council
or the city artist corps, or that would have been eligible to apply for funding
from such sources within the 2 years prior to the date on which such person or
entity submits an application to the office for participation in the program;
or
         (iii)   has fiscal sponsorship from a person or entity that meets the
definition set forth in (i) or (ii) of this definition.
      Office. The term “office” means the mayor’s office of citywide event
coordination and management established pursuant to executive order number 105,
dated September 17, 2007, or another agency designated by the mayor to perform
the functions set forth in this section.
      Program. The term “program” means the open culture program established
pursuant to subdivision b of this section.
      Roadway. The term “roadway” means that portion of a street designed,
improved or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder and
slope.
   b.   Open culture program. By August 1, 2023, the office, in consultation
with the department of transportation, the department of cultural affairs, and
any other agency designated by the mayor, shall establish an open culture
program for the purpose of authorizing an eligible institution to conduct an
artistic or cultural event in a roadway. The office shall establish eligibility
and use guidelines and policies for such program in consultation with such
agencies, and promulgate any necessary rules. Such program shall include the
following elements:
      1.   There shall be no fee for participation by an eligible institution
in such program, except as provided for in subdivision c of this section; and
      2.   An eligible institution utilizing a roadway for an artistic or
cultural event pursuant to such program shall conduct such event at no charge
to an audience.
   c.   Allowable fees. 
      1.   An application fee of $25 may be imposed for the processing of each
application to participate in the program. An applicant who requires a permit
to use or operate a sound device or apparatus shall pay any applicable fee in
accordance with subdivision h of section 10-108 of the administrative code.
      2.   Nothing in this section shall preclude the imposition of any civil
penalty or fine authorized for violation of any applicable rule or law.
   d.   Reporting. By November 1, 2023, and annually thereafter, the office
shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council and post on the
office’s website a report on the activities of the program in the prior fiscal
year. Such annual report shall include, but not be limited to:
      1.   The number of artistic or cultural events hosted through the program
in the prior fiscal year, disaggregated by borough and council district;
      2.   An overview of any outreach conducted by the office or other
agencies related to the program; and
      3.   The total number of eligible institutions that applied to the
program, disaggregated by the number of such applicants whose request to use a
roadway was granted or not granted.
(L.L. 2023/080, 6/25/2023, eff. 6/25/2023)
Section 2510. Funding for arts and cultural organizations and institutions.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Capacity-building funding. The term “capacity-building funding” means
funding to help small, community-based organizations serving low-to-moderate
income populations provide arts or cultural programming to members of the
public.
      Capital funding. The term “capital funding” means funding to support
design and construction projects or to purchase or lease major equipment or
machinery, such as vehicles or computers.
      Commissioner. The term “commissioner” means the commissioner of cultural
affairs.
      Cultural institution funding. The term “cultural institution funding”
means funding provided to a cultural institution in the cultural institutions
group.
      Cultural institutions group. The term “cultural institutions group” has
the same meaning as set forth in section
2507.
      Department. The term “department” means the department of cultural
affairs.
      Program funding. The term “program funding” means grant funding for a
nonprofit organization to provide arts or cultural programming to members of
the public.
   b.   No later than September 30, 2024, and no later than September 30 of
each year thereafter, the commissioner shall submit to the mayor and the
speaker of the council, and post on the department’s website, a report on
funding provided by the department to arts and cultural organizations and
institutions during the prior fiscal year. Such report shall include, but need
not be limited to, the following information:
      1.   The name of each organization or institution that received funds
from the department during the prior fiscal year, and for each such
organization or institution:
         (a)   The zip code, borough, community board, and council district in
which such organization or institution’s offices are located;
         (b)   The amount of funds the department provided to such organization
or institution during such fiscal year, and for each such amount, the type of
funds provided, including but not limited to program funding, cultural
institution funding, capital funding, and capacity-building funding;
         (c)   If provided to the department, the percentage of individuals
served by such organization or institution that identify as (i) Black,
indigenous, or people of color, including individuals who identify as Native
American, Native Hawaiian, Alaskan Native, Desi, Asian, Pacific Islander,
Chicanx, or Latinx, (ii) immigrants, (iii) people with disabilities, (iv)
seniors, or (v) lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, intersex, or
asexual; and
         (d)   The name of the leader of such organization or institution and
the demographic information of such leader, if such information is disclosed to
the department for purposes of the report required by this subdivision;
      2.   The total amount of funds used for staff and operating costs of the
department during the prior fiscal year;
      3.   A summary description of any trends or significant changes to
funding provided by the department to arts and cultural organizations and
institutions; and
      4.   A description of any challenges to obtaining data needed to produce
the report required by this subdivision.
(L.L. 2024/015, 1/6/2024, eff. 1/6/2024)
