Title 58: Department of Cultural Affairs
Chapter 1: Joint Living-Work Quarters for Artists
§ 1-01 Applicability.
These Regulations shall apply to all applications for artist's certification
submitted to the Department of Cultural Affairs (the "Department") for purposes
of occupancy of joint living-work quarters for artists in zoning districts M1-
5A and 5B.
§ 1-02 Artist's Certification Committee and Appeals Board.
   (a)   Qualifications, powers and duties.
      (1)   The Committee. The Commissioner of the Department of Cultural
Affairs (the "Commissioner") shall appoint an Artist's Certification Committee
(the "Committee"), the members of which shall review and make recommendations
regarding the disposition of applications for certification. Such committee
shall consist of up to 18 members, none of whom shall be a member of the staff
of the Department. There shall be, if feasible, at least one member appointed
from each of the following disciplines: painting, sculpture, crafts,
photography, film/video, dance, music, writing and performance/theater. The
remaining members of the Committee may be arts educators, arts administrators
or representatives of arts or other community organizations. Unless otherwise
waived by the Commissioner, all members shall reside or work in New York City.
      (2)   The Appeals Board. In the event that pursuant to 58 RCNY §
1-06(b), an appeal is taken of the Commissioner's denial of a particular
application, the Commissioner shall appoint an Artist's Certification Appeals
Board (the "Appeals Board") to make the initial recommendation with regard to
such appeal. The Appeals Board shall consist of at least 6 members, selected
from a list prepared on a yearly basis of individuals
         (i)   engaged in the disciplines referred to in 58 RCNY §
1-02(a)(1) or
         (ii)   otherwise engaged in the arts as arts educators, arts
administrators or representatives of arts or other community organizations,
none of whom shall have been members of the Committee at the time such
application was initially reviewed. Such Appeals Board shall contain if
possible at least 3 members engaged in the disciplines referred to in 58 RCNY §
1-02(a)(1), and in particular, 1 to 2 members engaged in the art form for which
the applicant has applied, and one member of the staff of the Department other
than the Artist's Certification Coordinator referred to in 58 RCNY §
1-03. Unless otherwise waived by the Commissioner, any person appointed by the
Commissioner to be a member of any Appeals Board shall reside or work in New
York City.
   (b)   Term. 
      (1)   Length. The members of the Committee shall serve for a three year
term and shall be divided into three classes consisting of not more than six
members each.
      (2)   New appointments. Each year in June, the Commissioner shall appoint
members to fill the places of the class whose term expires in that year, and
such newly appointed members shall serve for a term which begins on September 1
of that year and expires on August 31, three years hence. Members may be re-
appointed for one additional 3-year term but no member who has served two
consecutive three-year terms may serve an additional term until at least one
year after the expiration of his or her second term.
      (3)   Filling vacancies for an unexpired term. The Commissioner may at
any time fill any vacancy among the members of the Committee for the unexpired
term of such vacant position, but such appointment shall be subject to the
requirement set forth in 58 RCNY §
1-02(a)(1) as to representation of each of the media referred to in such
section.
      (4)   Resignations and leaves. A member may resign at any time prior to
the expiration of his or her term by delivering a letter of resignation to the
Commissioner, and such resignation shall be effective as of the date specified
in such letter. A leave of absence not to exceed one year may be taken by any
member.
      (5)   Removal of Committee members. The Commissioner may, after
consultation with the Committee, remove a member from the Committee whenever
the Commissioner concludes, in the reasonable exercise of his or her
discretion, that service by that member is no longer appropriate. Grounds for
removal shall include, but not be limited to, the fact that such member
         (i)   no longer resides or works in New York City or
         (ii)   has incurred three or more unexcused absences from regularly
scheduled monthly meetings of the Committee in any one year period beginning
September 1.
   (c)   Meetings. The Committee shall meet during the first week of each month
except July and August and at such other times as may be scheduled by the
Department. A record shall be kept of each regularly scheduled meeting and
shall include, among other matters, a listing of each applicant whose
application is considered at such meeting and the recommendation or other
action taken with regard to such application.
§ 1-03 Artist's Certification Coordinator.
The Commissioner shall appoint an Artist's Certification Coordinator (the
"Coordinator") who shall be a member of the staff of the Department and who
shall be responsible for the administration of the artist's certification
procedure. Among other matters, the Coordinator shall review applications,
maintain files pertaining to artist's certification, answer inquiries from the
public, schedule meetings of the Committee, and prepare the agenda for and the
record of each such meeting.
§ 1-04 Application Procedures.
   (a)   Submission of application. An application form for artist's
certification may be downloaded from the Department's website, picked up in
person, or requested by mail from the Department's offices located at 31
Chambers Street, 2nd Floor, New York, New York 10007. The completed application
must be returned to the Department, together with the required documentation,
in person or by mail to the Department's offices, addressed to the attention of
the Artist's Certification Coordinator. The Coordinator shall then review such
application for completeness. If an application is considered to be incomplete,
the Coordinator shall attempt to contact and advise the applicant as to what
additional material should be submitted. The applicant may then either submit
additional material or request that the application be considered as originally
submitted, in which case the Coordinator shall bring such application before
the Committee pursuant to 58 RCNY §
1-04(c).
   (b)   Required elements.
      (1)   Basic information. To be complete, an application for artist's
certification must ordinarily include the following:
         (i)   A description of the applicant's art form or art occupation.
         (ii)   An explanation as to
            (A)   why occupancy of a joint living-work quarters for artists is
important to the applicant in carrying out his or her art form or art
occupation,
            (B)   how such space is or will be used for such purpose, and
            (C)   if the applicant currently lives and works in the same space,
a diagram and/or photographs of such space.
         (iii)   A professional resume indicating, with reference to the
applicant's particular art form or art occupation, professional experience (or
a combination of professional training and experience) sufficient to
demonstrate a serious, consistent commitment to such art form or occupation –
such resume must also include other information as to the applicant's
educational background, professional training, and public presentation of his
or her work, e.g., exhibitions, performances, publications and the like, all
such information to include relevant dates.
         (iv)   Documentation appropriate to the applicant's field evidencing
his or her work and its dissemination to the public, e.g.,
            Visual Artists – 15 to 20 slides and/or photographs of work
            Set and Costume Designers – photographs of work
            Choreographers – photographs and/or video tapes or films of work,
notated dance scores
            Composers – scores, tapes and/or recordings of compositions
            Filmmakers and Video Artists – films and/or videotapes
            Writers – samples of published work such as books, magazines,
anthologies, broadsides, audio- and/or video or phonograph recordings of
readings and performances
            All applicants – documentation of performances, publications,
readings or showing of work to public such as programs, films, announcements or
reviews.
         (v)   Additional material which demonstrates outside recognition of
his or her standing as a professional in his or her art form or art occupation,
e.g., reviews, written proof of grants, awards or fellowships, or relevant
union or guild memberships.
         (vi)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of two people
recognized in the applicant's field who may be contacted as to the applicant's
professional involvement as an artist.
      (2)   Supplemental data. In addition to the material referred to in 58
RCNY §
1-04(b)(1), the applicant may submit such other information as the applicant
believes may support his or her request for artist's certification. The
applicant may also be asked to submit further material relevant to his or her
art form or art occupation in the event that:
         (i)   the Coordinator determines that the application is incomplete or
         (ii)   the Committee believes that it needs such additional material
in order to make its recommendation. In such instances and in the case of an
application being reconsidered pursuant to 58 RCNY §
1-06(a), the applicant may request that a studio visit be made to his or her
studio or work place. Provided such space is located in New York City, the
Coordinator, accompanied by another member of the Committee, shall use best
efforts to comply with such request.
   (c)   Review of application.
      (1)   At each regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee, subject to
Paragraph (2) of this subdivision, all those applications considered complete
by the Coordinator shall be presented to the Committee for review. The
Coordinator shall first separate the applications into different categories
according to art form or occupation and shall then assign each category of
applications to a two member panel of the Committee, at least one member of
which, if possible, should be engaged in the same or a related art form or
occupation. Each panel shall then review the applications in its category and
shall recommend to the Coordinator the action to be taken by the Commissioner
with regard to each such application. The Coordinator may, in his or her
discretion, present any application to the full Committee for discussion.
      (2)   The Coordinator shall have the discretion not to assign a
particular application for review by a panel in the event that, after
consultation with the Committee, where feasible, the Coordinator determines
that such application clearly demonstrates that the applicant is entitled to
certification. The Coordinator shall present any such application to the
Commissioner at such time as those applications reviewed by the Committee are
presented to the Commissioner for action.
      (3)   If any panel should be of the opinion that a particular application
is incomplete, the panel shall advise the Coordinator of the information such
panel believes is necessary to complete the application. The consideration of
such an application shall be postponed and it shall not be presented to the
Committee again until the applicant supplies the missing information or the
applicant requests that the application be considered as originally submitted.
      (4)   Following each meeting, the Coordinator shall gather the
recommendations from each panel and shall present the applications, the
recommendations and other pertinent information to the Commissioner, together
with a written statement in the case of each application as to the reasons for
the recommendations made with regard to the application. At this time, the
Coordinator shall also notify all individuals whose applications have been
tabled and shall advise them of the additional information requested by the
Committee.
      (5)   The Commissioner shall make the actual determination with regard to
each application. After action by the Commissioner, the Coordinator shall issue
artist's certification to those individuals whose applications have been
granted and shall notify those individuals whose applications have been denied
of the reasons for such denial, and of their right to reconsideration and
appeal thereof.
      (6)   If a particular applicant for artist's certification demonstrates
in his or her application that he or she works in a heavy or bulky medium,
pursuant to § 42-141(b)(ii) of the New York City Zoning Resolution, the
certification form issued such applicant may, at the applicant's request, carry
a notation to that effect.
      (7)   Following the determination by the Commissioner or the withdrawal
of any application for artist's certification, the Coordinator shall return to
the applicant the materials listed in 58 RCNY §
1-04(b)(l)(iv) submitted in support of such application provided that he or she
has submitted a self-addressed, stamped envelope for the return of such
materials. Alternatively, these materials may be picked up by the applicant at
the offices of the Department during regular business hours. Supporting
materials which have not been picked up within four months of the date of the
Commissioner's determination of the relevant application may be disposed of at
the discretion of the Coordinator, except that the Coordinator shall retain
possession of materials submitted in support of an application being
reconsidered or on appeal until such time as a determination is reached with
regard to reconsideration or appeal.
      (8)   In the event that an applicant whose application has either been
tabled or is being held for reconsideration has not submitted the additional
material requested by the Coordinator within four months after the date on
which such application was either tabled or initially denied, the Coordinator
may in his or her discretion consider such application withdrawn. In such
instance, the Coordinator may dispose of supporting materials in accordance
with 58 RCNY §
1-04(c)(7).
(Amended City Record 12/1/2017, eff. 12/31/2017)
§ 1-05 Criteria for Granting Artist's Certification.
   (a)   Statutory basis. In determining whether to grant an application for
artist's certification, the Department shall follow those criteria contained in
the definition of an "artist" set forth in Section 276 of Article 7B of the New
York State Multiple Dwelling Law, namely that those granted artist's
certification be "regularly engaged in the fine arts . . . on a professional
basis." Specifically, each applicant granted artist's certification must
demonstrate that he or she meets the following criteria:
      (1)   Regularly engaged. The applicant is currently engaged in and
demonstrates a serious consistent commitment to his or her art form or art
occupation.
      (2)   Fine arts. The applicant is engaged in an art form or art
occupation which
         (i)   can be considered and
         (ii)   is pursued by the applicant as a "fine art". To demonstrate
pursuit of such art form or occupation as a fine art, the application should
evidence a substantial element of independent aesthetic judgment by the
applicant in pursuing such art form or occupation, i.e., the production of work
solely on a commercial, industrial, functional, or work-for-hire basis without
evidence of the foregoing elements is not sufficient to demonstrate pursuit of
a particular art form or occupation as a fine art.
      (3)   Professional basis. The application should warrant a finding that
the applicant is committed to the art form or occupation as his or her primary
vocation and that others in the field recognize the applicant as a professional
with regard to his or her art form or occupation. The word "professional" in
this context does not necessarily refer to the amount of income earned by the
applicant from his or her art form or occupation.
   (b)   Intent to use joint living-work quarters. Consistent with the
designation of zoning districts M1-5A and M1-5B as manufacturing districts
pursuant to the New York City Zoning Resolution, to obtain artist's
certification, an applicant must demonstrate an intent to use joint living-work
quarters for the purpose of carrying out his or her art form or occupation.
(Amended City Record 12/1/2017, eff. 12/31/2017)
§ 1-06 Right to Reconsideration or Appeal.
   (a)   Reconsideration.
      (1)   In the event an applicant is denied artist's certification by the
Commissioner, the applicant shall have the opportunity either to
         (i)   withdraw the application,
         (ii)   request that it be reconsidered, in which case the applicant
shall submit additional material in support of the application, or
         (iii)   request an immediate appeal of the Commissioner's denial of
certification. If within 30 days of the date notice of such denial is given,
the Artist's Certification Coordinator has not been notified that the applicant
requests either reconsideration or appeal, then the application shall be
considered withdrawn. An applicant denied certification whose application has
been withdrawn after the initial determination by the Commissioner may submit a
new application for certification at any time.
      (2)   Should an applicant who has been denied certification request
reconsideration of his or her application, after the Artist's Certification
Coordinator determines that all relevant additional information has been
submitted, such application shall be presented to the Committee for
reconsideration at the next regularly scheduled meeting. Reconsideration of an
application shall be governed by the same procedures set forth herein as to the
initial submission of an application.
   (b)   Appeal.
      (1)   In the event that an application is reconsidered and again denied,
or the applicant elects not to submit additional information and have his or
her application reconsidered by the Committee, the applicant may take an appeal
to the Appeals Board. Upon receipt of a request for an appeal, the Coordinator
shall schedule a special meeting of the Appeals Board to consider the appeal.
At the meeting, the Coordinator shall present the application, following which
the Coordinator shall seek the opinion of each Appeals Board member as to
whether the appeal should be granted and the reasons for such opinion. The
Coordinator shall then forward a statement of these opinions to the
Commissioner who shall then determine whether the appeal should be granted.
Following the Commissioner's decision with regard to the appeal, the applicant
shall be promptly notified of such decision. In the event the Commissioner
determines that the appeal should be granted, the Coordinator shall issue an
artist's certification to the applicant.
      (2)   In the event that the Commissioner determines that the appeal
should be denied, then the applicant may submit a new application for artist's
certification after a period of one year has elapsed from the date of such
determination.
      (3)   Following determination of the appeal, the Coordinator shall return
the materials submitted in support of the application to the applicant in
accordance with the procedures set forth in 58 RCNY §
1-04(c)(7). Supporting materials which have not been picked up within four
months of the date of the Commissioner's determination of the appeal may be
disposed of at the discretion of the Coordinator.
      (4)   The decision of the Commissioner with reference to a particular
appeal shall be considered to be the final determination of the relevant
application for purposes of Article 78 of the New York Civil Practice Law and
Rules.
§ 1-07 Effect of Artist's Certification.
   (a)   Validity.
      (1)   Artist's certification shall be valid for so long as the artist so
certified resides at the address contained on the certification form. An artist
granted artist's certification may apply to the Department for a change in the
address indicated on the certification form provided that
         (i)   such artist returns his or her original certification form and
submits adequate proof, such as a signed lease, that he or she now resides at
the new address, and
         (ii)   no more than one year has elapsed since the date certification
was granted. The Department will then issue a new certification form containing
the new address.
      (2)   The Department will not accept a request for a change in the
address contained on a certification form in the event that such request is
made more than one year after the date of such certification. In such
instances, the person previously certified shall submit a new application for
artist's certification, but unless otherwise requested by the Coordinator, such
applicant need only submit information and supporting documentation relevant to
that period of time which has elapsed since the date of his or her previous
certification. Applications for re-certification shall be governed by the same
procedures as set forth herein for the review of initial applications.
   (b)   Legal significance. The legal significance of a certification form
issued by the Department is to evidence that the person named therein meets the
legislative criteria regarding artist's certification and is therefore eligible
to live in joint living-work quarters, in an area and dwelling unit where such
use is permitted by law pursuant to the terms of the city's Zoning Resolution
and New York State Multiple Dwelling Law. Artist's certification does not
represent a determination by the Department that joint living-work quarters in
a particular building is lawful under the Zoning Resolution or any other
applicable law or regulation, nor that such space meets the relevant
specifications of the Buildings Department Code.
§ 1-08 Nontransferability.
Each artist's certification form is valid only for the person named therein and
may not be transferred.
§ 1-09 Submission of False or Fraudulent Information.
The submission of any information in connection with an application for
artist's certification which the applicant knows to be false will result in the
denial of the application or the revocation of any artist's certification based
on such application.
Chapter 2: Cultural Development Fund
§ 2-01 Applicability and Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter and any application for a Cultural Development
Fund grant award submitted to the Department, the following terms have the
following meanings:
   Accessibility. The term “accessibility” means the degree to which an
environment, service, product, or program allows access and eliminates barriers
to participation by diverse or underrepresented communities, especially people
with disabilities.
   Applicant. The term “applicant” means an organization applying for CDF
funds.
   Audience. The term “audience” means any people who benefit from an
applicant’s programs and activities.
   City. The term “city” means the city of New York.
   Commissioner. The term “Commissioner” means the commissioner of cultural
affairs.
   Cultural Development Fund. The term “Cultural Development Fund” or “CDF” is
the citywide arts and cultural services grant award program administered in
accordance with this chapter.
   Cultural Institutions Group. The term “Cultural Institutions Group” has the
same meaning set forth in Section 2507 of the New York City Charter.
   Department. The term “Department” means the New York city department of
cultural affairs.
   Disability. The term “disability” has the same meaning set forth in § 8-102
of the Administrative Code of the city of New York.
   Guidelines. The term “guidelines” means the materials published by the
Department for each CDF application cycle used to administer the CDF program.
(Added City Record 6/12/2024, eff. 6/12/2024)
§ 2-02 Applicant Eligibility.
   (a)   To be eligible for an award pursuant to 58 RCNY §
2-07, the applicant must:
      (1)   Be a nonprofit arts or cultural organization or a nonprofit
organization that includes an arts or culture component as part of its mission;
      (2)   Demonstrate successful delivery of arts and cultural services in
New York City for the two consecutive years immediately preceding the fiscal
year for which the applicant is applying for CDF funds;
      (3)   Be based in New York city, as determined by the organization’s
address identified on internal revenue service (“IRS”) Form 990, IRS § 501(c)
(3) letter, and other publicly available information;
      (4)   Demonstrate administrative and programmatic operations within one
or more of the five boroughs;
      (5)   Possess a unique Federal Employer Identification Number (EIN);
      (6)   Be certified as tax exempt under IRS Code § 501(c)(3), or be an
incorporated nonprofit that uses a Department-approved, New York state
incorporated, tax-exempt fiscal sponsor, provided that only nonprofit
organizations may be eligible, regardless of whether they use a fiscal sponsor;
      (7)   Be incorporated in New York state as a nonprofit organization at
least three years prior to the fiscal year for which the applicant is applying
for CDF funds; and
      (8)   Be in compliance with the most recent annual state and federal
filing requirements for nonprofit organizations, including New York State
Charities Bureau filings.
   (b)   The following entities are not eligible applicants:
      (1)   Unincorporated individual artists or artist collectives;
      (2)   Limited liability companies, public benefit corporations, limited
partnerships;
      (3)   Parent-teacher associations and related organizations;
      (4)   Nonprofit organizations without IRS § 501(c)(3) tax-exempt status
that do not utilize an eligible fiscal sponsor;
      (5)   Nonprofit organizations with chapters, offices, branches, or
general activity in New York city but that are administratively based outside
of New York city;
      (6)   Members of the Department’s Cultural Institutions Group;
      (7)   Programs administered by New York city, New York state, or federal
agencies;
      (8)   Branches of, or program of or administered by, the New York Public
Library system, the Brooklyn Public Library system, or the Queens Public
Library system;
      (9)   Degree-granting institutions, including schools, colleges, and
universities, provided, however, that organizations affiliated with such
institutions that are independently incorporated nonprofits and meet all other
application criteria set forth in subdivision (a) of this section may be
eligible and should contact the Department for further guidance;
      (10)   Applicants without a history of providing services in arts and
culture as well as related income and expenses in the last two years; and
      (11)   Applicants that have previously received CDF funds but have failed
to comply with the Department’s grant reporting requirements at any time in the
past five fiscal years.
(Added City Record 6/12/2024, eff. 6/12/2024)
§ 2-03 Application Requirements.
   (a)   Applications for CDF funds must include one proposed project that
conforms to the requirements set forth in 58 RCNY §
2-04, and include the required materials described in 58 RCNY §
2-08. If such applicant is awarded CDF funds by the Department, such proposed
project will form the scope of service in the grant agreement between the
Department and the applicant.
   (b)   Applicants must submit the Department’s application form, which
includes a description of the project, and provide other relevant information
about the proposed project and the applicant, including the applicant’s ability
to compensate artists for their work.
(Added City Record 6/12/2024, eff. 6/12/2024)
§ 2-04 Project Qualifications.
   (a)   A proposed project for CDF funds must:
      (1)   Include an artistic or cultural activity of acceptable quality as
determined by the panels described in 58 RCNY §
2-06;
      (2)   Take place in New York city during the fiscal year for which the
applicant is seeking CDF funds;
      (3)   Be within the applicant organization’s artistic, cultural,
administrative, and fiscal capacity as determined by the panelists; and
      (4)   Incorporate a diverse funding stream that includes at least one of
the following: individual donations, earned income, foundation and corporate
support, or other government support.
   (b)   The proposed project must include an arts or cultural activity that
comprises or addresses at least one of the priority areas described in this
subdivision:
      (1)   Artistic dialogue, such as: creating a forum for new or previously
created works for public presentation during the grant period; supporting of
informed cultural public discourse; or engaging multiple genres or disciplines;
      (2)   Preservation projects, such as projects working to preserve: New
York city’s rich cultural heritage; the cultures of New York’s diverse
populations; public access to historic artifacts or sites relevant to New York
city; or archival cultural materials for public access;
      (3)   Services to an artistic or cultural field or creative community,
such as: professional training within an artistic or cultural discipline;
skills or professional training for cultural workers; or supportive services to
organizations serving a discipline;
      (4)   Arts education, such as: ongoing or sequential arts programs for
children, youth, or other targeted audiences; cultural activities in schools,
including programs related to curricula; in-school artist residencies; or arts
programs for children and adult learners at cultural organizations; or
      (5)   Projects that promote sciences and the humanities, such as projects
that promote: communication of cultural knowledge or practices to individuals
or communities; exploration of environmental and natural sciences; or the
heritage of an ethnic group in New York city.
   (c)   Projects that are not eligible for CDF funds include:
      (1)   Non-arts activity, including but not limited to physical fitness,
social services, or general education services such as college preparation or
homework help;
      (2)   Any activity funded by a City Council initiative administered by
the Department;
      (3)   Activities that do not provide access to the public;
      (4)   Strategic planning, including capacity building;
      (5)   Fundraising events and receptions;
      (6)   Construction or renovation of facilities, including the purchase of
equipment;
      (7)   Lobbying or government advocacy efforts.
(Added City Record 6/12/2024, eff. 6/12/2024)
§ 2-05 Create NYC Initiatives.
Notwithstanding subdivisions (a) and (b) of 58 RCNY §
2-04, and subject to availability as indicated in the guidelines for the fiscal
year for which the applicant is applying for CDF funds, funding may be provided
for initiatives developed from recommendations of the Department’s 2017
cultural plan (“Create NYC Initiatives”), or any subsequent cultural plan,
including, but not limited to the Language Access Fund (the “LAF”) and the
Disability Forward Fund (the “DFF”). To be considered for funding pursuant to a
Create NYC Initiative, the applicant must describe its initiative-related
activities in the project proposal in accordance with the guidelines.
(Added City Record 6/12/2024, eff. 6/12/2024)
§ 2-06 Competitive Panel Review.
   (a)   The Department will organize and oversee a competitive panel review
process to evaluate CDF applications in accordance with 58 RCNY §
2-07.
   (b)   Such panels will be comprised of no fewer than three panelists.
   (c)   Employees of the Department may not serve as panelists but may consult
and administer the evaluation of projects by the panelists.
   (d)   Panelists must be practicing artists in New York city or
administrators in the fields of arts and culture, or New York city community
leaders, civic leaders, educators, or government officials or their staff.
   (e)   The weight assigned to the evaluative criteria are published in the
guidelines and are subject to change to achieve the purposes of the CDF.
   (f)   Only panelists may assign scores to the applications. Scores
determined by panelists, including final average scores, are not subject to
change by the Department.
(Added City Record 6/12/2024, eff. 6/12/2024)
§ 2-07 Scoring and Fund Allocation.
   (a)   Eligibility for single year awards. Applicants that did not receive a
CDF grant award in any of the three fiscal years immediately preceding the
fiscal year for which the applicant is applying for CDF funds are eligible only
for a single-year award. The Department’s guidelines may provide additional
guidance governing limitations of awards for these applicants.
   (b)   Eligibility for multi-year awards. Applicants that received a CDF
grant award in any of the three fiscal years preceding the fiscal year for
which the applicant is applying for CDF funds are eligible for a three-year
award, provided, however, that such applicant must submit a renewal application
each year of such award, such application must comply with 58 RCNY §
2-03, and such application must demonstrate continued eligibility. The renewal
application will not be subject to panel review.
   (c)   Scoring and award determination. CDF funds will be awarded in
accordance with the following steps:
      (1)   Step one. Each application will be assigned to a panel. Panelists
determine and assign a final score to each assigned application according to a
methodology developed by the Department and designed to provide consistent
scoring across the panels. The methodology to score applications will use the
following evaluative criteria: the benefit of the proposed project to the
public; the applicant’s fiscal and administrative capacity to execute the
proposed project; and overall project quality and excellence.
      (2)   Step two. The Department will determine the minimum final award
score needed to receive an award based on the available CDF budget for the
relevant fiscal year. The Department may designate in its guidelines different
applicant budget categories describing ranges of applicants’ budgets and
provide a different award amount to each such category. Applicants assigned a
final panel score at or above the minimum award score will receive, at a
minimum, the minimum award provided for in their budget category.
      (3)   Step three. The Department’s guidelines may provide for a process
to adjust awards above the minimum award, or to provide an award for applicants
that did not meet the minimum award score, for each budget category in
consideration of any of the following factors:
         (A)   The total amount of funding appropriated for the CDF program;
         (B)   The percentile in which the applicant’s panel score ranks
compared to that of all other funded applicants;
         (C)   The applicant’s operating budget for the fiscal year for which
the applicant is applying for CDF funds or relevant prior years as determined
by the Department;
         (D)   The applicant received CDF baseline awards for the six
consecutive fiscal years preceding the fiscal year for which the applicant is
applying for CDF funds, and submitted an eligible and complete application for
such current fiscal year but did not achieve the minimum final award score
needed to receive an award pursuant to paragraph (2) of this subdivision,
provided that such applicant may not receive an award exceeding half the
average of their total CDF baseline awards from such prior fiscal years;
         (E)   Whether the application furthers agency priorities by meeting at
least one of the following criteria, which may be further defined by the
Department in its guidelines: whether additional funds would provide critical
support for arts or cultural organizations serving vulnerable populations or
areas of the City with fewer community resources; whether additional funds
would provide critical support for arts or cultural organizations located in
cultural deserts, defined as geographic areas with limited arts and cultural
resources; whether the applicants experienced a temporary increase in
programmatic expenses associated with the completion of a City-funded capital
investment for such applicant organization; or whether the applicant would be
significantly impacted by a proposed decrease in CDF funding compared to
funding awarded to such applicant in prior fiscal years; and
         (F)   Whether Create NYC Initiatives awards as described in 58 RCNY §
2-05 are available.
   (d)   Allowable expenses. CDF awards may only be used for project expenses,
including programmatic operating expenses, such as staff salaries, space
rentals, insurance costs, or any other costs incurred to realize the
organization’s proposed project.
(Added City Record 6/12/2024, eff. 6/12/2024)
§ 2-08 Application Materials
   (a)   Materials required for all applications. An applicant’s CDF
application must include the following documents:
      (1)   Background materials, in a single file of no more than 10 pages,
that describe the applicant’s arts and cultural public engagement over at least
the past two years, as well as any other programs, press or marketing
materials, letters of recommendation, curricula, testimonials, and artist
biographies the applicant elects to include;
      (2)   A copy of the applicant’s IRS § 501(c)(3) determination letter,
except as provided in paragraph (3) of subdivision (b) of this section; and
      (3)   A copy of each of the applicable financial documents required by
the Department, as described in the guidelines.
   (b)   Applicants with a fiscal sponsor or conduit. In addition to the
materials set forth in subdivision (a) of this section, applicants applying
with a fiscal sponsor or conduit must also submit the following documents:
      (1)   Proof of incorporation as a nonprofit organization in New York
state. Acceptable forms of documentation include a New York state incorporation
certificate and board of regents charter under section 216 of the education
law;
      (2)   A letter from the fiscal sponsor indicating that it has agreed to
act as a fiscal sponsor; and
      (3)   In lieu of the applicant’s IRS § 501(c)(3) determination letter, a
copy of the fiscal sponsor’s IRS § 501(c)(3) determination letter.
   (c)   Organizations with a primary mission beyond arts and culture. In
addition to the materials set forth in subdivisions (a) and (b) of this
section, as applicable, applicants with a primary mission not related to arts
and culture must also submit a full organizational budget on a template
provided by the Department, as may be updated from time to time by the
Department.
   (d)   Additional documentation. The Department may request additional
information from an applicant after an application has been submitted.
(Added City Record 6/12/2024, eff. 6/12/2024)
§ 2-09 Grant Administration and Legal Guidelines.
   (a)   Grant agreement. If an applicant is awarded funds, the Department will
prepare a grant agreement based on the project proposed in the application. An
officer, director, or member of the applicant who has been granted signatory
authority by the applicant’s bylaws or other valid corporate document must sign
such grant agreement to receive such funds. The grant agreement must specify
that an applicant receiving CDF funds shall:
      (1)   Comply with all pertinent New York city, New York state, and
federal laws, including the Americans with Disabilities Act, New York state
human rights law, and New York city human rights law;
      (2)   Maintain appropriate insurance, as required by the Department and
described in the guidelines; and
      (3)   Credit the Department’s support in all programs, brochures, flyers,
posters, announcements, or similar printed or electronic matter relating to
projects funded by the Department.
   (b)   Conflicts of interest. A CDF grant award may be rescinded at the sole
discretion of the Department because of an actual conflict of interest or to
avoid the perception of a conflict of interest. An applicant may appeal the
recission of an award in accordance with subdivision (d) of this section.
   (c)   Payment. 
      (1)   An applicant’s grant agreement must include a payment schedule that
is based on the services provided and associated costs.
      (2)   Funds will not be available until after the adoption of the city’s
budget for the fiscal year for which the applicant has applied. Notification of
final award amounts will be sent after the start of the grant period.
      (3)   Final payment is contingent on submission and Department approval
of a final report demonstrating that the project was completed. Such final
report must be submitted on a form provided by the Department. If modifications
to the city budget require the reductions of awards, such reductions may be
taken against any outstanding payments. Final payment is also contingent upon
completion of any other reporting required by the grant agreement. Applicants
that do not comply with such reporting by the deadlines required by the
Department may have their award rescinded and be ineligible for future funding,
as described in paragraph (11) of subdivision (b) of 58 RCNY §
2-02. An applicant may appeal the recission of an award in accordance with
subdivision (d) of this section.
      (4)   While applicants must apply for project-related public services
(rather than general operating support), funds received can be allocated to any
project-related operating costs of the grantee organization (such as staff
salaries, space rentals, etc.) other than capital expenditures, fundraisers, or
government advocacy efforts, provided the projected services have been
delivered as described.
   (d)   Appeal of denial of a baseline award. If an applicant does not receive
a baseline award, such applicant may appeal such determination only on the
following grounds: misrepresentation or nonpresentation of information about
the applicant or the application by or to the panel; evaluation by a panelist
who failed to disclose a conflict of interest; or where review of such
application was inconsistent with the guidelines. Within 21 days of receipt of
a notification letter from the Department, which includes the determination of
the applicant’s CDF award, an applicant may request a feedback call with the
Department, after which the Department will provide a form through which they
can appeal such baseline award determination. Applicants must submit an appeal
within 14 days of receipt of such appeal form. The Commissioner will determine
any such appeal within 60 days. Such determination will be a final agency
determination.
   (e)   Termination or rescission of grant. The Department may terminate or
rescind a grant, or part thereof, if it finds that the grantee has failed to
comply with this chapter, the guidelines, or the grant agreement, or where
termination or rescission is otherwise permitted by the grant agreement. The
Department will provide notice to the grantee of its determination to terminate
or rescind a grant, specifying the grounds for termination or rescission and
the basis for such determination. Except when a termination or rescission
results from a modification of the City budget that requires the Department to
reduce awards, the grantee may submit a letter contesting such determination,
with any necessary documentation, exhibits, or attachments, within 30 days of
such notice. The Commissioner will, within 30 days of receipt of such letter
from the grantee, issue a final determination upholding or withdrawing such
termination or rescission.
   (f)   Grantee evaluation. 
      (1)   Information regarding the upcoming funded activities of each
applicant awarded a grant must be provided to the Department on a regular
basis, and staff from the Department must be invited to view funded activities
for the purpose of monitoring to assure funds are spent in accordance with the
terms of the grant agreement.
      (2)   An organization’s performance record may be a determining factor
when considering future funding.
(Added City Record 6/12/2024, eff. 6/12/2024)
