Title 55: Department of Citywide Administrative Services
Chapter 1: Conduct Within Structures and Grounds Under the Control of the
Division of Facilities Management and Construction Services
§ 1-01 Scope and Enforcement.
These Rules and Regulations shall:
   (a)   Apply to all property under the control of the Division of Facilities
Management and Construction Services.
   (b)   Be in addition to and supplement applicable City, State and Federal
laws and regulations.
   (c)   Be enforced by the Division of Facilities Management and Construction
Services and by each occupant agency.
§ 1-02 Definitions.
The following words and phrases as used in these Rules and Regulations shall
have the following meaning:
   Authorized individual. An "authorized individual" is any police officer,
peace officer, special patrolman, city official or any individual designated by
the Deputy Commissioner of the Division of Facilities Management and
Construction Services or the head of an occupant agency to exercise authority
in the management, operation and utilization of property.
   Deputy Commissioner. The "Deputy Commissioner" is the Deputy Commissioner of
the Division of Facilities Management and Construction Services.
   Occupant agency. An "occupant agency" is any agency of the City of New York
which occupies or possesses any part of property under the control of the
Division of Facilities Management and Construction Services.
   Property. "Property" is any real estate which is owned, leased or operated
by the City of New York or any agency thereof, which is under the control of
the Division of Facilities Management and Construction Services.
§ 1-03 Operating Hours; Emergencies; Packages.
   (a)   Except as otherwise ordered, property shall be closed to the public
after normal working hours.
   (b)   Property may be closed to the public during emergencies and at such
other times as may be necessary for the conduct of business.
   (c)   Anyone admitted on the property may be required to show identification
and to sign a register.
   (d)   Persons carrying packages, briefcases and other types of containers
shall be required to open them for inspection when so requested by an
authorized individual as a condition of entering or leaving the property.
§ 1-04 Preservation of Property.
While on or about the property, no person shall:
   (a)   Dump, litter or throw any refuse, dirt or rubbish.
   (b)   Abandon a vehicle.
   (c)   Throw or project a stone or other missile.
   (d)   Climb upon the roof of any building or enter any area which is posted
as being closed to the public.
   (e)   Destroy or damage any structure or remove any part thereof.
   (f)   Destroy, damage or remove any property found on or within any
structure.
   (g)   Interfere with the operation of any utility system servicing the
property.
   (h)   Injure, mutilate, deface, alter, change, displace, remove or destroy
any posted sign or notice.
§ 1-05 Conformity with Signs and Official Directions.
Persons on or about the property shall comply with official signs and obey
directions given by authorized individuals.
§ 1-06 Gambling.
With the exception of those activities conducted by the Off-Track Betting
Corporation, the operation of, or participation in, unauthorized lotteries,
pools or games for money or something of value on or about the property is
prohibited.
§ 1-07 Alcoholic Beverages, Drugs and Similar Substances.
   (a)   No person may enter upon property while his ability to function has
been impaired by alcohol, drugs or any other substance.
   (b)   No person shall bring upon or use while on the property any substance
capable of impairing normal human functioning.
   (c)   The above prohibition shall not apply to drugs prescribed by a
physician or when permission has been obtained either from the Deputy
Commissioner or head of the occupant agency.
§ 1-08 Soliciting, Vending and Debt Collection.
The soliciting of alms, subscriptions, contributions, commercial soliciting and
vending of all kinds without the prior written approval of the Commissioner or
his/her designee, and the collecting of private debts in or on the property is
prohibited. This rule shall not apply to national and local drives for funds
for charitable, educational or other such purposes sponsored or approved by the
Commissioner or his/her designee, head of an occupant agency or elected city
officials. Any person who violates this rule in any public building may be
expelled from such building. Repeated violations of this rule may result in the
violator being banned from the premises. Any person may appeal such ban in
writing to the Commissioner.
§ 1-09 Handbills.
   (a)   No person shall distribute any material such as pamphlets, handbills
and flyers on the property unless the prior written approval of the Deputy
Commissioner or head of the occupant agency has been obtained.
   (b)   No person shall place or cause to be placed upon or affixed to the
property any words, characters, illustrations or devices as a notice of, or
reference to any matter or event. This prohibition shall not apply to personal
notices posted by employees on authorized bulletin boards, or when the prior
written approval of the Deputy Commissioner has been obtained.
   (c)   The foregoing prohibitions shall not apply to notices or other
materials posted or distributed pursuant to provisions made or contained in
collective bargaining agreements.
§ 1-10 Animals.
Unless otherwise authorized, no person shall bring any animal, except properly
harnessed seeing-eye dogs, onto the property.
§ 1-11 Vehicular Traffic.
   (a)   A person driving a vehicle upon the property shall operate it in a
safe manner and comply with posted traffic signs and directions given by
authorized individuals.
   (b)   A person driving a vehicle upon the property shall not:
      (1)   Park without a permit.
      (2)   Park in any area reserved for city vehicles or authorized
individuals.
      (3)   Block entrances, driveways, walks, ramps, platforms or hydrants.
§ 1-12 Weapons and Explosives.
Unless otherwise ordered by law or regulation, no person shall carry any gun,
firearm, explosives or deadly or dangerous weapon upon the property.
§ 1-13 Disturbances.
Any disorderly conduct or conduct on the property which creates loud and
unusual noise or which obstructs the usual use of entrances, foyers, corridors,
offices, elevators, stairways and parking lots or which otherwise tends to
impede or disturb the public employees in the performance of their duties, or
which impedes or disturbs the general public from obtaining the administrative
services provided on the property, is prohibited.
§ 1-14 Photographs.
   (a)   Except for those holding permits from the Executive Director of the
Office of Economic Development and members of the press who hold working press
identification cards, no person shall take photographs or moving pictures
within any structure located on the property.
   (b)   Courtrooms. The taking of photographs in a courtroom or the
broadcasting or telecasting from a courtroom at any time or on any occasion is
prohibited except where prior written permission has been obtained from the
presiding justice of the Appellate Division of the Department wherein the
courthouse is situated.
Chapter 3: Fees
§ 3-01 Fees.
   (a)   The fees charged by the Division of Real Property fall into the
following categories:
      (I)   Lease application fee charged for the processing of lease
applications.
      (II)   Title closing mortgage fees for preparation and processing of
various documents used in connection with the auctioning and sale of real
property by DRP.
      (III)   Test boring license fees.
      (IV)   Carnarsie cemetery fees for a certificate of burial right,
perpetual care, annual care, foundation charges, interment and other services.
      (V)   Redemption of properties taken In Rem – management Fees.
   (b)   The fee schedule below lists each of these categories separately. All
fees, unless otherwise specifically provided, shall be paid by certified
cashier's check or postal order payable to the order of the Division of Real
Property.
      Category I – Lease application fee – $25
      Category II – Title closings & mortgage fees for non-residential
properties sold by City
 
(i)    Duplicate document (e.g. mortgage,   $250
       deed)
       Preparation of purchase Money
(ii)   mortgage and mortgage note Mortgage   
       amount
      Up to $40,000                        $125
      $40,001-$100,000                     $250
      Over $100,000                        $500
       Preparation of other purchase money
       Mortgage related documents
(iii)  (assignments, satisfactions,         $150/per document
       subordinations and assumptions of
       the purchase money mortgage)
       Attendance of DRP employees at       $250 for each day or part thereof
(iv)   locations other than DRP office of   for each employee
       execute transactions
       Nonrefundable mortgage application   1% of maximum mortgage available,
(v)    fee                                  but not less than $300, nor more
                                            than $5,000
       Auctioneer's fee due from purchaser
(vi)   at the auction and payable by check   
       drawn to order of auctioneer
       identified at time of sale,
      Purchase Price                       Fee
      $1,000 or less                       $10
      $1,001 to $5,000                     $25
      $5,001 to $7,500                     $35
      $7,501 to $25,000                    $50
      $25,001 to $50,000                   $75
      $50,001 to $75,000                   $100
      $75,001 to $100,000                  $150
      $100,001 to $200,000                 $200
      Above $200,000                       .1% of the purchase price, but in
                                            no event greater than $500
(vii)  Assignment of purchaser's right      $150.00
       Under memorandum of sale
(viii) Assignment of contract within 7 days $0
       of sale
      Between 8 and 14 days from sale      $100.00
      After 14 days from sale              Not Allowed
      Category III – Test Boring License  
       fee
      Public and Quasi Public Agencies     $1.00
      All Other Applicants                 $350.00
      Category IV – Carnarsie Cemetery    
Schedule of Prices
Certificate of Burial Right
A certificate of burial right grants the privilege of interment or entombment
in a specified grave or plot. Each grave measures 3 feet by 9 feet. Two
interments may be in each grave in the traditional area and three in each grave
in the park area. Each plot in the urn gardens measures 2 feet by 2 feet and
permits the interment of several urns. Prices of certificates of burial rights
are as follows:
 
Traditional Area $1,995.00
Park Area        $1,995.00
Urn Gardens      $300.00
 
       Perpetual care. The purchase price of all certificates of burial right
(ix)   includes perpetual care. Plot holders having certificates of burial
       right purchased prior to January 20, 1949 may provide perpetual care
       for their plots upon payment of $650 per grave.
(x)    Annual care. All plot holders without perpetual care shall pay an
       annual care charge of $50.00 per grave, payable each year in advance.
(xi)   Foundation charges.                                            
      Minimum foundation: 30" across by 12" wide by 3' deep         $295.00
      Every additional cubic foot or part thereof                   $30.00
(xii)  Interment and other fees.                                      
      Interment                                                     $625.00
      Cremated remains                                              $300.00
      Disinterment and/or openings                                  $625.00
      Removal of remains (one grave to another)                     $1,250.00
      Use of chapel, per day                                        $225.00
      Use of receiving vault per day                                $120.00
       Transfer of certificate of burial right
      [Fee inclusive of one (1) Affidavit Fee and one (1) Probe Fee $80.00
       for each grave]
      Affidavit Fee                                                 $40.00
      Probe(s) each                                                 $40.00
       Late charges and penalties. Arrearages in annual care charges may be
       assessed a late payment charge equal to 20% of the balance in arrears,
(xiii) except that late payment charges assessed subsequent to December 31,
       1991, shall be excluded from the balance upon which late charges are
       assessed. Persons issuing checks returned as uncollectible shall be
       charged a penalty of $15.00 per check.
 
Category V – Redemption of properties taken In Rem – Management fees
      (i)   Seven (7%) percent of all rents billed during the period of
management by the City (from the date vesting through the date of release); or
Twenty-Five ($25.00) Dollars per month, or fraction thereof, during the period
of management by the City; whichever is greater.
      (ii)   Vacant property, deriving no income, is to be charged the minimum
fee of Twenty-Five ($25.00) Dollars per month, or fraction thereof, during the
period of management by the City.
Note: The Twenty-Five ($25.00) Dollar fee is to be applied to each lot within
the "property" only if the lots are not contiguous.
Chapter 4: Approval of Contract Awards
§ 4-01 Approving Awards of Contracts to Other Than the Lowest Responsible
Bidder: (Section 313(b)(2) New York City Charter). [Repealed]
Chapter 5: Disposition of Personal Property
§ 5-01 Disposition of Personal Property of the City.
   (a)   Personal property may be disposed of by the Division of Municipal
Supplies by public or private sale or as otherwise authorized by law or
regulation.
      (1)   The prior approval of the Comptroller is not required on a sale of
personal property where such sale is to the highest responsible bidder at
public auction or after receipt of sealed bids after advertisement in at least
ten successive issues of The City Record. A bidder may be disqualified in
accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
      (2)   If the estimated sales value of the personal property is $5,000 or
less, the Division of Municipal Supply Services may make requests for offers,
if possible, to at least three persons, firms or corporations separately
engaged in the regular business of selling and buying materials of the class
offered. All bids from other bidders shall be duly considered in making an
award. Award of such informal sale, if any, must be made to the highest
responsible bidder. However, no such award shall be valid without the prior
approval of the comptroller. The total amount of such informal sales of the
same class of materials shall not exceed $5,000 within a thirty-day period. The
classification of materials of "the same class" shall be as determined by the
commissioner and approved by the comptroller. Such classification shall be
filed in the Division of Municipal Supply Services and the Office of the
Comptroller and shall be effective upon publication in the City Record.
      (3)   When no bid or acceptable bid is received on an advertised sale,
the Commissioner may waive the advertising requirements in an informal re-bid.
Such sale on an informal re-bid shall be made only with the approval of the
Comptroller. The Commissioner shall issue a certificate in writing that no
acceptable bid was received when the proposal was originally advertised. Such
certificate shall be filed in the Division of Municipal Supplies and with the
Comptroller.
      (4)   Personal property may be given to a vendor in part payment on a
contract at public letting to furnish new personal property at the lowest net
price.
      (5)   Personal property may be sold at private sale without public
notice, at no less than the value fixed by the Division of Municipal Supplies
subject to the approval of the Comptroller.
      (6)   Personal property may be transferred between the various City
agencies by order of the Commissioner.
      (7)   All materials, supplies and equipment which the Commissioner
considers of no sale value or use to the City may be destroyed or otherwise
disposed of in the most advantageous manner under the direction of the
Commissioner. This provision shall not apply to public records until their
destruction or other disposition has been duly authorized in accordance with
applicable law or regulation.
      (8)   Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, property classified by the
commissioner as "memorabilia" may be disposed of in the best interests of the
city by public, private, wholesale or retail sale under the direction of the
commissioner without the prior approval of the comptroller. "Memorabilia" is
defined as surplus or obsolete personal property, excluding aircraft,
watercraft and land vehicles, not exceeding an estimated per-unit sale value of
$5,000, which by reason of its use by the city has historic, aesthetic, novelty
or sentimental value in excess of the property's salvage value. In addition to
a wholesale or retail price not exceeding an estimated per-unit sale value of
$5,000, the commissioner is authorized to negotiate in the best interests of
the city to obtain additional income from the disposition of "memorabilia".
      (9)   Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, property classified as a
"product" by the commissioner, in conjunction with the commissioner or head of
another agency or office, may be disposed of, as the commissioner deems
appropriate, by that individual agency. "Product" is defined as property
resulting from the processing, manufacture, or operations of an agency or its
agent. "Agent" is defined as an individual or entity that is authorized to act
for the agency by contract or other apparent authority. That individual agency
must dispose of that property in the best interests of the city by public,
private, wholesale or retail sale at a unit price to be determined by the
respective agency's commissioner or his/her designee, and under the direction
of said commissioner or his/her designee. If disposal by private sale is deemed
appropriate, and the estimated per sale value is less than or equal to $10,000,
the sale may proceed without the prior approval of the comptroller. In
determining the unit price to be charged for the product, the respective agency
must factor in the cost of producing each product. The agency must also factor
in the fair market wholesale and retail rates currently being charged by a
minimum of three entities that are marketing the same or similar products for
wholesale or retail sale in the local region.
Chapter 6: 'Original Equipment Manufacturer Agreements' for Purposes of the
City's Anti-Apartheid Law
§ 6-01 Definitions.
For purposes of the City's anti-apartheid rider, included in City contracts
pursuant to Administrative Code § 6-115 whenever the contractor has agreed to
sign the rider, a company shall be deemed to be providing goods or services to
South Africa pursuant to an "original equipment manufacturer agreement which
provides for or authorizes the sale of equipment, alone or as part of a
finished product, to a South African entity" in accordance with the following
definitions:
   (a)   "Company #1" includes the company which seeks to enter a contract with
a City agency, and is determining whether it is qualified to sign the City's
anti-apartheid rider, and all "affiliates" of that company, as that term is
defined in Administrative Code § 6-115(a)(8).
   (b)   "Sale" includes lease or rental of equipment.
   (c)   An "original equipment manufacturer agreement" ("O.E.M. agreement") is
an agreement between a manufacturer (Company #1) and another manufacturer, a
distributor, or a value-added reseller (Company #2), such that Company #1
provides products (which may include parts, components and/or subassemblies)
and authorizes the sale of such products by Company #2 under any of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   Company #1 makes a sale of its equipment to Company #2, which, with
or without making minor modifications to the equipment, privately labels and
sells it. An example would be an O.E.M. agreement whereby Company #2 purchases
a copier from Company #1, and resells it as a copier under its own brand name,
with or without having first made minor modifications to the copier's
packaging.
      (2)   Company #1 makes a sale of its equipment to Company #2, which
provides substantial added value to Company #1's product before selling it.
Company #2's added value may be major application software and/or special
hardware integrated into the product. Examples include:
         (i)   an O.E.M. agreement whereby Company #2 adds banking application
software to Company #1's personal computer, marketing the resulting product as
a banking teller station under Company #2's brand name.
         (ii)   an O.E.M. agreement whereby Company #2 embeds a subassembly
purchased from Company #1, such as a disk drive or a telecommunications
multiplexor, into Company #2's computer system, and then sells that computer
system under its own brand name.
         (iii)   Company #1 makes a sale to Company #2, which resells Company
#1's product with Company #1's name still intact on the product. An example
would be an O.E.M. agreement whereby Company #2 sells Company #1's word
processor and licensed software as an authorized dealer (exclusive or non-
exclusive) of Company #1.
   (d)   An O.E.M. agreement for equipment sold by a manufacturer of computers,
copiers or telecommunications equipment is considered to "provide for or
authorize the sale of such equipment, alone or as part of a finished product,
to a South African entity" if any of the following conditions is met:
      (1)   The O.E.M. agreement states that Company #2 may sell equipment made
by Company #1 (with or without modification by Company #2) in South Africa.
      (2)   The equipment covered by the agreement (as sold by Company #1 or
after modification by Company #2, if any is made) falls under one of the
designated classifications government by the Export Administration Act of 1979
(50 U.S.C. App. § 2401) and the associated federal regulations for Electronics
and Precision Instruments (15 C.F.R. § 799.1, Supp. 1, Group 5), such that
Company #1 knows of the resale or distribution of the equipment to South Africa
by Company #2 and assists Company #2 in procuring required governmental
authorizations for such resale or distribution.
      (3)   Company #1 has actual knowledge of resale or distribution of the
equipment to South Africa by Company #2 and has not either terminated its
contractual arrangement with Company #2 concerning such equipment or otherwise
prohibited Company #2 from making further resale or distribution of Company
#1's equipment to South Africa.
Chapter 7: Canarsie Cemetery Rules and Regulations
§ 7-01 Definitions.
Annual Care. The term "Annual Care" means care provided by the cemetery on a
year-by-year basis upon payment of an annual fee by or on behalf of a Plot
Holder.
Burial Grounds. The term "Burial Grounds" means any burial ground which
formerly was the public property of any town, village or city consolidated into
and now a part of the City of New York.
Burial Right. The term "Burial Right" means only the privilege of interment or
entombment in the cemetery. It does not convey an ownership of land or other
interest in the grave, or plot to which it refers.
Care. The term "Care" means the cutting of the grass on plots at reasonable
intervals, the raking and cleaning of the plots and the maintaining of the
grade and turf of the plots; meaning and intending the general preservation of
the plots to the end that said plots shall remain and be reasonably cared for
as cemetery plots. The term "Care" shall in no case be construed to mean the
maintenance, repair or replacement of any gravestones or monumental structures
or flowers or ornamental plants; nor the maintenance or doing of any special or
unusual work in the cemetery; nor does it mean the reconstruction of any
marble, granite, bronze or concrete work on any section or plot, or any portion
or portions thereof in the cemetery or buildings, or structures, caused by the
elements, an act of God, common enemy, thieves, vandals, strikers, malicious
mischief makers, explosions, unavoidable accidents, invasions, insurrections,
riots or by order of the military authorities, whether the damage be direct or
collateral, other than as herein provided.
Cemetery. The term "Cemetery" means the Canarsie Cemetery (Block 8038, Lot 1;
Block 8038, Lot 10; Block 8039, Lot 1; Block 8041, Lot 1; and Block 8041, Lot
2: Borough of Brooklyn), a former town Burial Ground within the meaning of §
100.01 of these Rules and Regulations.
Certificate of Burial Right. The term "Certificate of Burial Right" means a
document granting only the privilege of interment and entombment as defined
above and not to be construed as a deed to the land itself.
Commissioner. The term "Commissioner" means the Deputy Commissioner of the
Department of Citywide Administrative Services, Division of Real Estate
Services, or authorized representative designated in writing by the
Commissioner or his/her successor in office.
Domestic Partner. The term "Domestic Partner" means a person who has registered
a domestic partnership in accordance with applicable law with the City Clerk,
or has registered such a partnership with the former City Department of
Personnel pursuant to Executive Order 123 (dated August 7, 1989) during the
period August 7, 1989 through January 7, 1993. (The records of domestic
partnerships registered at the former City Department of Personnel are to be
transferred to the City Clerk.)
Grave. The term "Grave" means a space of ground (approximately three feet by
nine feet) in the Cemetery used or intended to be used for the burial of human
remains.
Interment. The term "Interment" means the permanent disposition of the remains
of a deceased person by entombment or burial.
Memorial. The term "Memorial" means a monument, marker, tombstone, tablet,
headstone or private mausoleum or tomb for family or individual use.
Park Area. The term "Park Area" means a landscaped area and includes Sections
3, 4, 5, 11 and 12 of the cemetery.
Perpetual Care. The term "Perpetual Care" means care provided by the cemetery
forever upon payment of a one-time fee by or on behalf of a plot holder.
Plot. The term "Plot" means a lot, plot, plat or part thereof or a grave in the
Cemetery.
Plot Holder. The term "Plot Holder" means any person having a burial right in a
plot in the cemetery.
Traditional Area. The term "Traditional Area" means Sections A, B, C, 1, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10 and 14 of the Cemetery.
Urn Gardens. The term "Urn Gardens" means that portion of the cemetery set
aside for the burial of cremated remains.
Visitor. The term "Visitor" means any person who may enter the former town
burial grounds or cemetery grounds and includes plot holders and workers of all
kinds.
§ 7-02 Purchase of Burial Rights.
   (a)   All persons wishing to purchase burial rights in the cemetery must
execute applications provided for that purpose.
   (b)   The Commissioner reserves the right to refuse to accept any
application form which is either incomplete or improperly executed. The
Commissioner further reserves the right not to honor an application when it is
learned that the application has been fraudulently completed or if information
found therein is found to be incorrect. The Commissioner reserves the right to
limit the number of burial rights purchased by any individual, association or
corporation.
   (c)   Acceptance of payment along with the application should not be deemed
an automatic granting of Burial Rights. Burial rights do not vest until a fully
executed certificate of burial right is issued to the applicant.
   (d)   The purchase after January 19, 1949 of burial rights includes
perpetual care.
   (e)   It shall be the obligation of the plot holder to notify the cemetery
of any change in his/her post office address. Notice sent to a plot holder by
ordinary mail at the last address of record at the cemetery shall be considered
sufficient and proper notification.
§ 7-03 Interments.
   (a)   Interment privileges can be received only from the plot holders, and
no persons can be recognized as plot holders unless their names appear as such
upon the records of the cemetery.
   (b)   The Commissioner reserves the right to refuse Interments in any Plot
and to refuse to open any burial space for any purpose, except by court order
or on written application by the plot holder or by the person designated to
represent the plot holder.
   (c)   All Interments, disinterments or removals, including all openings and
closings of Graves shall be made only by cemetery personnel.
   (d)   All funerals, upon entering the cemetery grounds shall be under the
charge of the superintendent and/or his/her assistant.
   (e)   Once a casket containing a body is within the confines of the cemetery
grounds, no funeral director or his/her embalmer, assistant, employee or agent
shall be permitted to open the casket or touch the body without the consent of
a legal representative of the deceased, or without an order of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   (f)   The right is reserved by the Commissioner to insist upon at least 48
hours notice prior to any interment, and to at least one week's notice prior to
any disinterment or removal.
   (g)   When instructions regarding the location of an interment space in a
plot cannot be obtained, or are indefinite, or when for any reason the
interment space cannot be opened when specified, the superintendent of the
cemetery may, in his/her discretion, open it in such a location in the plot as
he/she deems best and proper, so as not to delay the funeral; and the cemetery
shall not be liable in damages for such action or for any error so made; nor
shall the cemetery be held responsible for any order given over the telephone,
or for any mistake occurring from the lack of precise and proper instructions
as to the particular plot space, size and location where interment is desired.
   (h)   The cemetery shall in no way be liable for any delay in the interment
of a body where a protest to the interment has been made, or where the Rules
and Regulations have not been complied with; and, further, the superintendent
of the cemetery reserves the right, under such circumstances, to place the body
in a City receiving vault until the full rights have been determined. The
cemetery shall be under no duty to recognize any protests of Interments unless
they are in writing and duly filed with the cemetery.
   (i)   The cemetery shall not be liable for the interment permit nor for the
identity of the person sought to be interred; nor shall the cemetery be liable
in any way for the embalming of the body.
   (j)   Where a plot is owned by a church, lodge or other society, interments
shall be limited to those actually authorized by such church, lodge, etc.
   (k)   No interment shall be permitted in any plot so long as there are any
outstanding charges due the cemetery with respect to that plot or any other
plot head by the plot holder.
   (l)   There shall be no interments on weekends and legal holidays.
   (m)   No interments shall be begun after 3:30 p.m.
   (n)   No more than two interments shall be permitted in each grave in the
traditional area and no more than three interments shall be permitted in each
grave in the park area.
   (o)   No disinterment or removal shall be allowed except for a good reason
and with the written permission of the Commissioner, the written authorization
of the plot holder and nearest of kin, and all permits required by law.
   (p)   The cemetery shall exercise the utmost care in making a removal, but
it shall assume no liability for damage to any casket, burial case or urn
incurred in making the removal.
   (q)   The cemetery reserves the right to correct any errors that may be made
by it either in making disinterments or removals, or in the description,
transfer or sale and substituting and selling in lieu thereof another burial
right of equal value and similar location as far as possible, or as may be
selected by the cemetery, or in the sole discretion of the cemetery, in
allowing for a request to the Comptroller of the City of New York for a refund
of the money paid on account of said Burial Right purchase. The cemetery shall
also have the right to correct any error made by placing an improper
inscription, including an incorrect name or date on any memorial. The cemetery
shall not be liable in damages for any such errors.
   (r)   The cemetery shall not be deemed in default nor shall it be liable for
any failure of performance event or any damages resulting from an "unavoidable
delay." An "unavoidable delay" shall mean (1) strikes, lockouts, or labor
disputes; (2) acts of God, governmental restrictions, regulations or controls,
enemy or hostile governmental actions, civil commotion, insurrection,
revolution, sabotage or fire or other casualty or other conditions similar to
those enumerated in this section.
§ 7-04 Plot Usage and Maintenance.
   (a)   All plots shall be used as a place of burial for the dead or the
remains of deceased persons and for no other purpose whatever.
   (b)   All grading, landscaping work and improvements of any kind shall be
under the direction of and subject to the consent, satisfaction and approval of
the Commissioner.
   (c)   Cemetery personnel may at any time enter upon a plot to keep it neat,
to cut grass and to remove weeds, wilted flowers and debris, but nothing herein
contained shall obligate the cemetery to render any such service without
compensation therefor.
   (d)   Floral frames, when removed from a plot, unless specific instructions
are given to the contrary by those lawfully entitled to them may be disposed of
by the cemetery superintendent in any manner he/she sees fit.
   (e)   No plants, trees, shrubs or grave coverings, or other decorations may
be introduced into any plot without the written consent of the Commissioner,
and no plants, trees, shrubs or other covering growing within a plot or border
shall be cut down or destroyed without the consent of the Commissioner.
   (f)   Mounds and shrubs are prohibited in the park area and in section 2 of
the cemetery.
   (g)   Artificial flowers and plants are prohibited.
   (h)   In the event annual care charges have not been paid for five
successive years, any empty graves or plots for which these charges remain
unpaid shall be deemed abandoned, all rights therein shall be deemed
terminated, and burial rights therein may be granted by the cemetery to others.
§ 7-05 Memorials.
   (a)   No memorial shall be placed on any plot except by the plot holder or
his/her authorized representative.
   (b)   Designs, plans and specifications for proposed memorials, or other
improvements must be submitted on written application, signed by the plot
holder. Written approval of the Commissioner is required before work can be
begun. The foundation work is to be done at the expense of the plot holder or
his/her representatives, heirs or assignees. Foundations shall be of concrete.
   (c)   Memorial dealers shall abide by these Rules and Regulations.
Violations of any such Rule or Regulation by any producer or retail dealer may
be cause for disapproval by the Commissioner of such producer or retailer.
   (d)   All memorials are to be constructed of natural stone. No artificial
stone of any description is permitted.
   (e)   Should any memorial become unsightly, dilapidated or a menace to
visitors, the superintendent of the cemetery shall have the right, at the
expense of the plot holder, either to correct the condition or to remove the
memorial, if after due notice to the plot holder, sent by registered mail, the
plot holder fails to take proper steps to remedy the conditions, within a
reasonable time, not exceeding thirty days.
   (f)   Enclosures, fences, copings, benches and vases are not permitted
unless approved by the Commissioner.
   (g)   While a funeral or interment is being conducted, all work of any
description which is near enough to disturb, either by noise or otherwise,
shall cease. No work will be permitted on Saturdays, Sundays or legal holidays.
All deliveries shall be made at the cemetery prior to 4:00 p.m. on weekdays.
   (h)   No memorials are allowed in the park area and urn gardens, except for
markers flush with the ground.
   (i)   Memorials in section 2 of the cemetery are limited to two feet wide,
by two feet high, by one foot thick.
   (j)   No memorial or foundation shall be constructed on any plot so long as
there are any outstanding charges due the cemetery with respect to that plot or
any other plot held by the plot holder.
§ 7-06 Mausoleum.
   (a)   No mausoleum shall be constructed without prior written approval of
the Commissioner. No such approval shall be granted until satisfactory design
plans and construction contracts have been submitted to the Commissioner.
   (b)   The plot holder shall make, at his/her own expense, a survey; provide
and pay for his/her own contractor to excavate and construct the mausoleum
foundation; and have his/her contractor provide the cemetery with a guarantee
that only first grade materials will be used; that it will be executed in first
grade workmanship; and should fault develop within five years due to setting,
treatment or handling, the required repairs or replacements will be made by the
contractor without cost to the cemetery. Unless such guarantee in writing is
furnished the Commissioner, approval for construction of a mausoleum cannot be
had. Foundations must be at least six feet below grade.
   (c)   The plot holder must provide for perpetual care and maintenance of a
mausoleum by payment to the cemetery of fifteen percent of the total cost of
the structure within thirty days of completion of construction.
   (d)   Only substantially non-corrosive metals of approved permanency shall
be permitted for mausoleum or memorial fixtures, such as doors, window grilles,
statutary, etc.
   (e)   Care and maintenance of mausoleums shall include cleaning the
interiors and stained glass; cleaning and oiling bronze work unless otherwise
requested; repainting and cleaning the exterior stone where and when necessary;
and repairing damage caused by wear and tear.
   (f)   In the event the mausoleum, due to any reason, is badly damaged in the
opinion of the Commissioner, he/she shall request the Estate of the deceased or
the plot holder restore the mausoleum to a condition satisfactory to the
Commissioner. If these repairs are not made within a reasonable time, not to
exceed sixty days, the Commissioner reserves the right to remove the remaining
mausoleum and inter the bodies in the plot over which the mausoleum had been
constructed.
§ 7-07 Inheritance of Burial Right.
   (a)   In the event of the death of the owner of a burial right any and all
privileges (rights) of the plot holder shall pass to the plot holder's family
as set forth in the following sections.
   (b)   The surviving spouse or surviving domestic partner of the owner of the
certificate of burial right of record has the right to be buried with his/her
spouse or domestic partner. This right may be waived at any time but terminates
with burial elsewhere.
   (c)   Where burial privileges in the grave or plot are held in the name of
one person only:
      (1)   The rights of interment in the plot may be disposed of by specific
bequest in a will, subject to the vested right of interment of the surviving
spouse, but not by residuary clause. The specific bequest must mention the
section, the lot and grave number of the plot.
      (2)   If the owner of the certificate of burial right shall have filed
notarized instructions at the cemetery office as to which member or members of
his/her family shall succeed to the privileges (rights) of the plot, said
instructions shall be recognized by the Commissioner and will be followed if in
the judgment of the Commissioner such instructions are definite, reasonable and
practicable, subject, however, to a vested right of interment of the surviving
spouse.
      (3)   If no valid or sufficient written instructions shall have been
filed with the Commissioner, or if valid and sufficient instructions are in
conflict with a later will, and the owner of the certificate of burial right
has left instructions in said will, duly admitted to probate in a court having
jurisdiction thereof, subject, however, to a vested right of interment of a
surviving spouse, such instructions shall control, provided they are not in
conflict with cemetery rules and regulations then in force and providing the
Commissioner has been furnished with a certified copy of the same.
      (4)   In the absence of valid and sufficient instructions filed with the
commissioner by the owner of the certificate of burial right or a duly probated
will, the privileges (rights) of interment shall devolve upon those entitled to
succeed thereto by the intestate laws of the State of New York keeping in mind
the vested right of interment of the surviving spouse or surviving domestic
partner.
   (d)   Where the certificate of burial right is registered with the
Commissioner in the name of more than one person the privileges (rights) of the
interment follow as above for the deceased co-owners.
   (e)   When no one included in the classification set forth above is living,
burial rights will have terminated.
   (f)   Any person acquiring the privileges (rights) of a plot holder by
inheritance must also accept any and all liabilities associated with the plot,
including, in the case of a plot covered by annual care, any arrearages and all
future annual care charges.
   (g)   Notwithstanding the above provisions of this section, it shall be the
obligation of the supervising spouse or surviving domestic partner and/or heirs
to claim ownership of a burial right upon the death of a plot holder. In the
event that the commissioner is not notified in writing of a claim to a burial
right within five years of the death of the plot holder, such burial right
shall terminate with respect to any empty grave covered by the deceased plot
holder's certificate of burial.
   (h)   Any person(s) claiming inheritance of a burial right must furnish the
Commissioner a copy of the will of the deceased plot holder duly certified by
the court in which the will was admitted to probate. In the event that the
deceased plot holder left no will, the claimant(s) must furnish to the
Commissioner a notarized affidavit from the executor of the decedent's estate
stating that the claimant(s) is (are) the beneficiary(ies) of the burial right
or other proof of inheritance satisfactory to the Commissioner in his sole
discretion. Additionally, all claims must be documented on the cemetery's
official claim of inheritance of right of burial form.
§ 7-08 Transfer of Burial Right.
   (a)   No burial right may be sold, transferred, exchanged, or otherwise
disposed of without the written consent of the Commissioner on the cemetery's
official transfer of right of burial form.
   (b)   No burial right with respect to a grave in which an interment has been
made may be sold, transferred, exchanged, or otherwise disposed of, except to a
family member.
   (c)   If a plot holder wishes to sell, transfer, exchange or otherwise
dispose of to a person other than a family member a burial right with respect
to an empty grave, the cemetery may, at the option of the Commissioner,
repurchase the burial right for the price originally paid by the plot holder,
less any outstanding charges due the cemetery by the plot holder.
   (d)   No burial right may be sold, transferred, exchanged or otherwise
disposed of so long as there are any outstanding charges due the cemetery by
the plot holder with respect to the burial right in question or any other
burial right held by the plot holder.
   (e)   No sale, transfer, exchange, or other disposition of a burial right in
a plot covered by annual care will be permitted unless the transferee purchases
a perpetual care contract for the plot.
§ 7-09 Visitors and Others.
   (a)   All persons disturbing the quiet and good order of the cemetery by
noise or other improper conduct will be compelled instantly to leave the
grounds. cemetery personnel will exclude from cemetery grounds any persons it
deems improper and will disperse any improper assemblages in the cemetery.
   (b)   The cemetery gates will be open seven days a week from 8:30 a.m. to 4:
00 p.m.
   (c)   No children under the age of 18 will be admitted unless accompanied by
an adult.
   (d)   No truck, cart or business wagon will be allowed to enter the gates,
unless on business.
   (e)   Admittance will not be granted to persons on bicycles.
   (f)   All persons are strictly forbidden to pluck or carry flowers, either
wild or cultivated, out of the cemetery without written permit from the office.
   (g)   All solicitations of any kind whatever are strictly prohibited on the
cemetery grounds.
   (h)   No money shall be paid to any person in the employ of the cemetery in
reward for any personal service or attention.
   (i)   Motor vehicles shall be admitted only on permit from the cemetery
office. The speed limit for vehicles within the cemetery grounds is fifteen
miles per hour. Vehicles shall not park or come to a full stop in front of any
open grave unless they are in attendance at a funeral.
   (j)   Dogs brought into the cemetery must be kept on leash.
   (k)   No firearms or guns of any kind shall be brought into the cemetery
except with the express permission of the superintendent.
   (l)   The superintendent reserves the right to compel any person or persons
lawfully upon a plot, to temporarily withdraw from same whenever, in the
judgment of the superintendent, their presence would interfere with the orderly
conduct of funeral services upon a plot in the near vicinity.
   (m)   No person or persons, other than cemetery employees, shall be
permitted to bring food or refreshments into the cemetery grounds.
   (n)   All workers while on the cemetery grounds shall be subject to the
orders of the superintendent of the cemetery. They shall immediately cease work
when he/she so orders them to do so, if, in his/her opinion, the carrying on of
the work would interfere with the orderly conduct of a funeral service or an
interment.
   (o)   Except when necessary to cross another plot to reach the plot being
visited, all persons within the cemetery grounds shall use only the roads,
avenues, walks and paths established and maintained by the cemetery.
§ 7-10 Prices and Fees.
   (a)   The prices for burial rights and fees for services are listed in 55
RCNY §
3-01.
   (b)   All payments are to be made by check or money order payable to
Canarsie Cemetery and sent to the Division of Real Estate Services, 1 Centre
Street, Room 1900, New York, NY 10007.
§ 7-11 Miscellaneous.
   (a)   The statements or representations of any employee of the cemetery
shall not be binding on the cemetery except as such statements or
representations coincide with the instrument granting burial right and with
this chapter.
   (b)   This chapter shall apply to any grave, plot, memorial, or mausoleum
now in existence or which may hereafter be erected in the cemetery.
   (c)   In all matters not specifically covered by these Rules and Regulations
the Commissioner reserves the right to do anything which in his/her judgment is
deemed reasonable under the circumstances and such decision shall be binding
upon the plot holder and all parties concerned.
Chapter 8: Contracts for the Purchase of Products Containing Secondary Material
and Minimum Secondary Material Content Standards for the Purchase of
Establishing Price Preference Eligibility
§ 8-01 Purpose.
New York City's Recycling Law, which is codified as §§ 16-301 et seq. of the
Administrative Code of the City of New York encourages the use of "secondary
materials" in the manufacture of products purchased by DMSS for use by various
city agencies and departments. A mechanism authorized by the Recycling Law to
achieve the goal of purchasing products made from secondary materials is the
authority to award a contract pursuant to a "price preference." Simply stated,
the City is given the discretion to determine that the public interest will be
served by awarding contracts for the purchase of specified products to other
than the lowest responsive and responsible bidder provided that the product
contains a mandated "minimum amount of secondary material" and that the price
is within the specified percentage of the price bid by the lowest responsive
and responsible bidder.
§ 8-02 Definitions.
Aggregate product purchase. "Aggregate product purchase" shall mean a
procurement of products by DMSS which consists of a group or groups of products
which are related to each other in one of the following ways:
   (1)   The products are manufactured by a single manufacturer and are
purchased in the form of a price list which is a listing of items and their
prices;
   (2)   The products are contained in a published catalog which is offered to
DMSS at prices listed in the catalog or at a discount therefrom; or
   (3)   The products have been combined in a class for award to a single
vendor based upon fiscal, operational or pricing advantages.
Commissioner. "Commissioner" shall mean the Commissioner of the Department of
Citywide Administrative Services of the City of New York, or his or her
designee.
Contract. "Contract" means a procurement by DMSS to purchase goods, the total
value of which is in excess of $10,000 (or such other amount as the Procurement
Policy Board Rules may hereafter establish as the ceiling below which the
procurement is treated as a small purchase).
DMSS. "DMSS" means the Division of Municipal Supply Services of the Department
of Citywide Administrative Services.
Minimum amount of secondary material. "Minimum amount of secondary material"
means the secondary material content level established by these Rules as the
minimum percentage required for a product to potentially qualify for a price
preference in accordance with Administrative Code § 16-322.
Post-consumer material. "Post-consumer material" means only those products
generated by a business or a consumer which have served their intended end
uses, and which have been separated or diverted from solid waste for the
purposes of collection, recycling and disposition.
Procurement Policy Board Rules. "Procurement Policy Board Rules" means the
regulations originally effective September 1, 1990 governing contracting by
city agencies which are promulgated by the Procurement Policy Board of the City
of New York as those rules may, from time to time, be amended.
Secondary material. "Secondary material" means any material recovered from or
otherwise destined for the waste stream, including but not limited to, post-
consumer material, industrial scrap material and overstock or obsolete
inventories from distributors, wholesalers and other companies, but such term
does not include those materials and by-products generated from and commonly
reused within an original manufacturing process.
USEPA. "USEPA" means the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
§ 8-03 Minimum Content Standards and Applicability of Price Preference.
   (a)   Applicability of price preference. In general, on a contract let by
DMSS for the purchase of a product, a bidder shall be eligible for the price
preference set forth in § 16-322 of the Administrative Code for such product
only if such bidder offers to supply such product manufactured with the minimum
content of secondary material specified in these Rules.
   (b)   Minimum content standards incorporated. DMSS shall utilize the minimum
content standards for secondary materials contained in the tables in
subdivision (g) of this section to determine eligibility for the price
preference set forth in § 16-322 of the Administrative Code, provided, however,
that, except as provided in subdivision (c) of this section, DMSS shall utilize
all minimum content standards for secondary materials subsequently promulgated
or amended by either USEPA or the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation (DEC), and if there is a conflict between USEPA and DEC standards,
DMSS shall utilize the highest standard that it is permitted to utilize by §
16-322 of the Administrative Code.
   (c)   Minimum content standards for aggregate product purchases, multi-
material products, and metals. Except as provided by § 16-322, notwithstanding
any other provision of this section, the minimum content standard for the
following products shall be zero:
      (1)   any product which DMSS purchases by means of an aggregate product
purchase, except where such aggregate product purchase consists solely of
products that are substantially manufactured from the same material, and for
which the same minimum content standard applies or identical numerical minimum
content standards apply;
      (2)   any product that is not substantially manufactured from a single
material; and
      (3)   metal products.
   (d)   Recycled product purchases. DMSS may restrict bids solely to products
composed of specified minimum secondary material content levels. If the minimum
secondary material content level specified by DMSS for such a bid is less than
the minimum secondary material content standard for such product set forth in
these Rules, a bidder may be eligible for a price preference if such bidder
offers to provide such product with a level of secondary material content that
is equal to or greater than the minimum content standard specified in these
Rules.
   (e)   Market stimulus bids. Except for products for which DMSS is required
to utilize a USEPA minimum content standard for secondary materials pursuant to
Administrative Code § 16-322, DMSS may stipulate that for a specific bid a
price preference shall only be applicable to products which satisfy additional
minimum content standards or higher minimum content standards than those set
forth in these Rules, provided that DMSS first finds that such additional or
higher standards are intended to stimulate the market for secondary materials.
   (f)   Packaging. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, this
section does not apply to packaging incidental to the product being purchased.
   (g)   Tables. 
Paper and Paper Products1 
(1) USEPA Standard
                     Minimum percentage Minimum percentage  Minimum percentage
Material             of recovered       of postconsumer     of waste paper 2  
                     materials          recovered materials
Newsprint            –                40                  –
High grade bleached printing and writing papers:
Offset printing      –                –                 50
Mimeo and duplicator –                –                 50
paper
Writing (stationary) –                –                 50
Office paper (e.g.,  –                –                 50
note pads)
Paper for high-speed –                –                 ( 3 )
copiers
Envelopes            –                –                 50
Form bond including
computer paper and   –                –                 ( 3 )
carbonless
Book papers          –                –                 50
Bond papers          –                –                 50
Ledger               –                –                 50
Cover stock          –                –                 50
Cotton fiber papers  25                 –                 –
Tissue products: 
Toilet tissue        –                20                  –
Paper towels         –                40                  –
Paper napkins        –                30                  –
Facial tissue        –                5                   –
Doilies              –                40                  –
Industrial wipers    –                0                   –
Unbleached packaging: 
Corrugated boxes     –                35                  –
Fiber boxes          –                35                  –
Brown boxes (e.g.,   –                5                   –
bags)
 Recycled                                                 
paperboard: 
Recycled paperboard
products including   –                80                  –
folding cartons
Pad backing          –                90                  –
 
1. This table has been taken from 40 C.F.R. § 250.21. All terms in this USEPA
standard are as defined in the regulations heretofore adopted by the USEPA,
pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 6901 for paper products. The definitions for such terms
are found at 40 C.F.R. § 250.4.
2. Waste paper is defined in § 250.4 and refers to specified postconsumer and
other recovered materials.
3. [U.S.] EPA found insufficient production of these papers with recycled
content to assure adequate competition.
 (2) Additional Standards for Paper
 
                     Minimum Percentage by Weight Minimum Percentage by weight
Product              of Secondary Material        of Post- Consumer Material
                     Content                      Content
Paper for High Speed 50 percent                   10 percent
Copiers
Form bond including
computer paper and   50 percent                   10 percent
carbonless
 
(3) Printing Contracts 
The price preference is applicable solely to the paper portion of any printing
contract. For purposes of establishing the size of the price preference, the
paper portion of printing contracts shall be deemed to be 50 percent of the bid
price. The minimum content standard for preference eligibility for the paper
shall be that established for the type of paper specified in the Request for
Bids.
Building Insulation Products 4 
Product                                Percentage by Weight of Secondary
                                       Material
Cellulose loose-fill and spray-on      75 percent postconsumer recovered paper
Perlite composite board                23 percent postconsumer recovered paper
Plastic rigid foam, polyisocyanurate /  
polyurethane:
Rigid foam                             9 percent recovered material
Foam-in place                          5 percent recovered material
Glass fiber reinforced                 6 percent recovered material
Phenolic rigid foam                    5 percent recovered material
Rock wool                              50 percent recovered material
 
Lubricating Oils 5  
For engine lubricating oils, hydraulic fluids, and gear oils, excluding marine
and aviation oils, the minimum re-refined oil content shall be not less than 25
percent re-refined oil.
Plastics 6  
 
Minimum Percentage by Weight of Secondary Minimum Percentage by Weight of Post-
Material Content                          Consumer Material Content
50 percent                                15 percent
 
Note – The minimum content standards are based on the weight of material (not
volume) in the insulating core only.
4.   This Table has been taken from 40 C.F.R. § 248.21(a)(4). All terms used in
this standard are as defined in the regulations heretofore adopted by the
USEPA, pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 6901 for building insulation products. The
definitions for such terms are found at 40 C.F.R. § 248.4.
5.   The source for this standard is found at 40 C.F.R. § 252.21(a)(12).
Definitions for same are located at 40 C.F.R. § 252.4.
6.   These standards have been derived from Table 1 located at 6 NYCRR § 368.4
(a). The definitions for the terms used in these standards may be found at 6
NYCRR § 368.2.
 
Glass 6                         
Minimum Percentage by Weight of Minimum Percentage by Weight of Post-
Secondary Material Content      Consumer Material Content 
50 percent                      35 percent
Rubber 6                        
Minimum Percentage by Weight of Minimum Percentage by Weight of Post-
Secondary Material Content      Consumer Material Content 
50 percent                      25 percent
Solvents 6                      
Minimum Percentage by Weight of Minimum Percentage by Weight of Post-
Secondary Material Content      Consumer Material Content 
75 percent                      75 percent
 
6.   These standards have been derived from Table 1 located at 6 NYCRR § 368.4
(a). The definitions for the terms used in these standards may be found at 6
NYCRR § 368.2.
§ 8-04 Implementation Procedure.
   (a)   To be eligible for a price preference, bidders must submit with their
bids a written certification of the secondary material and post-consumer
material content of such product.
   (b)   In the event that a bidder offers a product which at the time of bid
submission is authorized by DEC, pursuant to 6 NYCRR Part 368 et seq., to use
the New York State "Recycled" emblem in connection with the sale of such
product in New York State, then such product shall be deemed to meet the
standards for minimum secondary material content pursuant to these Rules, and
the bidder, in lieu of the certification required by 55 RCNY §
8-04(a) above, may submit with its bid a copy of the DEC letter to the
manufacturer authorizing the use of the "Recycled" emblem in connection with
the sale of the particular product.
§ 8-05 Miscellaneous.
   (a)   DMSS' specifications will encourage:
      (1)   the offering of products made with secondary materials;
      (2)   the offering of products manufactured with remanufactured
components;
      (3)   the offering of products which are capable of utilizing products
made with secondary materials or components that are remanufactured.
   (b)   DMSS will work with other government agencies and purchase from their
existing contracts for products made with secondary materials or join with them
in the cooperative purchase of such products.
   (c)   Requests for bids for aggregate product purchases and multi-material
products will require that vendors identify products which are made wholly or
partially with secondary materials. As appropriate, based upon considerations
which include the amount of secondary material content and the volume of
purchases by the City, such products may be separately bid or bid as a recycled
product purchase or as a market stimulus bid.
   (d)   DMSS will encourage agencies wherever practicable to purchase
retreaded tires from the DMSS requirements contract for such retreaded tires.
   (e)   DMSS will encourage agencies wherever practicable to purchase products
made from post-consumer and other secondary materials.
§ 8-06 Separability.
If any provision or section of these Rules, or the application thereof to
particular persons is held invalid, the remainder of these Rules, and their
application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected by such
holding and shall remain in full force and effect.
Chapter 9: Press Conferences, Demonstrations and Similar Activities in the
Immediate Vicinity of City Hall
§ 9-01 Application. [Repealed]
§ 9-02 Covered Activities Exceptions; Monthly List of Events. [Repealed]
§ 9-03 Conduct; Maximum Number; Larger Groups. [Repealed]
§ 9-04 Alternative Locations; Covered Activities Not Permitted. [Repealed]
§ 9-05 Disorderly Conduct; Conduct Not Permitted. [Repealed]
§ 9-06 Permit System; Administration. [Repealed]
§ 9-07 Revocation of Permit. [Repealed]
§ 9-08 Police Department Powers Not Restricted; Searches. [Repealed]
§ 9-09 Emergency; Close Area. [Repealed]
§ 9-10 Contents of Permit. [Repealed]
Chapter 10: Rules for Press Conferences, Demonstrations and Similar Activities
in the Immediate Vicinity of City Hall
§ 10-01 [Application.]
These procedures apply to press conferences, demonstrations, picketing,
speechmaking, vigils and like forms of expressive conduct by participants or
onlookers ("covered activities") on the steps, sidewalk and plaza area fronting
City Hall. The "plaza area" consists of the bluestone-paved area bordered on
the north by the sidewalk fronting City Hall, on the south by City Hall Park
and to the east and west by cobblestone parking areas.
§ 10-02 [Activities Not Covered.]
Covered activities shall not include the following public ceremonies and
commemorations: (i) inaugurations; (ii) award ceremonies for city employees;
and (iii) ceremonies held in conjunction with a City-sponsored ticker-tape
parade.
§ 10-03 [Conduct, Maximum Number; Larger Groups.]
Covered activities shall be conducted in accordance with these requirements and
under the terms of permits issued by the Police Department pursuant to 55 RCNY
§
10-06 below. Covered activities shall be conducted in a manner which does not
endanger the safety or security of public employees and members of the general
public, impede ingress to or egress from City Hall, or interfere with the
rights of other persons engaged in covered activities. A maximum of 300 persons
in total shall be permitted on the City Hall steps, sidewalk and plaza fronting
City Hall for a three-hour time period in an area selected by the Police
Department which reasonably accommodates groups of 300 or less. Groups of over
300 persons or who seek to hold a covered activity that exceeds three hours in
duration shall be directed to obtain a permit for the use of City Hall Park or
other comparable area in accordance with the rules of the Department of Parks
and Recreation.
§ 10-04 [Alternative Locations; Covered Activities Not Permitted.]
Covered activities shall not be permitted when the Police Department determines
that the covered activity would violate the provisions of 55 RCNY §
10-05, or under the circumstances set forth in subdivision c of 55 RCNY §
10-06. When areas of the steps, sidewalk or plaza area fronting City Hall are
not available due to events enumerated in 55 RCNY §
10-02, anticipated security needs or the presence of other groups engaged in
covered activities, groups shall be informed of alternative locations or times
that are available for the covered activities.
§ 10-05 [Disorderly Conduct; Conduct Not Permitted.]
Disorderly conduct or conduct which obstructs the usual use of City Hall
entrances, foyers, and the parking area, which otherwise impedes public
employees in the performance of their official duties, vehicular and pedestrian
traffic around City Hall, or the general public from obtaining government
services or attending proceedings at City Hall is prohibited. Conduct shall not
be permitted which (a) reasonably presents a clear and present danger to the
public safety, good order or health; (b) interferes with ingress to or egress
from City Hall; or (c) may result in bodily harm to any individual, damage to
property, or imminent breach of the peace such that good order cannot otherwise
be maintained.
§ 10-06 [Permit System; Administration.]
These procedures shall be administered by the Police Department, on behalf of
the Department of Citywide Administrative Services and the Department of Parks
and Recreation. In administering these procedures, the following permit system
will apply:
   a.   Applicants shall submit fully executed permit applications in a form
prescribed by the Police Department to a designated office or division of the
Police Department, which will process applications in the order they are
received. In the event that multiple applications are received for the same
time period, permits will be considered in the order of receipt of fully
executed applications.
   b.   Applications shall be granted or denied within 10 business days of the
Police Department's receipt of the application. Applications filed within 10
business days of a proposed covered activity shall be processed as
expeditiously as possible. In the case of applications made two business days
or less before the proposed covered activity and in the absence of exigent
circumstances which prevented the applicant from earlier seeking a permit, the
application may be denied where the size or nature of the activity reasonably
requires an additional police presence and there is insufficient time to make
such presence available. In this event, the applicant will be informed of
alternative locations or times for the covered activity.
   c.   Permits may be denied on the following grounds:
         (i)   A permit has previously been granted to another applicant for a
covered activity for the date and time requested.
         (ii)   It reasonably appears that the covered activity will present a
clear and present danger to the public safety, good order or health.
         (iii)   The application proposes activities which would be in
violation of law or regulation.
         (iv)   An event enumerated in 55 RCNY §
10-02 was previously calendared for the same date and time.
         (v)   The Police Department determines that the proposed covered
activity conflicts with security needs anticipated for the time and place of
the proposed activity. In the event that a permit is denied under paragraphs
(i), (iv) or (v), the applicant will be informed of alternative locations or
times available for the covered activity.
   d.   Covered activities are subject to the following additional limitations:
         (i)   Applicants for permits that are issued in error because an event
enumerated in 55 RCNY §
10-02 had previously been calendared or a permit had previously been granted
for another covered activity will be notified and provided with a reasonable
opportunity to conduct the covered activity at an alternative location or an
alternative time.
         (ii)   No permit will authorize the erection or placement of
structures.
         (iii)   Permits shall authorize only one covered activity by one
permit holder at a time.
         (iv)   Permits shall extend for a period of not more than three hours.
   e.   Permits may be revoked prior to the scheduled covered activity under
the following circumstances: (i) unanticipated security needs or other exigent
circumstances; or (ii) information comes to the attention of the Police
Department which indicates that the proposed activity reasonably presents a
clear and present danger to the public safety, good order or health.
Revocations of previously granted permits which occur at least 10 days prior to
the covered activity shall be made in writing.
§ 10-07 [Revocation of Permit.]
During the conduct of covered activities, a permit may be revoked by the
ranking on-site New York City police officer if the covered activity or other
circumstances (i) present a clear and present danger to the public safety, good
order or health; (ii) interfere with ingress to or egress from City Hall or
otherwise violate the terms and conditions contained in the permit; or (iii)
result in bodily harm to any individual, damage to property, or imminent breach
of the peace such that good order cannot otherwise be maintained.
§ 10-08 [Police Department Powers Not Restricted; Searches.]
Nothing in these procedures shall restrict the power and authority of the
Police Department to preserve the public peace and safety in the vicinity of
City Hall, including but not limited to using magnetometers or other security
devices, submitting all persons, bags and packages to mechanical inspection or
search.
§ 10-09 [Emergency; Close Area.]
The Police Department may order the closure of or limit access to the City Hall
area in the event of an emergency or period of heightened security.
§ 10-10 [Contents of Permit.]
All permits issued shall include the conditions set forth above.
Chapter 11: Personnel Practice and Procedure
§ 11-01 General Examination Regulations.
   (a)   General provisions.
      (1)   These regulations shall be applicable to all examinations conducted
by the New York City Department of Citywide Administrative Services for
positions in the competitive, non-competitive and labor classes. Before
applying to take an examination, applicants should consult the Notice of
Examination for the specific position for which they are applying and these
General Examination Regulations. Applicants are responsible for knowledge of
the contents of those documents, which are binding on all applicants. In
addition, the Civil Service Law and the personnel rules and regulations of the
City of New York apply to all examinations.
      (2)   All information concerning an examination including these
regulations, notices of examination, filing dates, test dates, and key answers
are available at the website of the Department of Citywide Administrative
Services at www.nyc.gov/dcas or can be obtained in person at the Application
Centers, located at 2 Lafayette Street, 17th Floor, New York, NY 10007 and at
210 Joralemon Street, 4th Floor, Brooklyn, NY 11210.
   (b)   Applications.
      (1)   Completed application forms and required fee must be submitted in a
manner specified by the Notice of Examination for the specific position for
which the applicant is applying. Applications must be received by the last date
for receipt of applications specified in the Notice of Examinations.
      (2)   Except on legal holidays and unless otherwise stated in the Notice
of Examination, the Application Centers of the Department of Citywide
Administrative Services, located at 2 Lafayette Street, 17th Floor, New York,
NY 10007 and at 210 Joralemon Street, 4th Floor, Brooklyn, NY 11210, are open
from Monday to Saturday, from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Application forms can be
obtained without charge at the Application Centers during the application
period specified in the Notice of Examination. Application materials are also
available at the website of the Department of Citywide Administrative Services
at www.nyc.gov/dcas.
      (3)   A late application in a promotion examination shall be accepted if
submitted by the employing agency personnel office as early as practicable
prior to the day of the first test thereof if such late application includes a
signed statement from his or her personnel officer that he or she was absent
from employment because of vacation, sick leave, military duty, or other reason
acceptable to the Department of Citywide Administrative Services, for a period
of not less than one-half of the application period.
      (4)   A late application in an open competitive examination will be
accepted from a provisional appointee to the title for which the examination is
administered if submitted by the employing agency personnel office as early as
practicable prior to the day of the first test thereof if such late application
includes a signed statement from his or her personnel officer that he or she
was absent from employment because of vacation, sick leave, military duty, or
other reason acceptable to the Department of Citywide Administrative Services,
for a period of not less than one-half of the application period.
      (5)   The Department of Citywide Administrative Services assumes no
responsibility for applications where:
         (i)   errors or mistakes are made therein by the applicant;
         (ii)   they are filed by mail;
         (iii)   they are not filed with the Department of Citywide
Administrative Services or other agency designated by the Commissioner of
Citywide Administrative Services to accept applications; or
         (iv)   they are not received on a timely basis.
   (c)   Application fees.
      (1)   An application fee, as required in the Notice of Examination, must
be paid at the time of submitting the application for any civil service
appointment and for any application for appointment without competitive
examination including provisional and labor class appointments and transfers.
The application fee will be based upon the minimum of the salary range of the
title being sought:
 
Salary Category   Fee
Under $30,000     $40
$30,000 - $34,999 $47
$35,000 - $39,999 $54
$40,000 - $44,999 $61
$45,000 - $62,999 $68
$63,000 - $69,999 $82
$70,000 - $74,999 $85
$75,000 - $79,999 $88
$80,000 - $89,000 $91
$89,001 - $99,999 $96
$100,000 & over   $101
 
      (2)   An application fee is not required of a New York City resident
receiving public assistance from the New York City Department of Social
Services. To have the fee waived, such applicant must submit a photocopy of a
current Medicaid identification card. In addition, the application fee may be
waived, in the discretion of the Commissioner of Citywide Administrative
Services, upon a showing of compelling circumstances.
      (3)   Application fees must be submitted and paid for in a manner
authorized by the Notice of Examination for the specific position for which the
applicant is applying.
      (4)   An applicant who was unable to take or complete an examination may
apply for refund of the application fee by submitting a written request
therefor to the Fiscal Division of the Department of Citywide Administrative
Services within 30 days of the date of the first test in the examination at
which he or she was unable to appear with verification that such absence was
due to:
         (i)   compulsory attendance before a court or other public body or
official having the power to compel attendance;
         (ii)   hospitalization;
         (iii)   a clear error or mistake for which the Department of Citywide
Administrative Services is responsible.
      (5)   An applicant who was unable to take the first test in an open
competitive examination because of active military service with the armed
forces of the United States may apply for refund of the filing fee by
submitting written request therefor with verification of such service not later
than 60 days from the termination of military duty.
      (6)   Veteran Exam Fee Waiver.
         (i)   An application fee for an open-competitive or promotion civil
service examination will not be required of a Veteran for taking any
examination, under the conditions detailed in this paragraph.
            A "Veteran," for the purposes of this paragraph, shall mean an
individual who, at the time of filing his or her application for a civil
service examination, (i) is a citizen of the United States or an alien lawfully
admitted for permanent residence, (ii) has received an honorable discharged or
who has been released under honorable conditions from the Armed Forces of the
United States, and (iii) has served on full-time active duty, other than active
duty for training.
            The "Armed Forces of the United States" shall mean the United
States Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, and Coast Guard, including all
components thereof, and the National Guard when in the service of the United
States pursuant to call as provided by Law.
            The Veteran Exam Fee Waiver can be used by a Veteran to waive the
application fee for any open-competitive or promotion civil service examination
offered by the Department of Citywide Administrative Services or offered by any
other agency or entity pursuant to a delegation from the Department.
         (ii)   Process for Requesting the Veteran Exam Fee Waiver. To request
the Veteran Exam Fee Waiver, an applicant must submit a photocopy of his or her
U.S. Armed Forces separation papers (DD214 long form) in the manner and at the
time detailed on the Fee Waiver Request Form, available at Application Centers
and at the website of the Department of Citywide Administrative Services at
www.nyc.gov/dcas.
   (d)   Test date and admission cards.
      (1)   The tentative date of the first assembled test in an examination is
stated in the Notice of Examination. The official test date will be given in
the admission card sent to the applicant. The City assumes no responsibility
for mail delivery. Applicants who do not receive an admission card at least 4
days prior to the tentative test date must obtain a duplicate admission card at
the address specified in the Notice of Examination.
      (2)   A candidate who is found to be not qualified or not eligible for an
examination or for whom the Department of Citywide Administrative Services has
no record of receiving an application will not have his/her test scored.
   (e)   Change of address.
      (1)   A candidate in an examination whose address changes after s/he
submits the application but prior to mailing of the notice of results, must
promptly notify the Examining Service Division of the Department of Citywide
Administrative Services in writing in the manner described in paragraph (3) of
this subdivision.
      (2)   A candidate in an examination whose address changes after mailing
of the notice of results and during the life of an eligible list upon which the
candidate's name appears shall promptly notify the Certification Section of the
Department of Citywide Administrative Services in writing in the manner
described in paragraph (3) of this subdivision.
      (3)   A separate notification of a change of address should be submitted
for each examination in which the person is a candidate or an eligible. Each
submission must include the candidate's name, Social Security number, complete
new address, the title of the examination and the examination number, and place
on the eligible list, if applicable. For promotion examinations, include the
name of the city agency by which the candidate is employed. Failure to furnish
notification of a change of address may result in the loss of opportunity to
compete in tests or loss of opportunity to appear for appointment interviews.
   (f)   Citizenship.
      (1)   Any citizenship requirement will be set forth in the Notice of
Examination. When citizenship is not required, non-citizens must be able to
establish at the time of appointment and throughout the period of their
employment that they are legally permitted to work in the United States.
      (2)   Under the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986, each
candidate must be able to prove his/her identity and his/her right to obtain
employment in the United States prior to employment with the City of New York.
   (g)   Age. Persons who have not reached their eighteenth birthday shall
obtain employment certificates as required by law before appointment.
   (h)   Residency. §§ 12-120 and 12-121 of the Administrative Code of the City
of New York require that any person who enters City service on or after
September 1, 1986 shall be a resident of the City within 90 days after the date
he or she enters City service and shall thereafter maintain city residence as a
condition of employment. The Commissioner of Citywide Administrative Services
may waive this requirement for positions which are hard to fill. In addition,
certain positions are exempted by law.
   (i)   Language. Candidates must be able to understand and be understood in
English. A qualifying English language oral will be given by the Department of
Citywide Administrative Services to all candidates who, in the opinion of the
appointing officer, do not meet this requirement.
   (j)   Special testing services for disabled applicants.
      (1)   Any applicant who is disabled to the extent that he or she requires
special accommodations to take an examination shall submit a written request
for such accommodations, together with proof of disability as described below
The written request shall be submitted in the manner specified in the Notice of
Examination and the Special Circumstances Form for the submission of such
requests. The written request must indicate the specific accommodation
requested, and any alternative which would be equally acceptable. Where
appropriate and practicable, the Department of Citywide Administrative Services
will provide one or more forms of testing accommodations, such as providing an
accessible or alternate examination site, additional time to complete the
examination, special seating, full written instructions and special attention
from the monitor to insure that the applicant has understood oral instructions,
a reader or tape recorder for test questions, an amanuensis or tape recorder
for test answers, and large print or braille.
      (2)   Where the disability involves vision, the applicant shall submit:
         (i)   proof of registration with the New York State Commission for the
Blind and Visually Handicapped, or
         (ii)   proof that corrected total vision is less than 20/200 or that
the applicant's field of vision is less than 20 degrees.
      (3)   Where the disability involves hearing, the applicant shall submit
an audiogram taken within the past year by an audiologist licensed in New York
State or board certified otologist, indicating registration number, and showing
the level of hearing loss.
      (4)   Where the applicant's disability does not come within the
categories described in paragraphs (2) or (3) of this subdivision and the
applicant nevertheless requires special accommodations to take the examination
because of his or her disability, the applicant shall submit either a doctor's
note or proof of disability from an agency or organization which is recognized
as one which specializes in serving persons with the applicant's type of
disability. The substantiating document shall indicate the extent of the
disability and the specific testing accommodations recommended for the
applicant.
      (5)   For the purpose of these regulations, "an agency or organization
which is recognized as one which specializes in serving persons with (certain
disabilities)" means a government agency (such as the New York State Office of
Vocational Rehabilitation) or a private organization or agency (such as United
Cerebral Palsy) which is known to the Department of Citywide Administrative
Services or the Mayor's Office for People with Disabilities for its work. The
substantiating document must be on letterhead and must bear the signature and
title of the person certifying the applicant's disability.
      (6)   Disabled applicants may take steps to personally accommodate their
special testing needs in the following ways:
         (i)   Applicants may use their own impairment-related aids, such as
magnifying glasses or talking calculators with ear plugs (where all other
applicants are permitted to use calculators), during the examination.
         (ii)   An applicant who requires an amanuensis or reader with special
skills or abilities not provided by the Department of Citywide Administrative
Services may submit proof of special need from an agency or organization which
is recognized as one which specializes in serving persons with the candidate's
type of disability and which further has volunteers available to perform the
requested service. The agency or organization must notify the Department of
Citywide Administrative Services no later than 15 work days before the test
date that it will provide a volunteer. The Department of Citywide
Administrative Services will not be responsible for providing a replacement
amanuensis or reader in the event a volunteer fails to appear on the day of the
examination.
   (k)   Special examinations.
      (1)   An applicant who is unable, for any of the reasons listed below, to
take the regular examination as scheduled may be given a special examination
upon written request. Such applicant must submit a written request setting
forth the reasons requiring the absence and providing documentary evidence
which demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Commissioner of Citywide
Administrative Services that the applicant was unable to take the regular
examination as scheduled. Unless otherwise specified herein, such material must
be submitted to the Examining Service Section either in person or by certified
or registered mail no later than one week following close of the application
period. If one of the following circumstances arises after that date, such
documentation must be received within one week following the occurrence, but no
later than one week before the special test.
      (2)   Religious observance. An applicant claiming to be unable to take an
examination when originally scheduled because of his or her religious beliefs
may request a special examination by submitting either in person or by
certified or registered mail to the Examining Services Division of the
Department of Citywide Administrative Services, a written request no later than
15 days before the scheduled date of the regular examination. The request must
include a recent written statement on letterhead signed by the applicant's
religious leader attesting to the applicant's religious beliefs and certifying
that the applicant is a Sabbath observer and that it is contrary to the
applicant's tenets to participate in an examination on the date the regular
test is scheduled.
      (3)   Military service.
         (i)   § 243: An applicant who has taken the first test:
            (A)   in an open competitive examination but is unable to complete
the remaining test because of military duty as defined in § 243 of the New York
Military Law must apply to the Control and Service Division of the Department
of Citywide Administrative Services with his or her separation papers not later
than 90 days from the termination of such military duty;
            (B)   in a promotion examination, who is unable to take or complete
such examination because of military duty as defined in § 243 of the New York
Military Law, must apply to the Control and Service Division of the Department
of Citywide Administrative Services with his or her separation papers not later
than 60 days from the date of restoration to his or her City position.
         (ii)   § 242: An applicant in a multiple choice promotion examination
who is ordered to appear for military duty on the scheduled test date must
notify the Examining Service Section in writing no later than one week from the
close of the application period. To be admitted to the make-up test scheduled
in the Notice of Examination, such applicant must provide by certified or
registered mail, written documentation on letterhead signed by the commanding
officer stating that such duty cannot be rescheduled to permit the applicant to
participate in the test and setting forth the reasons why. Such documentation
must be received by the Examining Service Section no later than 10 working days
prior to the regular test date. Such applicants who do not follow the above
procedures must apply for a special test under the procedures in paragraph (3)
(i)(B) of this subdivision.
      (4)   Other reasons:
         (i)   a manifest error or mistake for which the Department of Citywide
Administrative Services or the examining agency is responsible; or
         (ii)   compulsory attendance before a court or other public body or
official having the power to compel attendance; or
         (iii)   physical disability incurred during the course of and within
the scope of municipal employment where such applicant is an officer or
employee of the City; or
         (iv)   absence from the test within one week after the date of death
of a spouse, domestic partner, mother, father, sister, brother, child or child
of a domestic partner of such applicant where such applicant is an officer or
employee of the City; (For purposes of this subparagraph, a domestic partner
shall mean a person who has registered a domestic partnership in accordance
with applicable law with the City Clerk, or has registered such a partnership
with the former City Department of Personnel pursuant to Executive Order 123
(dated August 7, 1989) during the period August 7, 1989 through January 7,
1993. (The records of domestic partnerships registered at the former City
Department of Personnel are to be transferred to the City Clerk.))
   (l)   Education and experience credit.
      (1)   To be credited, the education and experience must be of the nature,
duration and quality described in the notice of examination and must have
occurred during the prescribed period of time. Unless otherwise specified in
the Notice of Examination, all requirements must be met by the last date of the
application period.
      (2)   All education and experience must be clearly specified on the
experience paper in order to be credited or considered on appeal. Education and
experience listed on the experience paper will receive credit only to the
extent that it is described clearly and in detail. A maximum of one year of
experience will be credited for each 12 month period. Part-time experience will
be pro-rated and credited in lieu of, but not in addition to full time
experience during the same period.
      (3)   If statements of material facts are found to be false, exaggerated
or misleading, an applicant may be disqualified.
      (4)   Where experience is a qualifying test only, experience which falls
short by up to one month shall be accepted as qualifying.
   (m)   Physical tests. To be permitted to participate in any physical test
candidates must sign the prescribed release form.
   (n)   Medical examination.
      (1)   Any impairment which will adversely affect ability to perform the
duties of the position in a reasonable manner, or which may reasonably be
expected to render the applicant unfit to continue to perform the duties of the
position shall constitute grounds for disqualification.
      (2)   A candidate medically rejected for a condition which thereafter
materially improves may apply for medical reexamination. However, no such
candidate will be re-examined following expiration of the eligible list.
   (o)   Test administration. A candidate who fails to follow instructions at
the test site will not have his/her test scored.
   (p)   Impersonating and cheating.
      (1)   A person who impersonates another or who allows himself or herself
to be impersonated or who otherwise cheats in an examination shall be barred
from taking civil service examinations for positions with the City of New York
or receiving appointments with the City of New York.
      (2)   A person barred from city employment pursuant to subdivision (p)(1)
of this section may submit a written request to the Commissioner of Citywide
Administrative Services for reconsideration of this action, setting forth
reasons to substantiate the request.
   (q)   Protests. Candidates may file protests against proposed key answers in
accordance with § 50-a of the Civil Service Law. Protest procedures and time
limits will be described at the time of the test.
   (r)   Appeals.
      (1)   Except as may otherwise be provided by the Commissioner of Citywide
Administrative Services and upon payment of applicable fees:
         (i)   Candidates who wish to appeal a computational error in rating
shall file an appeal within 30 days from the date of the notice of results of
the examination.
         (ii)   Candidates who wish to appeal the rating of oral, practical, or
essay tests may request a breakdown of their scores and an appointment for
review by submitting a written request to the Committee on Manifest Errors
within one week following the date of the notice of results of the examination
and shall file their completed appeals within 60 days from that date. An
appointment for review, i.e. for playback of audio/video recording, inspection
of work sample on practical test, or review of answer paper and the key or
illustrative answers of essay tests, where available, will be granted prior to
the end of the appeal period.
      (2)   For all oral, practical, or essay tests, such playback, inspection
or review shall be limited in duration to a period equivalent to the duration
of the test in question. A representative of the Department of Citywide
Administrative Services must be present at all times.
   (s)   Investigation.
      (1)   All applicants must be of satisfactory character and reputation and
must meet all requirements set forth in the Notice of Examination for the
position for which they are applying. Applicants may be summoned for the
written test prior to investigation of their qualifications and background.
Admission to the test does not mean that the applicant has met the
qualifications for the position.
      (2)   A fee of $50 is required of each candidate to cover the cost of
fingerprint processing. Payment shall be submitted to the appointing agency at
the time of fingerprinting and shall be in the form of a Travelers Express,
American Express or postal money order payable to the "New York State Division
of Criminal Justice Services." Cash will not be accepted.
   (t)   Probationary terms.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided, all appointments and promotions shall
be for a probationary term of one year.
      (2)   Upon showing to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that the
services of a probationer have been unsatisfactory, an appointing officer may
terminate the employment of such probationer at any time during the
probationary term.
   (u)   Fees for special services.Fees for special services furnished upon
request shall be as follows:
      (1)   duplicate result cards – $l per card
      (2)   breakdown of rating on examination – $5 per copy
      (3)   photocopies – $l per page
      (4)   play-back of audio recordings – $5 per play-back
      (5)   play-back of video recordings – $10 per play-back
      (6)   other – as may be provided
   (v)   Correspondence and address: All correspondence relating to examination
issues shall be sent to the Department of Citywide Administrative Services,
Division of Citywide Personnel Services, One Centre Street, 14th Floor, New
York, N.Y. 10007, unless otherwise specified.
   (w)   Seniority and veterans' credit. Where seniority or Veterans'
Preference credit is claimed, the candidate must achieve a passing score in
order to be eligible for such credit.
(Amended City Record 9/28/2020, eff. 10/28/2020; amended City Record 4/1/2024,
eff. 5/1/2024)
§ 11-02 License Examinations. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 12/22/2020, eff. 1/21/2021)
§ 11-03 Adjudications of the Department of Citywide Administrative Services.
   (a)   Pursuant to Sections 1041 and 1046 - 1048 of the Charter, and by
designation by the Mayor, the Department of Citywide Administrative Services
has determined that adjudications held pursuant to Section 210.2(g) of the
Civil Service Law Article 14 ("The Taylor Law") to determine whether an
employee has violated the Taylor Law shall be conducted by the Department or a
designee of the Commissioner of Citywide Administrative Services. Such designee
shall be a Hearing Officer who is authorized in writing by the Commissioner of
Citywide Administrative Services to conduct hearings pursuant to the Taylor
Law. Administrative Law Judges from the Office of Administrative Trials and
Hearings ("OATH") may be designated as Hearing Officers authorized by the
Commissioner of Citywide Administrative Services to conduct hearings pursuant
to the Taylor Law.
   (b)   Disciplinary hearings and disability hearings conducted pursuant to
Civil Service Law §§ 72 and 75 shall be conducted by OATH. In all adjudications
conducted by OATH, pursuant to Civil Service Law §§ 71, 72, 73 and 75, the
Administrative Law Judge shall make written proposed findings of fact,
conclusions of law, a recommended decision and, where appropriate, a proposed
penalty. The Commissioner of Citywide Administrative Services may adopt,
reject, or modify any such recommendations.
§ 11-04 Taylor Law Hearings.
   (a)   All hearings conducted pursuant to § 210.2(g) of the New York Civil
Service Law shall be subject to the following rules.
   (b)   Notice. All persons who are entitled to a Taylor Law Hearing shall
receive a notice that shall contain the following provisions:
      (1)   a statement of the legal and jurisdictional authority for a
hearing;
      (2)   a statement of the pertinent legal and regulatory sections at
issue;
      (3)   a statement of the employee's right to object to a determination of
a Taylor Law violation;
      (4)   a statement of the nature of the proceeding and the particular
matter to be adjudicated;
      (5)   a statement of the date(s) a Taylor Law violation was committed;
      (6)   a statement of potential penalties that may be assessed;
      (7)   a statement that the employee is entitled to representation by
counsel or a union representative.
   (c)   The notice shall be served personally or by certified mail addressed
to the last address the employee has filed with his or her agency's personnel
office.
   (d)   Where a hearing is required pursuant to § 210.2(g) of the New York
Civil Service Law, the employee shall receive further notice of the time and
place of the hearing.
   (e)   Hearing. Where an employee requests that a hearing pursuant to § 210.2
(g) of the New York Civil Service Law, be held, such a hearing shall be held
within a reasonable time. The hearing shall be conducted by a Hearing Officer
assigned exclusively to perform adjudicative and related duties for the
Department of Citywide Administrative Services, or by a designee of the
Department who is authorized in writing by the Commissioner of Citywide
Administrative Services to conduct hearings pursuant to the Taylor Law.
Administrative Law Judges from OATH may be designated as Hearing Officers
authorized by the Commissioner of Citywide Administrative Services to conduct
hearings pursuant to the Taylor Law.
      (1)   At the hearing, the employee shall be entitled to: be represented
by counsel or union representative; call witnesses and cross-examine opposing
witnesses; present oral and written arguments on the law and facts; issue
subpoenas or request that a subpoena be issued, requiring attendance and the
giving of testimony and/or the production of books, papers, documents, and
other evidence. The issuance of subpoenas shall be governed by the New York
Civil Practice Law and Rules.
      (2)   Adherence to the formal rules of evidence is not required.
Objections may be made to evidence, including testimony, and shall be noted in
the record.
      (3)   There shall be no ex parte communications between a party and the
hearing officer.
      (4)   The hearing shall be transcribed or recorded. Upon request, a copy
of the transcript or record, or any part thereof. shall be made available and a
copy shall be provided at reasonable cost.
   (f)   Burden of proof. The employee shall bear the burden of proof at the
hearing in accordance with Civil Service Law § 210.2(g).
   (g)   Findings of fact. In all hearings conducted by the Department or a
designee of the Commissioner of Citywide Administrative Services, the Hearing
Officer shall make findings of fact and determine whether the employee has
established that he or she did not violate Section 210 of the New York Civil
Service Law. These findings and the determination shall be in writing and
delivered to the Commissioner of Citywide Administrative Services within a
reasonable time following the conclusion of the hearing. The Commissioner of
Citywide Administrative Services shall then notify the employee of the Hearing
Officer's findings and determination.
   (h)   Appeals. The determination of the hearing officer may be appealed by
any party by bringing a proceeding pursuant to Article 78 of the New York Civil
Practice Law and Rules.
Chapter 12: Municipal Employees' Charitable Contributions
§ 12-01 Definitions.
   Annual solicitation campaign. "Annual solicitation campaign" shall mean the
period of organized solicitation of municipal employees conducted annually by
the Combined Municipal Campaign to obtain contributions with respect to the
ensuing year of contributions.
   Charitable non-profit organization. "Charitable non-profit organization"
shall mean a private non-profit organization performing charitable services for
human health and welfare or recreation, eligible for approval as a coordinating
agency, or for membership in the combined Municipal Campaign in accordance with
the provisions of these rules.
   Combined municipal campaign. "Combined municipal campaign" shall mean the
joint campaign of the coordinating agency with one or more other charitable
non-profit organizations, based on their written agreement, approved by the
Commissioner of Citywide Administrative Services pursuant to 55 RCNY §
12-06, for the joint conduct and sharing in the result of annual solicitation
campaign.
   Commissioner. "Commissioner" shall mean the Commissioner of Citywide
Administrative Services.
   Coordinating agency. "Coordinating agency" shall mean a federated community
campaign, as defined in section 93-b of the General Municipal Law, which is
approved by the Commissioner of Citywide Administrative Services pursuant to 55
RCNY §
12-05 to serve as the agent for the Combined Municipal Campaign.
   Year of contributions. Year of contributions. "Year of contributions" shall
mean the calendar year or other period designated by the Commissioner of
Citywide Administrative Services for collection of the payroll deductions
authorized by municipal employees pursuant to § 93-b of the General Municipal
Law on behalf of the Combined Municipal Campaign.
§ 12-02 Coordinating Agency; Constituent Organizations.
The coordinating agency shall consist of the charitable non-profit
organizations named as constituent members thereof upon the Commissioner of
Citywide Administrative Services' approval of the coordinating agency, subject
to changes by discontinuance of such participation or the addition of eligible
charitable non-profit organizations. The coordinating agency shall give prompt
written notice of any such changes to the Commissioner of Citywide
Administrative Services.
§ 12-03 Charitable Non-Profit Organizations.
To be eligible as a constituent organization of the coordinating agency or as a
participating organization in the Combined Municipal Campaign, a charitable
non-profit organization must meet and maintain the following requirements:
   (a)   It shall be
      (1)   a private, non-profit corporation, association, or organization,
      (2)   incorporated or authorized to do business in New York, or a member
of a federation of charitable organizations which is authorized to do business
in New York, and
      (3)   organized to render voluntary charitable services for human health
and welfare or recreation.
   (b)   It shall be and remain registered with the Secretary of State; in
compliance with the requirements and provisions of article 7-A of the Executive
Law of New York; and a tax exempt organization under the terms of Section 501
(c)(3) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code.
   (c)   It shall operate without discrimination in regard to all persons
served by the campaign and comply with all requirements of law and regulations
respecting nondiscrimination and equal employment opportunity with respect to
its officers, staff, employees and volunteers.
   (d)   As its principal purpose, function and activity, it shall carry out a
bona fide program of charitable services in support and advancement of the
health, welfare or recreation of a substantial number of persons in need of
such services.
§ 12-04 Coordinating Agency; Qualification Requirements.
To be eligible for approval as the coordinating agency, a charitable non-profit
organization shall meet all of the conditions specified in 55 RCNY §
12-03, and in addition, shall
   (a)   constitute a federation of a substantial number of charitable non-
profit organizations;
   (b)   conduct a bona fide program for the provision of services for human
health and welfare or recreation services for the aid, support and advancement
of a substantial number of residents in the City; and
   (c)   agree to combine with other eligible charitable non-profit
organizations and/or federations of such organizations to form a Combined
Municipal Campaign, and serve as agent of the Combined Municipal Campaign as
set forth in 55 RCNY §
12-06.
§ 12-05 Approval of Coordinating Agency.
   (a)   To solicit contributions among municipal employees, a charitable non-
profit organization eligible pursuant to the conditions specified in 55 RCNY §
12-04 may make written application to the Commissioner of Citywide
Administrative Services for approval as the coordinating agency for the City.
   (b)   In December of every year there shall be made available at the offices
of the Commissioner of Citywide Administrative Services a proposed calendar of
events for the preceding years' Combined Municipal Campaign, if any. This
schedule shall include a timetable for application.
   (c)   The application shall contain a detailed statement and furnish
documentation evidencing the organization's compliance with all conditions of
eligibility as a coordinating agency and shall provide the following:
      (1)   corporate or registered business name and address of the
organization; name, titles and addresses of its directors or principals and
executive officers; registration number obtained upon registration pursuant to
Article 7-A of the Executive Law;
      (2)   concise description of the organization's structure, origin, and
history of its activities in the City; financial statements for its two
immediately preceding years of operation, showing contributions and other
revenues received, administrative and overhead expenses, costs of operations
and other significant financial data; a specification of the extent its
operations have been carried out by volunteers' services;
      (3)   statement of its plan and program for performing charitable
services within the City over the next three-year period, with particular
description of projected benefits to employees' communities of residence;
      (4)   copies of charter or certificate of incorporation, bylaws, latest
external audit by a certified public accountant and letter from the Internal
Revenue Service certifying tax exempt status pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of
the Internal Revenue Code;
      (5)   a listing, by corporate or registered business name, address, and
name of the authorized principal representative, of each constituent charitable
non-profit organization included in the coordinating agency; the applicant
shall certify that it has examined and established compliance by all of its
constituent organizations with the conditions and requirements of eligibility
specified in 55 RCNY §
12-03.
   (d)   The applicant shall furnish additional information and documentation
as requested by the Commissioner of Citywide Administrative Services.
   (e)   The Commissioner's determination as to the approval or refusal of an
application hereunder shall be conclusive and binding, and written notice
thereof shall be given to the applicant.
   (f)   If it should become necessary to change the coordinating agency while
the annual solicitation campaign or the year of contributions is in progress,
the Commissioner shall substitute another charitable non-profit organization
eligible to be coordinating agency pursuant to 55 RCNY §
12-04.
§ 12-06 Combined Municipal Campaign; Structure and Operations.
   (a)   For the purposes of conducting a joint annual solicitation campaign
and sharing in the contributions of municipal employees obtained therefrom, the
coordinating agency shall contract with all other organizations approved
pursuant to 55 RCNY §§
12-07 and
12-08 to form a Combined Municipal Campaign.
   (b)   Such contract shall be subject to approval by the Commissioner of
Citywide Administrative Services and shall:
      (1)   identify each charitable non-profit organization participating with
the coordinating agency by corporate or business name and address, and name its
authorized representative;
      (2)   provide an annual budget of the campaign and specify the allocation
among the coordinating agency and participating organizations of administrative
expenses including publicity, central receipt, accounting and distribution of
contributions, and loss of anticipated income to the campaign due to withdrawal
of consent to contribution, termination of employment, or other discontinuation
of payroll deduction;
      (3)   state the method of calculation of the share of total contributions
to be received respectively by the coordinating agency and each participating
organization, and the manner of payment to them;
      (4)   inform participants that the administrative expenses of the
campaign shall be divided equally among each participating agency; for this
purpose each participating constituent member of a federation of charitable
non-profit organizations shall be counted as a separate participating agency.
      (5)   Contain such other terms and conditions as may be required by the
Commissioner.
   (c)   The coordinating agency shall be the recipient in the first instance
of all contributions made by employees to the campaign, including both
contributions collected through payroll deductions and those made by check. The
coordinating agency shall act in a fiduciary capacity with respect to its
receipt and distribution of the contributions in accordance with the terms of
the Combined Municipal Campaign contract.
   (d)   The annual solicitation campaign shall be conducted at such times and
pursuant to such procedures as shall be approved by the Commissioner.
   (e)   The coordinating agency shall submit a report to the Commissioner at
the end of each calendar year and at such other times as the Commissioner may
request, stating the total amount of contributions collected through the
Combined Municipal Campaign, the amount received by each participating agency,
and such other information as the Director may request.
§ 12-07 Application for Participation in the Combined Municipal Campaign.
   (a)   A charitable non-profit organization seeking participation in the
Combined Municipal Campaign shall make written application therefor to the
Commissioner, who shall forward such application to the coordinating agency.
   (b)   Such application shall be made on the form prescribed by the
Commissioner and shall be accompanied by all required documentation.
   (c)   The coordinating agency shall review the applications and approve the
applications of all organizations qualified pursuant to 55 RCNY §
12-03.
   (d)   The coordinating agency shall notify each applicant in writing whether
or not it has been accepted as a participating organization in the Combined
Municipal Campaign. If an applicant has not been accepted for participation,
such notice shall state the reasons therefor, and shall state that the decision
may be appealed to the Commissioner within fourteen days.
§ 12-08 Review of Non-Acceptance for Participation.
   (a)   An organization which has been notified of non-acceptance for
participation in the Combined Municipal Campaign may, within fourteen days of
the date notice was sent to the applicant by the coordinating agency, appeal in
writing to the Commissioner for review of the determination of the coordinating
agency. Copies of all material previously submitted to the coordinating agency
shall be furnished to the Commissioner by the organization seeking review.
   (b)   The Commissioner, consistent with these rules, shall determine whether
sufficient grounds existed for non-acceptance of the applicant or whether the
coordinating agency's decision shall be reversed, in which case the
Commissioner shall direct the coordinating agency to accept the applicant for
participation in the Combined Municipal Campaign.
   (c)   The Commissioner's written determination shall be transmitted to the
applicant and the coordinating agency, and shall be final and conclusive. Upon
a determination directing the acceptance of the applicant, the coordinating
agency shall forthwith arrange for the participation of the applicant in the
Combined Municipal Campaign.
§ 12-09 Conduct of Solicitation Among City Employees.
   (a)   Contributions by employees to any charitable non-profit organization
shall be purely voluntary.
   (b)   No form of pressure or coercion shall be used at any time by any
employee or charitable non-profit organization to persuade employees to
contribute to any charitable non-profit organization.
   (c)   An employee who wishes to make a charitable contribution through the
Combined Municipal Campaign shall do so by completing and signing the form
furnished by the Director. The employee shall indicate on the form whether the
contribution is to be given to a particular organization participating in the
Combined Municipal Campaign, or to the Combined Municipal Campaign itself for
distribution to all participating organizations in the manner set forth in this
section. Contributions may be made by submitting a single check made out to the
order of the Combined Municipal Campaign, or by consenting to payroll deduction
of a specified amount per pay period. If the employee chooses to contribute to
the Combined Municipal Campaign through payroll deduction, the year of
contribution shall be deemed to be the period between the time the consent to
the deduction is given and the time such consent is withdrawn or the employee
leaves his/her agency of employment, whichever shall occur first. The deduction
shall continue until the employee either withdraws his/her consent to the
payroll deduction or the employee leaves his/her agency of employment,
whichever shall occur first.
   (d)   Employees shall be allowed to withdraw their consent to payroll
deduction for contribution to charitable non-profit organizations at any time,
upon written notice to the Commissioner.
   (e)   Contributions received by the Combined Municipal Campaign which are
not designated for receipt by a particular participating organization shall be
distributed among all participating organizations in the following manner: the
total amount of such undesignated funds, less administrative expenses agreed
upon as provided in 55 RCNY §
12-06, shall be divided by the total number of participating agencies, and an
amount equal to the dividend shall be received by each agency. For the purposes
of this calculation, each constituent member of a federation of charitable non-
profit organizations shall be counted as a separate participating agency, but
the federation to which such member belongs shall receive that member's share
of the undesignated funds, to be distributed in accordance with the
federation's agreement with its members.
   (f)   When an employee's paycheck is refunded by the employee's agency to
the Department of Finance, any charitable contribution deducted for the period
covered by such paycheck shall be returned to the City by the coordinating
agency, or recovered by the City from the Combined Municipal Campaign by
deduction from subsequent payments.
Chapter 13: [Filming and Photography Authorized by the Department]
§ 13-01 Scope.
These rules shall be applicable to all film and photography shoots and related
activities conducted on properties and within facilities under the jurisdiction
of, and with permission from, the Department of Citywide Administrative
Services that shall be authorized by a permit issued by the Mayor's Office of
Film, Theatre and Broadcasting. Nothing contained herein shall preclude the
requirement to comply with any other applicable law, rule or case law governing
such activities.
§ 13-02 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   (a)   Commissioner. "Commissioner" shall mean the Commissioner of the
Department of Citywide Administrative Services ("DCAS").
   (b)   Court properties or facilities. "Court properties or facilities" shall
mean the interiors and exteriors of buildings under the jurisdiction of the New
York State Unified Court System that are managed by DCAS, and shall include the
property adjacent to such buildings that is under the jurisdiction of DCAS.
   (c)   DCAS Film Office. "DCAS Film Office" shall mean the unit of DCAS that
oversees the filming, photography and related activities that are conducted on
properties and within facilities under the jurisdiction of DCAS.
   (d)   Equipment. "Equipment" shall include, but not be limited to,
television, photographic, film or video cameras or transmitting television
equipment, including radio remotes, props, sets, lights, electric and grip
equipment, dolly tracks, screens, or microphone devices, and any and all
production related materials. "Equipment" shall not include (1) "hand-held
devices," as defined in 43 RCNY §
9-02 of the Mayor's Office of Film, Theatre and Broadcasting Film Permit Rules,
and (2) vehicles, as defined in section one hundred fifty-nine of the New York
Vehicle and Traffic Law, that are used solely to transport a person or persons
while engaged in the activity of filming or photography from within such
vehicle, operated in compliance with relevant traffic laws and rules.
   (e)   Filming. "Filming" shall mean the taking of motion pictures, the
taking of still photography or the use and operation of television cameras or
transmitting television equipment, including radio remotes and any preparatory
activity associated therewith, and shall include events that include, but are
not limited to, the making of feature or documentary films, television serials,
webcasts, simulcasts or specials.
   (f)   Holding. "Holding" shall mean the temporary accommodation of cast or
crew members and other individuals associated with a production in a space in
which filming is not taking place. "Holding" may include the space in which an
independent company provides meals or catering services to cast or crew members
and other individuals associated with a production.
   (g)   MOFTB Film Permit Rules. "MOFTB Film Permit Rules" shall mean the
rules promulgated by the Mayor's Office of Film, Theatre and Broadcasting
("MOFTB"), codified as
Chapter 9 of Title 43 of the Rules of the City of New York, as amended from
time to time.
   (h)   Permittee. "Permittee" shall mean the holder of a Required Permit
issued by the Mayor's Office of Film, Theatre and Broadcasting in accordance
with 43 RCNY §
9-01 of the MOFTB Film Permit Rules.
   (i)   Photography. "Photography" shall mean the taking of moving or still
images.
   (j)   Required Permit. "Required Permit" shall mean the permit for filming
or photography issued by MOFTB in accordance with 43 RCNY §
9-01 of the MOFTB Film Permit Rules.
   (k)   Rigging/de-rigging. "Rigging/de-rigging" shall mean the loading in or
loading out, loading or unloading, of any shooting or production related
equipment, including, but not limited to, props, sets, electric and grip
equipment, at any location, time and date where film or production is not
occurring. Such term shall have the same meaning as the commonly used term
"prepping/wrapping."
   (l)   Scouting. "Scouting" shall mean the act of viewing, assessing and
photographing locations for filming or photography during pre-production or
production for, including, but not limited to, still photography, feature
films, television series, mini-series or specials.
   (m)   Shooting. "Shooting" shall mean filming on properties, in the
interiors or on exteriors of buildings or facilities under the jurisdiction of
DCAS.
§ 13-03 Pre-Production Scouting.
   (a)   Prior to conducting any scouting related activities on properties or
within facilities under the jurisdiction of DCAS, a scouting permit shall be
obtained from MOFTB.
   (b)   After a scouting permit is obtained from MOFTB, an appointment shall
be scheduled with the DCAS Film Office to make arrangements for such scouting
activities.
   (c)   If after conducting scouting related activities it is determined that
a filming or photography project or production will be pursued, the scouting
permit holder shall submit the documentation and resolve production issues
described in 55 RCNY §
13-04.
§ 13-04 Required Documentation and Approvals from DCAS.
   (a)   The following forms and documents, which are required for DCAS review
and approval prior to obtaining a Required Permit from MOFTB, shall be
submitted to the DCAS Film Office no later than four (4) business days prior to
the date on which the prepping or rigging for film and/or photography shoots is
sought to commence:
      (1)   Completed "Properties and Facilities Under DCAS Jurisdiction
Activity Approval Form" signed by the applicant;
      (2)   DCAS "Letter of Intent" signed by the applicant;
      (3)   "Prohibited Conduct" Memorandum signed by the applicant;
      (4)   Accurate and updated information concerning an applicant's
forwarding postal address and, if available, an e-mail address, telephone
number and facsimile number for purposes of receiving reimbursement
notification from DCAS; and
      (5)   Any other documents, including, but not limited to, equipment
specifications and architectural renderings, that may be required by the DCAS
Film Office. The Commissioner or his or her designee may approve an exception
to the four (4) business day minimum time frame referenced in subdivision (a)
of this section if the nature and scope of the activity to be undertaken
support a request that a shorter time within which to submit requisite forms
and documents be granted.
   (b)   In addition to reviewing the documentation required by subdivision (a)
of this section, DCAS shall review and issue determinations concerning the
following types of issues prior to completing the approvals necessary for
MOFTB's Required Permit:
      (1)   Structural conditions, landmark status issues, equipment specifics,
weight, load and other similar considerations.
      (2)   The use of smoke, pyrotechnics, firearms, weapons, animals and
other special effects or unusual scenes, which shall also be subject to all
applicable laws, rules and other governmental policies regarding such
activities.
   (c)   Where appropriate, an applicant may be required to attend a security
meeting with DCAS staff, depending on the nature and location of the activity
to be undertaken.
   (d)   Determinations about all DCAS staffing matters, including decisions
regarding the scope, type, number or level of staff required, shall be made by
DCAS.
   (e)   The DCAS Film Office shall review the documentation provided in
accordance with subdivision (a) of this section, and shall attempt to
accommodate particular technical needs and any other special circumstances,
including approvals from City agency tenants and DCAS engineers or other
personnel, that may be presented by the applicant.
   (f)   Where the DCAS Film Office has approved an application, it shall
notify MOFTB about such approval. DCAS shall also notify the applicant that
they can proceed by submitting the documentation to MOFTB necessary for
obtaining a Required Permit.
§ 13-05 Application for Required Permit from MOFTB.
   (a)   A Required Permit shall be applied for and issued in accordance with
the provisions of 43 RCNY §
9-02 of the MOFTB Film Permit Rules after the requisite DCAS documentation has
been completed by the applicant and reviewed by DCAS; production issues have
been resolved with DCAS; and DCAS approval has been received.
   (b)   A non-refundable fee of $3,200.00 shall accompany any application
submitted to MOFTB for a Required Permit. Such fee shall be in the form of a
certified bank check or money order, payable to the New York City Department of
Finance.
   (c)   The fee required by this section shall be imposed for each instance in
which prepping or rigging commences, is followed by shooting and/or photography
for such production, and then is concluded by wrapping, de-rigging and/or
related activities.
§ 13-06 Indemnification and Insurance Requirements.
   (a)   Prior to the commencement of prepping or rigging for film and/or
photography shoots on properties or within facilities under the jurisdiction of
DCAS, a permittee shall provide to the DCAS Film Office a copy of insurance
documentation and a copy of the Required Permit in order to obtain final DCAS
authorization for such production.
   (b)   By obtaining a Required Permit from MOFTB, a permittee who is
authorized to conduct film shoot and/or photography shoot activities on
properties or within facilities under the jurisdiction of DCAS agrees to
protect all persons and property from damage, loss or injury arising from any
of the operations performed by or on behalf of such permittee, and to indemnify
and hold harmless the City of New York, to the fullest extent permitted by law,
from all claims, losses and expenses, including attorneys' fees, that may
result therefrom.
   (c)   A permittee who has been authorized by DCAS to conduct film shoot and/
or photography shoot activities on properties or within facilities under the
jurisdiction of DCAS, and has obtained a Required Permit from MOFTB, shall
maintain, during the entire course of its operations, a liability insurance
policy with a limit of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000) per
occurrence. Such policy shall name the City of New York as an additional
insured with coverage at least as broad as provided by Insurance Services
Office (ISO) form CG 20 12 (07/98 ed.). The permittee shall provide to MOFTB
the original certificate of insurance signed in ink to which a copy of the
required endorsement is attached. For currently enrolled film students, proof
of insurance obtained through their school and proof of the student's current
attendance shall satisfy this requirement.
   (d)   If it is determined, in light of the activity for which a Required
Permit has been sought, that such activity may increase the potential for
injury to individuals and/or damage to property, and that the minimum limit of
insurance should be higher than one million dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence
referenced in subdivision (c) of this section, it shall be determined what
higher minimum limit is to be required and the permittee shall be advised of
such higher limit. Factors to be considered shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the number of people involved, the location of the activity and the
nature of the activity. The permittee shall thereafter provide proof of such
insurance in accordance with this section. Such determination may be appealed
by written request to the Commissioner, who may reverse, affirm or modify the
determination and provide a written explanation of his or her decision.
§ 13-07 Production Requirements.
   (a)   Holding on properties and within facilities under the jurisdiction of
DCAS is available only for those productions taking place on or within such
properties or facilities, upon the approval of the Commissioner or his or her
designee.
   (b)   DCAS shall provide security personnel to protect City property under
its jurisdiction during production activities at non-court properties and
facilities, the cost of which shall be reimbursed by the permittee.
   (c)   All individuals affiliated with the permittee and the production shall
be required to present a valid, government-issued photo identification card to
receive security clearance to have access to properties and facilities under
the jurisdiction of DCAS where the production and related activities are taking
place.
   (d)   All individuals affiliated with the permittee and the production shall
wear a laminated identification card on non-court properties and within non-
court facilities under the jurisdiction of DCAS. The identification cards shall
be similar in form and include the name of the production. Failure to display
such identification cards at all times may lead to ejection from such
properties and facilities.
   (e)   All production equipment and props brought to properties and
facilities under the jurisdiction of DCAS shall be subject to inspection at any
time prior to or during the production.
   (f)   DCAS shall not be responsible for any injury to persons and/or damage
or loss to any property on properties and within facilities under the
jurisdiction of DCAS arising from any of the operations performed by or on
behalf of the permittee.
   (g)   In addition to the fee referenced in 55 RCNY §
13-05 and any other costs identified in 55 RCNY §
13-08, a permittee requesting use of properties and facilities under the
jurisdiction of DCAS for twenty-eight (28) days or longer shall be required to
enter into an agreement providing for the payment of renting or leasing such
space in an amount not to exceed $5,000.00 per month, in accordance with
Administrative Code § 4-203(b).
§ 13-08 Post-Production Requirements.
   (a)   A permittee is responsible for cleaning and restoring the properties
and facilities under the jurisdiction of DCAS after the rigging, shooting and/
or holding. The cost of any DCAS employee time incurred due to a permittee
failing to clean and/or restore such properties and facilities following the
rigging, shooting and/or holding shall be borne by the permittee and reimbursed
to DCAS.
   (b)   Any fixtures, furniture, books, doors, windows, walls, and other
structures and/or objects shall be returned to their original position and/or
restored to their original condition by the permittee during the de-rigging,
unless the permittee has obtained prior approval from the Commissioner or his
or her designee. The permittee shall immediately remove any props used during
the production from properties and facilities under the jurisdiction of DCAS.
The permittee shall reimburse DCAS for any property and facility damage arising
from such production activities.
   (c)   At the conclusion of all film and photography shoots, the permittee
shall reimburse DCAS for all production related costs including, but not
limited to, DCAS personnel costs contemplated by 55 RCNY §
13-04(d) and subdivision (a) of this section, and reimbursement for any
property or facility damage in accordance with subdivision (b) of this section.
If the permittee cancels any of its production related activities twenty-four
(24) hours or less prior to the scheduled commencement of such activities on
properties or within facilities under the jurisdiction of DCAS, the permittee
may be subject to the reimbursement of costs for DCAS personnel assigned to
staff such production.
Chapter 14: Security Guards at Nonpublic Schools
§ 14-01 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings.
Capitalized terms used in this chapter that are not specifically defined in
this section have the same meanings set forth in Administrative Code § 10-172
(a).
   Commissioner. The term "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of the
Department.
   Department. The term "Department" means the Department of Citywide
Administrative Services.
   Invoice Submission Portal. The term “Invoice Submission Portal” means the
system that facilitates, on behalf of the Department, the invoice submission
and reimbursement process for participating Qualified Nonpublic Schools.
   PASSPort. The term “PASSPort” means the system that facilitates, on behalf
of the Department, the application process for nonpublic schools that seek to
participate in the Reimbursement Program.
   Qualifying Nonpublic School. The term “Qualifying Nonpublic School” means
any nonprofit elementary or secondary school in the city that (a) is other than
(1) a school of the city school district of the city of New York, or (2) a
school that shares space with a school of the city school district of the city
of New York, (b) is providing instruction in accordance with the education law,
(c) has been assigned a Basic Educational Data System (BEDS) code by the New
York state department of education, or a similar successor identifier, and (d)
is serving students in any combination of grades pre-kindergarten through
twelve. Such definition shall not include any elementary or secondary school
that is (1) eligible for rental assistance from the City of New York and (2)
utilizes such City assistance pursuant to subparagraph (5) of paragraph (e) of
subdivision 3 of section 2853 of the education law for the purpose of
contracting for the provision of security services during the same school year
for which the school receives reimbursements from the Reimbursement Program.
   Reasonable Costs. The term "Reasonable Costs" means administrative expenses
of a Security Guard Company, including overhead, profit, equipment, supplies
and uniform expenses, which are deemed reasonable by the Department. Such
reasonable expenses may not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the wages
earned by the Security Guard Company's Security Guards at any given school in
any given quarter pursuant to the Reimbursement Program.
   Reimbursement Period. The term “Reimbursement Period” means a twenty-four
(24) month period that commences on July 1 of each fiscal year, during which a
Qualifying Nonpublic School must submit its invoices for the respective fiscal
year. Invoices submitted after the Reimbursement Period has passed shall not be
reimbursed. For example, a Qualifying Nonpublic School must submit its invoices
for Fiscal Year 2026 between July 1, 2025 and June 30, 2027, and any invoices
submitted after June 30, 2027 shall not be reimbursed.
   Reimbursement Program. The term "Reimbursement Program" means the nonpublic
school security guard reimbursement program authorized by the Mayor pursuant to
Administrative Code § 10-172(b).
   School Security Administrator. The term “School Security Administrator”
means a person, appointed by the Dean, Principal, Administrator or governing
body of a Qualifying Nonpublic School that participates in the Reimbursement
Program, who provides on-campus supervision to the Security services (as such
term is defined in § 10-172 of the Administrative Code) provided pursuant to
the Reimbursement Program.
(Added City Record 7/19/2016, eff. 7/19/2016; amended City Record 7/28/2025,
eff. 7/28/2025)
§ 14-02 Security Guard Companies; Application for Inclusion on the Qualified
Provider List.
   (a)   Application. Pursuant to Administrative Code § 10-172(d), the
Department will seek to develop a Qualified Provider List of Security Guard
Companies. A Security Guard Company that seeks inclusion on the Qualified
Provider List must apply by completing an application on a form prescribed by
the Department and must satisfy all provisions of this section. A Security
Guard Company must answer all questions set forth in the application.
      (i)   The application for inclusion on the Qualified Provider List shall
be made continuously available on the Department's website. A Security Guard
Company may apply for inclusion on the Qualified Provider List at any time.
      (ii)   In addition, the Department will publish invitations to apply for
inclusion on the Qualified Provider List periodically in the City Record, but
not less than twice per year. Upon each such publication, the Department will
publish the invitation in five consecutive editions of the City Record and
shall post the invitation on the Department's website.
      (iii)   Once created, the Qualified Provider List shall be made
continuously available on the Department's website.
   (b)   Qualifications. A Security Guard Company that seeks inclusion on the
Qualified Provider List must meet the following requirements:
      (i)   be fully licensed pursuant to Article 7-A of the New York State
General Business Law and rules and regulations promulgated thereunder by the
New York Secretary of State;
      (ii)   be a responsible company as set forth in 55 RCNY §
14-02(e)(1);
      (iii)   demonstrate a minimum of two (2) years prior experience as a
Security Guard Company;
      (iv)   demonstrate that it has exercised due diligence and has conducted
a background investigation, including a criminal history check, to verify the
credentials of each Security Guard that it employs, pursuant to the
requirements set forth in Article 7-A of the General Business Law;
      (v)   ensure that each of its Security Guards holds a valid registration
card, which has not expired or been revoked or suspended, pursuant to Article
7-A of the General Business Law;
      (vi)   be incorporated, a limited liability company, a person or firm at
the time of its application for inclusion on the Qualified Provider List;
      (vii)   be enrolled in the Procurement and Sourcing Solutions Portal
("PASSPort"); and
      (viii)   the Security Guard Company must demonstrate that each of its
guards have undergone training as set forth in 55 RCNY §
14-06(a).
   (c)   The Department shall review all applications for compliance with the
requirements set forth in these Rules. The Agency Chief Contracting Officer
("ACCO") shall determine whether the application is responsive. A responsive
application is one that complies with all material terms and conditions of the
application, including providing required documentation.
   (d)   If the ACCO determines the application is not responsive, the ACCO
will notify the Security Guard Company by electronic mail within 30 days of
receipt of the application. If the Security Guard Company fails to respond with
all material terms and conditions, including supplying required documentation,
within 60 days of receipt of its application, the application may be denied as
nonresponsive. A denial for non-responsiveness does not preclude the Security
Guard Company from reapplying to the Department.
   (e)   The Qualified Provider List shall be comprised of responsible Security
Guard Companies only. A Security Guard Company must affirmatively demonstrate
its responsibility.
      (i)   A responsible Security Guard Company is one which can perform fully
the program requirements and also has the business integrity to justify the
award of public tax dollars.
         (1)   Factors affecting a Security Guard Company's responsibility may
include:
            A.   financial resources;
            B.   technical qualifications;
            C.   experience;
            D.   a satisfactory record of performance; and
            E.   a satisfactory record of business integrity.
         (2)   Failure of a firm to provide relevant information regarding the
Security Guard Company's responsibility specifically requested by the ACCO may
be grounds for a determination of non-responsibility.
         (3)   A Security Guard Company that has performed unsatisfactorily in
the provision of services to the City shall be presumed to be non-responsible,
unless the ACCO determines that the circumstances were beyond the company's
control or that the company has taken appropriate corrective action. Past
failure to apply sufficient tenacity and perseverance to perform acceptably is
strong evidence of non-responsibility.
      (ii)   Making the Responsibility Determination. 
         (1)   The ACCO shall use the following sources of information to
support determinations of responsibility or non-responsibility:
            A.   the VENDEX database of debarred, suspended, and ineligible
contractors;
            B.   VENDEX and other records of evaluations of performance, as
well as verifiable knowledge of contracting and audit personnel;
            C.   determinations of violations of employment-related federal,
state, or local law or executive order, including but not limited to those
relating to equal employment opportunity, prevailing wage, workplace health and
safety, employee benefits, and employee wages and hours;
            D.   information supplied by the Security Guard Company, including
application information, financial data, and personnel information; and
            E.   other sources, such as publications, suppliers, subcontractors
and customers of the prospective contractor, financial institutions, other
government agencies, and business and trade associations.
         (2)   The ACCO may notify a Security Guard Company of unfavorable
responsibility information and provide the Security Guard Company an
opportunity to submit additional information or explain its actions before
denying the Security Guard Company inclusion on the Qualified Provider List.
      (iii)   Determination of Non-Responsibility Required. 
         (1)   If a Security Guard Company who otherwise would have been placed
on the Qualified Provider List is found non-responsible, a determination of
non-responsibility setting forth in detail and with specificity the reasons for
the finding of non-responsibility shall be prepared by the ACCO.
         (2)   A copy of the determination of non-responsibility shall be
immediately sent to the Security Guard Company. Notice to the non-responsible
Security Guard Company must be mailed no later than two business days after the
determination of non-responsibility is made and must inform the Security Guard
Company of the right to appeal the determination pursuant to subdivision h of
this section. A copy of the determination of non-responsibility shall also be
sent to the City Chief Procurement Officer.
         (3)   The determination of non-responsibility shall be included in the
VENDEX database.
   (f)   Upon the determination by the ACCO that an application meets the
requirements set forth herein, the Department shall notify the applicant of its
inclusion on the Qualified Provider List by regular and electronic mail within
90 days of receipt of its application. The Qualified Provider List will be
reviewed periodically to ensure that providers continue to meet the necessary
qualifications.
   (g)   At least once every two years, each Security Guard Company on the
Qualified Provider List must affirm that there has been no change in the
information included in its original application. In the event that there has
been a change in the information submitted on its application before two years
has elapsed, the Security Guard Company must immediately submit such changed
information to the Department. Failure to supply such affirmation of no change
will result in the Security Guard Company's removal from the Qualified Provider
List until the affirmation of no change or the updated information has been
supplied to the Department. Any Security Guard Company that is removed from the
Qualified Provider List and re-applies must also provide an affirmation of no
change or updated information.
   (h)   A Security Guard Company must retain all certified payroll records,
which verify that its Security Guards were paid at least the prevailing wages
and supplements for unarmed security guards as determined by the Comptroller of
the City of New York pursuant to New York State Labor Law § 234.
   (i)   Determination of Non-responsibility or Denial or Revocation of
Qualification. 
      (1)   If the Department determines that a Security Guard Company is non-
responsible or otherwise not qualified as a provider or the Department revokes
such qualification, the Security Guard Company may appeal in writing to the
Commissioner or the Commissioner's designee within 10 days of receipt of the
Department's determination, denial, or revocation. Receipt of notice by the
Security Guard Company shall be deemed to be no later than five days from the
date of mailing or upon delivery, if delivered. Filing of the appeal shall be
accomplished by actual delivery of the appeal document to the office of the
Commissioner.
      (2)   The written appeal by the Security Guard Company must briefly state
all the facts or other basis upon which the Security Guard Company contests the
Department's determination, denial, or revocation. Supporting documentation
must be included.
      (3)   The Commissioner or the Commissioner's designee shall consider the
Security Guard Company's appeal and shall make a prompt written decision no
later than 60 days after receipt with respect to the merits of the Security
Guard Company's appeal. The determination of the Commissioner or the
Commissioner's designee shall be a final agency determination.
(Added City Record 7/19/2016, eff. 7/19/2016; amended City Record 2/14/2020,
eff. 3/15/2020)
§ 14-03 Nonpublic Schools; Qualification for the Reimbursement Program.
   (a)   PASSPort. Any nonpublic school in the City of New York (hereinafter
“school”) that seeks to participate in the Reimbursement Program must first
create an account with PASSPort and complete the HHS Accelerator
Prequalification.
   (b)   Application. 
      (i)   After creating an account in PASSPort and completing the HHS
Accelerator Prequalification, a school may access the application to
participate in the Reimbursement Program. The application will be on a form
prescribed by the Department and will be accessed through PASSPort. For the
2025-2026 school year, and for any subsequent school year in which the
Reimbursement Program is authorized, the deadline to submit a completed
application is May 15, unless the agency determines that due to an event that
impacts public safety, which was not foreseen in advance of the May 15 deadline
and which compromises the safety of one or more non-public schools, it is
appropriate for the application to be due at a later date for one or more
nonparticipating schools. This deadline applies to both new and existing
schools that wish to participate in the Reimbursement Program. The Department
shall use such application to determine whether a school is qualified to
participate in the Reimbursement Program.
      (ii)   The application will require the school to provide the number of
students enrolled at the school, which may include pre-kindergarten students
who will be four years of age on or before December 1, or who will otherwise be
eligible to attend kindergarten in the following school year. To participate in
the Reimbursement Program a school must be a Qualifying Nonpublic School
pursuant to Administrative Code § 10-172(a) and must enroll at least 150
students. The Department will verify all enrollment information with the New
York State Education Department as reported by the school on the prior year’s
Basic Educational Data Systems (“BEDS”) or Student Information Repository
System (“SIRS”) Nonpublic and Public Schools Report for the current school year
for which the qualified nonpublic school is seeking reimbursement. A separate
application is required from each school instructional site with its own
individual BEDS code. A school’s prior year’s BEDS or SIRS enrollment number is
considered final for the current school year.
      (iii)   All questions regarding the submission, uploading, or retention
of documents in connection with the application must be submitted to PASSPort.
   (c)   A complete application for the Reimbursement Program must include:
      (i)   an organizational chart, which identifies the names and roles of
the school’s administrators and the hierarchy of the School;
      (ii)   the school’s BEDS form for the prior year, or if the school does
not have the prior year’s BEDS form, the letter from NYSED assigning the school
its BEDS code;
      (iii)   a workscope document, which depicts the daily schedule of the
school, as well as school closures;
      (iv)   proof of the School’s non-profit, non-public status in the form of
either a School Charter, Board of Regent’s Certificate, or Certificate of
Incorporation;
      (v)   IRS 501(c)(3) Determination Letter which includes the school’s tax
identification number;
      (vi)   Attachment B, to be provided by the Department, wherein the school
lists all of its locations under the same BEDS code and the enrollment count
for each location; and
      (vii)   a certification from the School stating that the School does not
use funding from the City of New York pursuant to subparagraph (5) of paragraph
(e) of subdivision (3) of section 2853 of the Education Law for the provision
of security services during the same school year that the School receives
reimbursements from the NPS Program.
   (d)   Denial or Revocation of Qualification. 
      (i)   If the Department determines that a school is not qualified to
participate in the Reimbursement Program or revokes such qualification, the
school may appeal in writing to the Commissioner or the Commissioner's designee
within 10 days of receipt of the Department's denial or revocation. Receipt of
notice by the nonpublic school shall be deemed to be no later than five days
from the date of mailing or upon delivery, if delivered. Filing of the appeal
shall be accomplished by actual delivery of the appeal document to the office
of the Commissioner.
      (ii)   The written appeal by the school must briefly state all the facts
or other basis upon which the school contests the Department's denial or
revocation. Supporting documentation must be included.
      (iii)   The Commissioner or the Commissioner's designee shall consider
the school's appeal and shall make a prompt written decision no later than 60
days after receipt with respect to the merits of the appeal. The determination
of the Commissioner or the Commissioner's designee shall be a final agency
determination.
(Added City Record 7/19/2016, eff. 7/19/2016; amended City Record 4/13/2017,
eff. 5/13/2017; amended City Record 2/14/2020, eff. 3/15/2020; amended City
Record 7/28/2025, eff. 7/28/2025)
§ 14-04 Memorandum of Understanding.
   If the Department notifies a school that it qualifies to participate in the
Reimbursement Program, the Department shall also provide a Memorandum of
Understanding (“MOU”) regarding the school’s participation in the Reimbursement
Program. Each school must enter into a MOU with the City of New York, acting by
and through the Department, before the school may receive funds through the
Reimbursement Program. The MOU must be returned by the School to the Department
no later than November 15 of the corresponding year. Failure to timely return
the MOU to the Department shall result in the forfeiture of the School’s
acceptance into the Program for the school year at issue, and the school will
need to reapply the following year if it seeks to participate in the
Reimbursement Program. Any security expenses incurred by a school from the date
of acceptance, but prior to the timely return of the MOU will not be eligible
for reimbursement. Upon execution of the MOU, such MOU shall take effect in
accordance with applicable law.
(Added City Record 7/19/2016, eff. 7/19/2016; amended City Record 2/14/2020,
eff. 3/15/2020; amended City Record 7/28/2025, eff. 7/28/2025)
§ 14-05 Nonpublic Schools and Security Guard Companies; Program Administration.
   (a)   Start Date. A school may seek reimbursement from the Department for
the cost of Security Services beginning on the first day of classes in the
school year for which the Reimbursement Program has been authorized or the date
the Department determines that the School is qualified to participate in the
reimbursement program, whichever is later.
   (b)   Qualified Providers. If the Qualified Provider List contains three (3)
or more Security Guard Companies on the date of the execution of the MOU
between the Department and a school, the school must retain a Security Guard
Company from the Qualified Provider List in order for the cost of its Security
Services to be eligible for reimbursement. If the Qualified Provider List
contains fewer than three (3) Security Guard Companies at such time, the school
may retain any Security Guard Company that is licensed pursuant to Article 7-
A of the General Business Law and complies with all applicable labor and
employment laws.
   (c)   Insurance Requirements. Upon retention by the school of a Security
Guard Company from the Qualified Provider List or a Security Guard Company
licensed pursuant to Article 7-A of the General Business Law, the Security
Guard Company must maintain throughout the term of its agreement with the
school commercial general liability ("CGL") insurance, which shall:
      (i)   be issued by a company that may lawfully issue the CGL policy. The
company must have an A.M. Best rating of at least A-/VII or a Standard & Poor's
rating of at least A;
      (ii)   insure the Security Guard Company, the school, and the City of New
York and protect them from any claims for injury (including death) or property
damage that may arise from or allegedly arise from operations under the
agreement with the school
      (iii)   provide coverage of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000) per
occurrence and two million dollars ($2,000,000) aggregate;
      (iv)   provide coverage at least as broad as that provided in the most
recently issued edition of Insurance Services Office ("ISO") Form CG 00 01 and
be "occurrence" based rather than "claims-made"; and
      (v)   name the school and the City of New York as an Additional Insured
with coverage at least as broad as the most recent edition ISO Form CG 2026.
         (1)   The Security Guard Company shall provide the endorsement(s)
naming the school and the City as an Additional Insured and proof of CGL
insurance by submission of a certificate of insurance that:
            A.   satisfies the requirements of this rule;
            B.   identifies the insurance company that issued such insurance
policy, the policy number, limit(s) of insurance, and expiration date; and
            C.   is accompanied by a sworn statement in a form prescribed by
the Department from a licensed insurance broker or agent certifying that the
certificate of insurance is accurate in all material respects.
         (2)   A Security Guard Company must ensure that its policies are
current and is required to submit an updated certificate of insurance and
certification by broker or agent within five days of the expiration date of the
current policy.
         (3)   A Security Guard Company shall maintain workers' compensation
insurance, disability benefits insurance and employer's liability insurance in
accordance with the laws of the State of New York on behalf of, or with regard
to, all employees providing services to a school, and must produce proof of
workers' compensation insurance and disability benefits insurance coverage
within 10 days of its retention by the school, or upon demand by the
Department. Satisfactory proof shall mean:
            A.   C-105.2 Certificate of Workers' Compensation Insurance;
            B.   U-26.3 – State Insurance Fund Certificate of Workers'
Compensation Insurance;
            C.   Request for WC/DB Exemption (Form CE-200);
            D.   Equivalent or successor forms used by the New York State
Workers' Compensation Board; or
            E.   Other proof of insurance in a form acceptable to the City.
   (d)   School Security Administrator. The School Security Administrator shall
be responsible for the daily administration of Security Services provided at
the school, including decisions regarding the selection, retention, and
replacement of Security Guards. The School Security Administrator must report
the misconduct of a Security Guard to the administration of the school. The
School Security Administrator may report any concerns regarding a Security
Guard Company to the Department.
   (e)   Requirements of Security Guard Companies. A Security Guard Company
that is retained to provide Security Services must:
      (i)   furnish distinctive, appropriate, and complete uniforms to each
Security Guard assigned to such school. All Security Guards must report for
duty wearing a complete uniform;
      (ii)   ensure that each Security Guard assigned to the school has
satisfactorily completed training programs in compliance with Section 89-n of
Article 7-A of the General Business Law and 55 RCNY §
14-06;
      (iii)   ensure that each Security Guard assigned to the school has no
physical conditions that would hamper the performance of assigned duties;
      (iv)   ensure that each Security Guard assigned to the school is
physically able to wear and use any equipment furnished to them to conduct
their duties;
      (v)   ensure that each Security Guard assigned to the school wears and
displays a Company-issued identification card and New York State Guard License
prominently while on duty;
      (vi)   ensure that each Security Guard assigned to the school has the
ability to understand, speak, write and be understood in English; and
      (vii)   furnish communication systems and accessories for use at each
school. Such systems and accessories must be provided in sufficient quantities
to ensure that there is at least one operable, fully charged radio and case, or
other Security Guard Company issued communication device, for each guard on
each shift. All security personnel assigned to a school must report for duty
bearing all assigned equipment. The School Security Administrator must approve
all equipment prior to use. Such systems and accessories must:
         (1)   permit each guard to communicate with the School Security
Administrator and any other guards assigned to the school; and
         (2)   be licensed by the Federal Communication Commission on a
business or public safety band.
   (f)   Incident Reporting. 
      (i)   Each Security Guard assigned to the school must document criminal
activity and other significant incidents related to public safety that occur
while the Security Guard is on duty. Each school is responsible for maintaining
such documentation and for promptly reporting criminal activity to the New York
City Police Department and other significant incidents related to public safety
to any other government agency, where appropriate.
      (ii)   The School Security Administrator must submit an annual report to
the Department that summarizes all criminal activity and other significant
incidents related to public safety that are documented by its Security Guards.
(Added City Record 7/19/2016, eff. 7/19/2016; amended City Record 2/14/2020,
eff. 3/15/2020)
§ 14-06 Security Guard Companies; Training.
   (a)   Security Guard Companies must ensure that all Security Guards receive
training pursuant to the Article 7-A, Section 89-n of the General Business Law.
Consistent with such requirements, a Security Guard must receive:
      (i)   On-the-Job Training: A minimum of 16 hours of training generally
relating to the security guard's specific duties, the nature of the work place
and the requirements of the Security Guard Company.
      (ii)   Refresher Training: During each year that a Security Guard takes
part in the Reimbursement Program, such Security Guard must complete at a
minimum an eight hour annual in-service training course.
   (b)   Security Guard Companies must maintain current records for each
Security Guard regarding the training that such guard has completed. The school
may request a copy of such records at any time.
   (c)   Nothing contained in this section shall preclude a school from
requiring additional training suited to its particular needs. However, such
additional training will not be eligible for reimbursement to the schools.
(Added City Record 7/19/2016, eff. 7/19/2016; amended City Record 2/14/2020,
eff. 3/15/2020)
§ 14-07 Nonpublic Schools; Allowable Costs and Reimbursements.
   (a)   Number of Guards. 
      (i)   A school that enrolls between 150 and 499 students may be
reimbursed for Allowable Costs with regard to one (1) Security Guard; a school
that enrolls between 500 and 999 students may be reimbursed for Allowable Costs
with regard to two (2) Security Guards; and a school may be reimbursed for
Allowable Costs with regard to an additional Security Guard for each additional
500 students enrolled in such school. Reimbursement for the Security Services
provided by each Security Guard during periods of school-related instruction or
school-related events may include the cost of different individuals providing
Security Services at different times.
      (ii)   When calculating the number of students enrolled at a school, each
school that has been assigned a BEDS code by the New York State Education
Department will be considered distinct. The number of students at schools with
distinct codes, even if such schools are contractually or otherwise related,
will not be combined for the purposes of determining the number of guards
pursuant to this subdivision.
      (iii)   The Department will adjust payments, including recoupment, based
on verification of the school’s enrollment information by the New York State
Education Department.
      (iv)   A school that operates at more than one address under a single
BEDS code will be eligible for reimbursement for the allowable costs of a
security guard at each such address, provided that student enrollment at each
such address satisfies the minimum student enrollment requirements of 150
students as set forth in subdivision (a) of 55 RCNY §
14-07, and provided that the location does not share space with a school of the
city school district of the city of New York. If no single location under a
single BEDS code satisfies the minimum student enrollment requirements of 150
students, the school is ineligible for reimbursement for the allowable costs of
a security guard.
   (b)   Wages. The Department shall reimburse for Security Services only if
each Security Guard is paid on an hourly basis no less than the prevailing wage
and supplements in the City for unarmed guards as determined by the Comptroller
of the City of New York pursuant to New York State Labor Law § 234.
   (c)   School-Related Instruction and Events. The Department shall reimburse
for Security Services provided during school-related instruction or school-
related events. School-related events shall not include private functions or
activities that are not primarily directed to students. Schools are required to
maintain records containing a description of school-related events for which
reimbursement is requested.
   (d)   Overtime. The Department shall reimburse for overtime costs for
Security Services provided during school-related instruction and school-related
events that do not exceed fifteen percent of the non-overtime wages of Security
Guards reimbursed to the school during any given quarter.
   (e)   Reasonable Costs. Each Security Guard Company may charge Reasonable
Costs to each school for administrative expenses. The Department shall
reimburse the school for such costs.
   (f)   Payments. The Department shall provide reimbursements on a quarterly
basis after receiving satisfactory proof from the school of compliance with the
requirements set forth in these Rules. Satisfactory proof must be submitted
through the Invoice Submission Portal, and must include, but shall not be
limited to, certified invoices, payroll records, timesheets and, when
applicable, an annual report of incidents as required by 55 RCNY §
14-05(f). Invoices must be submitted to the Department during the Reimbursement
Period for the respective fiscal year. All invoices must be signed by an
authorized signatory, or their successor, identified in the application
submitted by each school.
   (g)   Budget. If the Department anticipates that schools will submit
reimbursement claims in excess of available funds for a given school year, the
Department shall reimburse each school on an equitable basis until such funds
are exhausted. The Department will notify each school promptly if such a
determination is made.
(Added City Record 7/19/2016, eff. 7/19/2016; amended City Record 2/14/2020,
eff. 3/15/2020; amended City Record 7/28/2025, eff. 7/28/2025)
§ 14-08 Nonpublic Schools; Compliance and Auditing.
   (a)   Records Retention. Each school must retain all records supporting its
reimbursement claims for seven (7) years. Such records include, but not are not
limited to, invoices, payroll records, timesheets, and work assignment data
from Security Guard Companies and annual reports of incidents as required by 55
RCNY §
14-05(f).
   (b)   Submission of Records. Each school must submit all records supporting
its reimbursement claims through the Invoice Submission Portal including, but
not limited to, certified payroll records, invoices, and time sheets, which
include the name, address, and unique employee identification number of each
Security Guard.
   (c)   Audit. Each school must make available all records supporting its
reimbursement claims for auditing and inspection by DCAS Internal Audit and
Compliance Unit ("IA") and/or its contractors upon demand with five (5) days
prior written notice. The school must produce any and all original books,
reports, financial statements, vouchers, records, payroll records, time sheets,
and work assignment data pertaining to the reimbursement claims, whether those
documents are maintained in hard copy or electronically. Such records must be
made available for inspection at the offices of the Department or on the
premises of the school. The school must gather any and all documents pertaining
to its reimbursement claims, including, but not limited to, documents
describing school-related activities at which Security Services were provided.
   (d)   Visits to Schools. IA may visit the school to review records and
interview staff, contractors, and subcontractors in furtherance of IA's audit
of the reimbursement claims. The school must cooperate with IA during such
visits. These visits may be unannounced.
   (e)   Records Review. IA may review documents on the premises of the school
and may make and remove copies of records for auditing purposes.
   (f)   Findings. IA shall report the findings of its audit and
recommendations to the Department for any action it deems appropriate. A
school's failure to comply with these Rules may result in disqualification from
the Reimbursement Program. The Department may, in its sole discretion, share
the findings of the audit with the school or other government entities. Nothing
set forth herein shall limit the ability of the Comptroller of the City of New
York or the New York City Department of Investigation to obtain and review a
school's records.
(Added City Record 7/19/2016, eff. 7/19/2016; amended City Record 7/28/2025,
eff. 7/28/2025)
Chapter 15: Installation of Side Guards on Large Vehicles
§ 15-01 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, and unless otherwise specified, the following terms
have the following meanings:
   Agency. The term "Agency" means a city, county, borough, or other office,
position, administration, department, division, bureau, board or commission, or
a corporation, institution or agency of government, the expenses of which are
paid in whole or in part from the City treasury.
   BIC. The term "BIC" means the New York City Business Integrity Commission.
   Chief Fleet Management Officer. The term "Chief Fleet Management Officer"
means the DCAS official appointed by the Commissioner, in accordance with
Executive Order 161 of 2012, who is responsible for implementing policies and
procedures to ensure safe, reliable, and proper use of City vehicles, or their
duly authorized designee.
   City. The term "City" means the City of New York.
   City Contracted Vehicle. The term "City Contracted Vehicle" means any Large
Vehicle that is utilized within the City on a weekly or more frequent basis to
fulfill requirements material to the scope of a Contract.
   City Fleet. The term "City Fleet" means vehicles owned by Agencies of the
City or leased for periods of over one (1) year.
   Commissioner. The term "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of the New York
City Department of Citywide Administrative Services.
   Contract. The term "Contract" means any contract awarded by the City and
registered with the New York City Comptroller after the Effective Date and
whose cost is to be paid from funds belonging to or administered by the City,
where such contract has an estimate value of $2,000,000 or more. This
definition does not include (1) Agency on-call emergency contracts, including
on-call storm emergency contracts; (2) the following types of contracts that
are governed by rules of the Procurement Policy Board: emergency procurements;
intergovernmental contracts; government to government contracts; and contracts
for the provision of work or services by public utilities; and (3) renewals,
exemptions or modifications of contracts registered with the Comptroller prior
to the Effective Date.
   Contractor. The term "Contractor" means any entity that enters into a
contract with the City.
   DCAS. The term "DCAS" means the New York City Department of Citywide
Administrative Services.
   Effective Date. The term "Effective Date" means January 1, 2023.
   Large Vehicle. The term "Large Vehicle" means a motor vehicle with a
manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating exceeding 10,000 pounds. Such term
does not include street sweepers, fire engines, car carriers, off-road
construction vehicles, or any specialized vehicles or vehicle types on which
Side Guard installation is deemed impractical by the Department in accordance
with Administrative Code § 6-141(c).
   Notice to Proceed. The term "Notice to Proceed" means the written direction
to a Contractor by an Agency to commence work pursuant to a Contract registered
with the New York City Comptroller.
   Side Guard. The term "Side Guard" means a lateral protective safety device
fit to the side of a Large Vehicle that is designed to prevent pedestrians and
bicyclists from falling into the exposed space between the front axle and the
rear axle of such vehicles and that meets the requirements of 55 RCNY §
15-02.
   Subcontractor. The term "Subcontractor" means any entity that enters into a
subcontract to perform work on behalf of a Contractor which enters into City
contract registered with the City.
   Volpe Side Guard Standard. The term "Volpe Side Guard Standard" means the
United States Department of Transportation's Volpe Side Guard standard
published and referred to as "U.S. DOT Standard DOT-VNTSC-OSTR-16-05", as
amended, or a functionally equivalent national vehicle Side Guard standard, as
determined by DCAS.
(Added City Record 10/7/2022, eff. 11/6/2022)
§ 15-02 Side Guard Requirements.
   (a)   General Requirements. Unless prohibited by Federal, State, or City
law, or an exemption has been issued pursuant to 55 RCNY §
15-04, all Large Vehicles in the City Fleet must be equipped with Side Guards
by the Effective Date and all City Contracted Vehicles performing work under a
Contract are required to be equipped with Side Guards by the Effective Date or
in compliance with the Phase-In Period set forth in 55 RCNY §
15-03(b).
   (b)   Satisfaction of Side Guard Requirements. The requirements for Side
Guards will be considered satisfied if one or more of the following three
situations is present:
      (1)   The Large Vehicle is equipped with Side Guards that allow for a
maximum 13.8 inch ground clearance, a maximum 13.8 inch top clearance up to
four feet in height, and a minimum 440 pound impact strength that achieves a
smooth and continuous longitudinal (forward to backward) impact surface flush
with the vehicle sidewall, known as the "NYC Volpe Side Guard Standard".
         (i)   Side Guards may include rail style guards, provided that such
rails are no less than four inches tall and no more than 11.8 inches apart.
         (ii)   Side Guards may incorporate other vehicle features such as
toolboxes and ladders, or the function of a Side Guard may be performed by
those features, subject to the approval of DCAS.
      (2)   The Large Vehicle cannot maintain a Side Guard due to the design or
operations of the vehicle, subject to the Contractor's application to DCAS for,
and the grant of, an exemption from these rules.
      (3)   The Large Vehicle is designed or equipped on each side of the unit
such that, by virtue of its shape and characteristics, its component parts can
be regarded as replacing or functioning as Side Guards in accordance with the
Volpe Side Guard Standard, or will perform the function of Side Guards with
modifications separate from installation of Volpe Standard sideguards, subject
to the approval of DCAS.
   (c)   In the case that mandated Federal standards are established for truck
Side Guards, DCAS will assess any Federal specification guidelines and issue
revised rules relating to the New York City specification(s), if required.
(Added City Record 10/7/2022, eff. 11/6/2022)
§ 15-03 City Contracted Vehicles.
   (a)   All City Agency Contracts involving City Contracted Vehicles must
contain specifications reflecting the requirements set forth in this chapter,
including the submission of compliance plans and reports described in
subdivision (c) of this section, which specifications will be reviewable by
DCAS.
      (1)   Contracts may include additional charges by the Contractor for the
installation of Side Guards at a price not to exceed $3,000.00 per vehicle
unless otherwise approved by DCAS, in its sole discretion.
      (2)   Contractors shall ensure that the Subcontractors have access to
funding to add Side Guards to City Contracted Vehicles used in City Agency
Contracts. Contractors shall reimburse Subcontractors for the costs of any Side
Guards installed on vehicles which are required to comply with these rules.
      (3)   Contractors must provide a list of vehicles that require retrofits
to be performed, as well as an affidavit stating that any add-on fees for Side
Guard installations will only be included for trucks not previously equipped
with Side Guards under any City contract or otherwise previously fitted and
equipped with operational Side Guards.
   (b)   Phase-in Period for City Contracted Vehicles. Except when a Contractor
or a Subcontractor is granted an exemption pursuant to 55 RCNY §
15-04, the requirements of this chapter will apply. Side Guards must be
installed and fully operational no later than:
      (1)   Twelve (12) months from the issuance of a Notice to Proceed
pursuant to an individual Contract utilizing ten (10) or fewer Large Vehicles;
or
      (2)   Eighteen (18) months from the issuance of a Notice to Proceed
pursuant to an individual Contract utilizing more than ten (10) Large Vehicles.
   (c)   Compliance Plan and Reports. Any Contract entered after the Effective
Date must require the Contractor to submit the following to the Chief Fleet
Management Officer:
      (1)   A written compliance plan within fourteen (14) days following the
Notice to Proceed or the placing of the first order under the Contract, as
applicable.
      (2)   A report that includes the following information, submitted six (6)
months following the Notice to Proceed or the placing of the first order under
the Contract, as applicable, or when requested by the Chief Fleet Management
Officer:
         (i)   the number of Large Vehicles used in the performance of the
Contract by the Contractor and any Subcontractor;
         (ii)   the number of Large Vehicles used in the performance of the
Contract by the Contractor and any Subcontractor that are retrofitted with
safety enhancing equipment as required by these rules;
         (iii)   one or more photographs of both sides of each Large Vehicle
used in the performance of the Contract by the Contractor and any Subcontractor
that is retrofitted with safety enhancing equipment as required by these rules.
The photographs must also show the Large Vehicle's license plate number with
the safety enhancing equipment fitted on the vehicle; and
         (iv)   a certification that the Contractor and any Subcontractor under
the Contract have complied with the requirements of these rules.
      (3)   The Chief Fleet Management Officer will review written compliance
plans and reports to confirm that the Agency or Contractor (including its
Subcontractor) meets the requirements of these rules.
   (d)   Record Retention and Audits. 
      (1)   Contractors and their Subcontractors must keep records of their
Compliance Plans and Reports for a period of six (6) years from the date of the
Notice to Proceed, or from the payment of the last invoice pursuant to their
Contract with the City, whichever occurs later.
      (2)   At any time during a Contract, or during the record retention
period set forth in subdivision (d) of 55 RCNY §
15-03, DCAS will have, upon reasonable notice, full access to and the right to
request and inspect documents and records in accordance with applicable law
that are maintained or retained by or on behalf of the Contractor and its
Subcontractor pursuant to such subdivision (d).
   (e)   DCAS is authorized to request and perform the physical inspection of
any Large Vehicle used in the performance by an Agency, Contractor or
Subcontractor, in order to ensure compliance with contract provisions required
by this chapter, in accordance with applicable law.
(Added City Record 10/7/2022, eff. 11/6/2022)
§ 15-04 Exemptions.
   (a)   City Agencies and Contractors (including on behalf of any of its
Subcontractors using Large Vehicles in the performance of the Contract) may
submit an application, on a form available on DCAS' website, to the Chief Fleet
Management Officer for an annual exemption from the requirements of these Rules
if they have determined that compliance is impractical; or it will disrupt
provision of public safety or public health services; or there are limitations
in the capacity of vendors to supply Side Guards; or because the vehicle cannot
maintain a Side Guard due to the design or operations of such vehicle.
   (b)   Contractors (including on behalf of any of its Subcontractors using
Large Vehicles in the performance of the Contract) may also submit requests for
an exemption from the timeframes of the installation schedule set forth in 55
RCNY §
15-03 based on a claim of undue financial hardship. However, Contractors will
have the opportunity to account for and factor in the costs for Side Guards as
part of the bid pricing they submit for a Contract as part of Contract pricing
structures. An exemption request based on financial hardship must
satisfactorily explain why the financial hardship has remained despite the
opportunity for the Contractor to account for the costs in its bid prices.
   (c)   Exemptions may be available if one or more of the following
circumstances exist and there is sufficient evidence or proof provided with
respect to such circumstances:
      (1)   Supply chain disruption;
      (2)   Delays in the commencement of work or payments which are not caused
by the fault of the Contractor;
      (3)   If removing the vehicle from service would have a material effect
on the contractor's ability to perform work under the Contract;
      (4)   Natural or man-made emergencies. For purposes of this paragraph,
"natural or man-made emergencies" means acts or events beyond the control and
without any fault or negligence of the Contractor. Such events may include, but
are not limited to, pandemic, fire, flood, earthquake, storm or other natural
disaster, civil commotion, war, terrorism, riot, and labor disputes not brought
about by any act or omission of the Contractor; or
      (5)   Any other circumstance, whether or not anticipated or found to be
usual or typical, which is accompanied by supporting information provided
pursuant to paragraph (d) of this subdivision.
   (d)   The application for an exemption must include all of the following
information and statements, to be verified in an affidavit accompanying the
application:
      (1)   A list of all Large Vehicles that the applicant owns, leases or
otherwise controls to conduct the applicant's business; and
      (2)   A statement, accompanied by supporting documents, and if
applicable, financial statements, that retrofitting the applicant's Large
Vehicles in order to comply with these rules is impractical; or would disrupt
provision of public safety or public health services; or would cause the
applicant to suffer an undue financial hardship.
   (e)   The Chief Fleet Management Officer will evaluate an exemption request
and make a determination within 90 days of receipt whether to approve or deny
such request.
   (f)   An annual exemption granted pursuant to this section will expire one
year from the date it has been granted, except for exemptions granted pursuant
to 55 RCNY §
15-02(b)(2). Exemptions granted pursuant to such paragraph will remain
applicable as long as the specific vehicle(s) are in operation by the Agency
or, as to a Contractor or Subcontractor, the life of the Contract with the
City.
   (g)   The Chief Fleet Management Officer may renew an exemption for
additional one-year periods in the event that the Agency, a Contractor or a
Subcontractor submits a written statement verified by affidavit that such
Agency, a Contractor or a Subcontractor continues to be eligible for the
exemption. The Chief Fleet Management Officer retains the discretion to reject
an exemption request if, based on such Officer's determination, circumstances
have changed that would obviate the basis for such previously granted
exemption. Applications to renew an exemption must be submitted using the form
available on DCAS' website.
   (h)   The Chief Fleet Management Officer shall have the sole authority to
grant a exemption of the requirements set forth in these rules.
   (i)   Appeals. 
      (1)   If the Chief Fleet Management Officer denies the request for
exemption and/or extension of exemptions from the requirements of these rules,
the Contractor or Subcontractor may appeal in writing to the Commissioner or
their designee within 30 days of receipt of the Chief Fleet Management
Officer's determination, on a form available on DCAS' website. Receipt of
notice by the Contractor or Subcontractor shall be deemed to be no later than
five (5) days from the date of mailing or upon delivery, if delivered. Filing
of the appeal shall be accomplished by actual delivery of the appeal document
to the Commissioner or their designee.
      (2)   The written appeal by the Contractor must briefly state all the
facts or other bases upon which the Contractor contests the Chief Fleet
Management Officer's determination, and must include supporting documentation.
      (3)   The Commissioner or their designee will consider the merits of the
Contractor's appeal and provide a written decision no later than 90 days after
receipt of such appeal.
(Added City Record 10/7/2022, eff. 11/6/2022)
§ 15-05 Violations.
   (a)   A Contractor may be assessed up to $4,000 for each City Contracted
Vehicle, including those vehicles used on behalf of the Contractor by its
Subcontractor(s), that are found to be out of compliance with the requirements
of these rules.
   (b)   In addition to other remedies provided by law or specified in the
Contract, any person who knowingly makes a false statement of material fact to
any City Agency with respect to the financial condition of the Contractor
submitted in connection with a request for an exemption from compliance with
these Rules may be fined not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for each such
false statement and the person on whose behalf such false, deceptive or
fraudulent representation was made, shall thenceforth be disqualified from
bidding on any contracts for the City.
   (c)   For purposes of this section, a person knowingly makes a false
statement of material fact when such statements regarding the Contractor's
financial condition fail to comply with the standards set forth in
Administrative Code § 6-112.
   (d)   A Contractor shall be responsible and liable for the actions or
omissions of its subcontractor(s), and for any assessments imposed upon such
subcontractor(s) pursuant to these rules.
(Added City Record 10/7/2022, eff. 11/6/2022)
§ 15-06 Vehicles Regulated by the Business Integrity Commission (BIC).
In the event that a City Contracted Vehicle is also a vehicle licensed or
regulated by the New York City Business Integrity Commission (BIC), any laws or
rules applicable to or promulgated by BIC will govern with respect to Side
Guard matters addressed by these rules.
(Added City Record 10/7/2022, eff. 11/6/2022)
Chapter 16: Donation of Surplus City-Owned Computers
§ 16-01 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
   Beneficial Use. The term “Beneficial Use” means the use of equipment by an
Eligible Organization for an educational or other public purpose, provided that
such organization has a demonstrated need for such equipment; and provided
further that such use may not include religious worship, instruction, or
proselytization.
   Commissioner. The term “Commissioner” means the Commissioner of the
Department of Citywide Administrative Services.
   Computer. The term “Computer” means a desktop computing device, a laptop, or
other portable computing device, containing a central processing unit and any
peripheral components that are connected to the central processing unit such
that they may reasonably be viewed functionally as a single unit, including,
but not limited to, motherboards, RAM, hard drives, or other storage devices,
video or sound cards, and computer cases.
   Department. The term “Department” means the Department of Citywide
Administrative Services (“DCAS”).
   Eligible Organization. The term “Eligible Organization” means a public
school, public library, other public or private educational institution, and a
not-for-profit institution serving persons with disabilities, senior citizens,
or low-income individuals.
   Equipment. The term “Equipment” means a Computer and its associated
peripheral components, and other electronic devices that operate with or can be
operated by a Computer, including but not limited to floppy disk drives, CD
drives, USB drives, printers, modems, networking devices, scanners, monitors,
and the cables or wiring required to connect a Computer with the computer
equipment.
   Salvage Office. The term “Salvage Office” means the unit entrusted with the
disposal of personal property by public or private sale or as otherwise
authorized by law or regulation under 55 RCNY
Chapter 5.
   Salvage Officer. The term “Salvage Officer” means agency personnel who is
responsible for the repurposing/relinquishment of all inventories purchased
with City funds.
   Surplus. The term “Surplus” means equipment that is no longer in use, and
not needed for use, by any agency.
(Added City Record 6/18/2024, eff. 7/18/2024)
§ 16-02 Donation Process.
   (a)   Notification. 
      i.   The Department will notify the public of its intent to donate
Surplus Equipment through:
         1.   the Public Surplus online platform;
         2.   the existing network of Salvage Offices across the City;
         3.   the DCAS Connect Surplus webpage; and
         4.   The City Record.
      ii.   The notification will include a description of the Surplus
Equipment and the total shipping and handling fees, if any.
   (b)   Specific Plan. 
      i.   Eligible Organizations must submit to the Department a specific plan
for the Beneficial Use of Surplus Equipment within fourteen (14) days of the
Department notification described in subdivision (a) of this section. Eligible
Organizations must use the form provided by the Department for the specific
plan.
      ii.   Eligible Organizations must submit the specific plan to the
Department by email to OSAGeneral@dcas.nyc.gov. General inquiries may also be
sent to that email address.
      iii.   The specific plan must include, but need not be limited to:
         1.   A description of the organization, including:
            A.   Whether the organization is a public school or public library;
            B.   Whether the organization is a public or private educational
institution other than a public school or public library;
            C.   Whether the organization is a not-for-profit institution
serving persons with disabilities, senior citizens, or low-income individuals;
            D.   The type of community the organization serves;
            E.   An estimate of the number of people the organization serves
yearly;
            F.   The location(s) which will utilize the Surplus Equipment;
            G.   All locations operated by the organization; and
            H.   The number of staff at the location to be served.
         2.   A description of the Surplus Equipment requested by the Eligible
Organization.
         3.   The intended use of the Surplus Equipment, including:
            A.   The primary purpose of the Surplus Equipment; and
            B.   When, where and how the Surplus Equipment will be used.
         4.   A written statement indicating why the donation of equipment to
the organization will facilitate the organization’s services to the public for
low or no cost.
         5.   Whether the Eligible Organization has previously received Surplus
Equipment donations.
            A.   If the Eligible Organization has previously received Surplus
Equipment by donation, it must:
               a.   Specify the equipment that was donated to the organization;
               b.   Provide the date the organization received the donation;
and
               c.   Provide a written description regarding the past
utilization of the Surplus Equipment.
         6.   Any other information which the Eligible Organization deems
relevant to its plan submission.
   (c)   Order of Priority. 
      i.   If only one Eligible Organization submits a specific plan for the
Beneficial Use of Surplus Equipment, such Eligible Organization will receive
the Surplus Equipment if it has demonstrated that it intends to use such
equipment for a predominantly public purpose in which any private benefit is
merely incidental. In determining whether the use will be for a predominantly
public purpose, the Department will review factors including, but not limited
to:
         1.   The primary users of the Surplus Equipment;
         2.   The primary use of the Surplus Equipment;
         3.   Whether the Surplus Equipment will go to programs affected by
budget cuts;
         4.   Whether the Surplus Equipment will go to organizations with
limited resources; and
         5.   Whether the Surplus Equipment will be used for educational
purposes.
      ii.   If multiple Eligible Organizations submit a specific plan for the
Beneficial Use of Surplus Equipment, the Department will take into
consideration the following factors in determining priority:
         1.   Whether the Beneficial Use of such equipment facilitates services
to the public for low or no cost;
         2.   Whether the Beneficial Use of such equipment will serve
communities that are under-serviced or have difficulty receiving services;
         3.   In the event that an Eligible Organization has previously
received a donation of Surplus Equipment, whether such organization has
utilized such equipment to fulfill the Beneficial Use for which it was donated;
         4.   Whether an Eligible Organization has a greater need for a
donation of Surplus Equipment due to its limited size as compared to other
Eligible Organizations; and
         5.   Any other factor that the Department deems relevant.
      iii.   The order of priority for which Eligible Organizations receive the
Surplus Equipment will be determined as follows:
         1.   Public schools and libraries will receive first priority. If more
than one public school and/or public library submits a specific plan, the
Department will review the details provided in the specific plans and determine
priority in accordance with the factors stated in 55 RCNY §
16-02(c)(ii). The Department will retain a record of how it reached the
determination for a minimum of six years after the determination has been made.
         2.   Subsequent to the consideration of specific plans for Beneficial
Use submitted by public schools and libraries, if any, the Department will
review specific plans from other Eligible Organizations. If more than one
Eligible Organization other than a public school or library submits a specific
plan, the Department will review the details provided in the specific plans and
determine priority in accordance with the factors stated in 55 RCNY §
16-02(c)(ii). The Department will retain a record of how it reached the
determination for a minimum of six years after the determination has been made.
      iv.   If the Surplus Equipment is in need of repair or restoration,
priority will be given to Eligible Organizations that have documented, in their
specific plans for Beneficial Use, that they intend to use the repair or
restoration of such equipment in the training of their students. Public schools
and libraries will receive first priority. If more than one Eligible
Organization other than a public school or library intends to repair or restore
the Surplus Equipment, the Department will prioritize those organizations in
accordance with the factors set forth in 55 RCNY §
16-02(c)(ii). The Surplus Equipment must be in a condition where it can be
repaired or restored to fully functioning. Upon the repair or restoration of
the Surplus Equipment, the Eligible Organization may either:
         1.   Retain such equipment; or
         2.   Return such equipment to the Department for donation to another
Eligible Organization.
   (d)   Cost. The Department will donate Surplus Equipment to Eligible
Organizations for Beneficial Use at no cost except for any reasonable shipping
and handling fees. Eligible Organizations are responsible for transporting the
Surplus Equipment from the Department or agencies.
   (e)   Compliance. 
      i.   The donation of any Surplus Equipment must comply with § 10-504 of
the Administrative Code of the City of New York.
      ii.   The Department will notify New York City agencies of the
requirements under this rule and will require a Certification of Compliance
from any donating agency. Donating agencies must complete the Certification of
Compliance provided by the Department.
      iii.   Agencies must confirm that the Surplus Equipment they seek to
donate is in a condition suitable for donation and state in its Certification
of Compliance whether the Surplus Equipment is fully functioning or if it is in
need of repair or restoration. If repair or restoration is needed, agencies
must state what component(s) requires repair or restoration.
      iv.   Computers missing one or more of the following components are
ineligible for donation under this rule:
         1.   Central Processing Unit (CPU);
         2.   Motherboard;
         3.   RAM;
         4.   Hard drive or other storage device;
         5.   Video or sound card; or
         6.   Computer case (where applicable).
(Added City Record 6/18/2024, eff. 7/18/2024)
§ 16-03 Auction or Disposal.
   (a)   The Department may auction or dispose of Surplus Equipment if no
Eligible Organization has submitted a specific plan for the Beneficial Use of
such Surplus Equipment over the course of one (1) year from the date of the
Department’s notification, pursuant to 55 RCNY §
16-02(a), of its intent to donate such Surplus Equipment.
   (b)   The Department is not required to donate equipment where it
determines, upon consideration of the five (5) factors stated in 55 RCNY §
16-02(c)(i), that no Eligible Organization has demonstrated that it intends to
use such equipment for a predominantly public purpose in which any private
benefit is merely incidental. In such case, the Department will retain a record
as to how it made such determination.
   (c)   Auction or disposal of Surplus Equipment must comply with § 10-504 of
the Administrative Code.
(Added City Record 6/18/2024, eff. 7/18/2024)
§ 16-04 Record Retention.
   (a)   The Department will retain all documentation related to Surplus
Equipment donations for a period of six (6) years.
   (b)   Documentation retained by the Department will include, but is not
limited to:
      i.   Department notifications to the public of its intent to donate
Surplus Equipment;
      ii.   Specific plans submitted to the Department by Eligible
Organizations;
      iii.   Department statements explaining how it prioritized order when
multiple Eligible Organizations submitted specific plans; and
      iv.   Itemized lists of Surplus Equipment offered for donation, including
whether the equipment was in need of repair or restoration, donated, auctioned,
or disposed. If auctioned or disposed, a record as to why the Surplus Equipment
was not donated.
(Added City Record 6/18/2024, eff. 7/18/2024)
Appendix A: Personnel Rules and Regulations of the City of New York
RULE I - DEFINITIONS
Agency: Agency is any department, administration, board, body or authority
possessing separate and independent powers and functions and recognized as such
by the department of citywide administrative services. 
Agency Head: Agency head is the head of an agency. 
Announcement: Announcement is the official notice of examination. 
Appointing Officer: Appointing officer is the officer, commission, board, body
or authority having the power of appointment to subordinate positions. 
Certifying Agency: Certifying agency is an agency which administers and
certifies eligible lists for classes of positions unique to such agency. 
Civil Service of New York City or Civil Service: Civil Service of New York City
or Civil Service includes all offices and positions in the definitions
hereinafter set forth of "classified service" and "unclassified service." 
Class of Positions: Class of positions means a group of positions substantially
similar with respect to duties, responsibilities, qualifications and
examination requirements to the extent that the same title may be used to
designate such positions and the same salary grade may be equally applied
thereto. 
Classified Service: Classified service means all offices or positions in the
civil service of New York City, classified under one of the four jurisdictional
classes: exempt; competitive; non- competitive; labor; including such offices
and positions in the New York City housing authority, triborough bridge and
tunnel authority, New York City transit authority, New York City board of
education and the offices of all district attorneys and all public
administrators within the City of New York. 
Commission: Commission means the New York City civil service commission. 
Commissioner of Citywide Administrative Services: The Commissioner of Citywide
Administrative Services is the head of the New York City department of citywide
administrative services. 
Compensation: Compensation is the annual salary attaching to a position or its
equivalent if stated by the day, week, month, hour or other unit. Maintenance
in the form of board and lodging or its monetary equivalent as duly fixed may
also be included therein. 
Day: Day is each day of the week; provided, however, if the last day for
completing action on any matter is a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, it shall be
the next business day. 
The Department of Citywide Administrative Services: The Department of Citywide
Administrative Services is the department established by Chapter 35 of the
Charter. 
Examination: Examination is the process by which the department of citywide
administrative services or other examining agency ascertains the fitness of
candidates for entrance into the classified service or promotion therein. 
Examining Agency: Examining agency is an agency which schedules and conducts
non-written promotion examinations for positions in that agency. 
Grade or Salary Grade: Grade or salary grade is the order or standing of a
position with reference to the full-time annual compensation attaching to it
or, if compensation be paid on other than a full-time per annum rate, then the
equivalent of such rate as determined by the commissioner of citywide
administrative services. 
Jurisdictional Classification: Jurisdictional classification is the assignment
of positions in the classified service to the exempt, non-competitive, labor or
competitive classes. 
Period of Service: In computing the length of a period of service in order to
attain a prescribed eligibility requirement, whenever the first working day is
immediately preceded by a Saturday, Sunday or public holiday, or a combination
thereof, such "period of service" shall be deemed to commence on the day
following the last work day preceding the Saturday, Sunday or public holiday,
or combination thereof. 
Position: Position means a particular office or employment in the civil
service. 
Position Classification: Position classification is a grouping together under
common or descriptive titles of positions that are substantially similar in the
essential character and scope of their duties and responsibilities and in the
qualification requirements thereof. 
Position Reclassification: Position reclassification is the reassignment of a
position or positions from one class of positions to a different class of
positions. 
Publish: The term "publish" means making a public announcement by advising the
public or making known of something to the public or bringing before the public
either by posting publicly and conspicuously in the office of the department of
citywide administrative services or other appropriate agency or printing or
causing to be printed and to issue from a newspaper, or such other distribution
or circulation as the commissioner of citywide administrative services deems
appropriate. 
Regulation: Regulation is a resolution of the commissioner of citywide
administrative services setting forth policy or procedures for the effectuation
of the provisions of the civil service law of the State of New York and the
rules of the commissioner of citywide administrative services, which shall not
be inconsistent with or supersede the civil service law or the rules. 
Salary Grade Allocation: Salary grade allocation is the assignment of a class
of positions to one of the salary grades set forth in the classification
rules. 
Salary Grade Reallocation: Salary grade reallocation is the reassignment of a
class of positions from one salary grade to another salary grade. 
Service Rating, Performance Rating, or Performance Evaluation: Service rating,
performance rating, or performance evaluation means a rating or evaluation of
an employee for performance in a position as defined in the rules or
regulations of the commissioner of citywide administrative services. 
Subject: Subject is a subdivision of a test. 
Terminal Date: If the "terminal date" of a prescribed period in which to
accomplish an act of duty occurs on a Saturday, Sunday or public holiday, or a
combination thereof, such date shall be deemed to be the first working day
following thereupon. 
Test: Test is a major subdivision of an examination. 
Title: Title is the designation of a position based upon its duties and
functions. 
Unclassified Service: Unclassified service means all offices or positions in
the civil service of New York City as described in section thirty-five of the
civil service law. 
RULE II - APPLICABILITY AND ADMINISTRATION
SECTION I – PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
2.1.   (a)   The commissioner of citywide administrative services shall have
the power to promulgate rules and regulations relating to the personnel
policies, programs and activities of city government in furtherance of and
consistent with state civil service law and Chapter 35 of the Charter. 
   (b)   The commissioner of citywide administrative services shall have all
the powers and duties of a municipal civil service commission provided in the
civil service law or in any other statute or local law other than such powers
and duties as are by Chapter 35 of the Charter assigned to the mayor, the city
civil service commission or the heads of agencies.
   (c)   The heads of agencies shall have the powers and duties of personnel
management as provided for in Chapter 35 of the Charter.
SECTION II – RULES
2.2.   These rules shall have the force and effect of law. 
SECTION III – REGULATIONS
2.3.   The commissioner of citywide administrative services shall have power to
adopt suitable regulations to carry out the provisions of the civil service
law, the New York City Charter and the rules. 
SECTION IV – GENERAL ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
2.4.   (a)   The commissioner of citywide administrative services shall have
the authority and responsibility in the administration and enforcement of the
rules and regulations prescribed thereunder and shall possess the powers and
duties assigned to the commissioner of citywide administrative services
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 35 of the Charter. 
   (b)   The commissioner of citywide administrative services shall prescribe
directives and orders for the instruction of the staff of the department of
citywide administrative services and for the execution of the rules and
regulations and wherever practicable, shall prescribe forms for all
applications, certifications, reports, records and returns required thereunder.
SECTION V – APPLICABILITY
2.5.   These rules shall apply to all offices and positions in the classified
service of the city including offices and positions in the New York City
housing authority, New York City transit authority, triborough bridge and
tunnel authority, New York City board of education, and the offices of all
district attorneys and all public administrators within the City of New York. 
SECTION VI – RULE CHANGES; CALENDAR
2.6.   (a)   No proposed amendment, modification or addition to the rules shall
be acted upon until public notice thereof shall be given in a designated
newspaper for not less than three days prior to a public hearing thereon. Such
notice shall set forth the proposal; but notice and public hearing shall not be
necessary where the purpose of the proposed amendment, modification or addition
is to conform with a change in a statute. 
   (b)   Certified copies of all duly adopted amendments, modifications or
changes of rules shall be transmitted to the offices of the secretary of state,
the corporation counsel, the city clerk and to said designated newspaper for
publication. Certified copies of all duly adopted regulations shall be
transmitted to all of the foregoing except the office of the secretary of
state.
   (c)   The commissioner of citywide administrative services shall cause to be
published in said designated newspaper, as the commissioner of citywide
administrative services may determine, those minutes of general interest or
broad application appearing as items in the calendar. Copies of the entire
calendar shall be maintained for public inspection at the office of the
department of citywide administrative services.
   (d)   If one year after the date of the public hearing held to consider
approval of a change of a rule of the commissioner of citywide administrative
services (as provided for by section 20 of the New York State civil service
law) either the commissioner of citywide administrative services or the mayor
of the City of New York or the state civil service commission has not acted
upon the matter, the resolution shall automatically be deemed withdrawn unless
the period of consideration is extended by an official action of the
commissioner of citywide administrative services.
SECTION VII – NON-DISCRIMINATION; EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
2.7.   There shall be no unlawful discrimination in city employment on the
basis of race, sex, age, religion, national origin or disability, and equal
opportunity in employment shall be ensured and promoted in the administration
of personnel. 
SECTION VIII – CONTINUITY AND PRESERVATION
2.8.   Any resolutions, equivalency tables, terminal dates, restrictions, terms
and conditions, and regulations in connection with the rules of classification
in force and effect immediately prior to the effective date of these rules,
shall continue to be in force and effect to the extent theretofore provided
under the provisions of these rules, unless otherwise provided herein. 
RULE III - JURISDICTIONAL CLASSIFICATION
SECTION I – THE EXEMPT CLASS
3.1.1. Definition.
The exempt class shall include all offices and positions in the classified
service enumerated in section forty-one of the civil service law and all other
subordinate offices or positions for the filling of which competitive or non-
competitive examination shall be found by the commissioner of citywide
administrative services to be not practicable.
3.1.2. Application to Classify.
An application by an agency to classify in the exempt class a position not
specifically thus classified by law shall not be considered unless it is
accompanied by a statement setting forth the reasons why examination,
competitive or non-competitive, is impracticable.
3.1.3. Number of Positions; Classification by Rule.
Not more than one appointment shall be made to or under the title of any office
or position placed in the exempt class unless a different number is
specifically prescribed in the classification rules. No office or position
shall be deemed to be in the exempt class unless it is specifically named in
such class in the rules.
3.1.4. Agency Certificate.
Appointments to positions in the exempt class may be made without examination;
but the agency head shall in each case submit to the department of citywide
administrative services, in such form as it shall prescribe, a certificate
which shall include:
   (a)   the title of the position;
   (b)   the full name and residence of the appointee;
   (c)   the place of the appointee's residence for five years immediately
preceding appointment;
   (d)   the appointee's previous appointments to and periods of service, if
any, in the public service;
   (e)   the appointee's qualifications for the office or position to be
filled.
3.1.5. Evaluation Upon Vacancy.
   (a)   Upon the occurrence of a vacancy in any position in the exempt class,
the commissioner of citywide administrative services shall study and evaluate
such positions and, within four months after the occurrence of such vacancy
shall determine whether such position, as then constituted, is properly
classified in the exempt class. Pending such determination, such position shall
not be filled, except on a temporary basis.
   (b)   If the commissioner of citywide administrative services shall
determine that such position is properly classified in the exempt class, such
appointment shall be deemed effective as exempt as of the original date of
appointment. The determination of the commissioner of citywide administrative
services thereon shall be recorded.
SECTION II – THE NON-COMPETITIVE CLASS
3.2.1. Definition.
The non-competitive class shall include all positions that are not in the
exempt or labor class and for which it is found by the commissioner of citywide
administrative services not to be practicable to ascertain the merit and
fitness of applicants by competitive examination.
3.2.2. Application to Classify.
An application by an agency to classify in the non-competitive class a position
not specifically thus classified by law shall not be considered unless it is
accompanied by a statement setting forth the reasons why competitive
examination is impracticable.
3.2.3. Classification by Rule.
   (a)   Not more than one appointment shall be made to or under the title of
any office or position placed in the non-competitive class, unless a different
or unlimited number is specifically prescribed in the classification rules. No
office or position shall be deemed to be in the non-competitive class unless it
is specifically named in such class in the rules.
   (b)   The commissioner of citywide administrative services shall designate
among positions in the non-competitive class those positions which are
confidential or require the performance of functions influencing policy.
3.2.4. Examination.
Appointments to positions in the non-competitive class shall be made after such
non-competitive examination as is hereinafter prescribed and all such
examinations shall be subject to the control of the commissioner of citywide
administrative services.
3.2.5. Agency Examiners.
   (a)   In each agency there shall be a board of examiners for non-competitive
positions, consisting of three members who are officers or employees of the
agency designated by the agency head subject to the approval of the
commissioner of citywide administrative services.
   (b)   In each institution of an agency there may be an institutional
examiner who shall be designated by the agency head subject to the approval of
the commissioner of citywide administrative services.
   (c)   Members of the agency board of examiners and the institutional
examiners shall, insofar as practicable, be persons in the competitive class.
3.2.6. Scope of Examination.
Such examinations shall be conducted so as to show that the candidate
   (a)   is free from any physical or medical disability which will interfere
with the proper discharge of the candidate's duties;
   (b)   is a person of satisfactory character and reputation;
   (c)   possesses the requisite knowledge and ability;
   (d)   is qualified by experience or training to discharge the duties of the
position efficiently.
3.2.7. Examination Reports; Action of Commissioner of Citywide Administrative
Services.
The reports of the character, scope and results of the examination of each
candidate for a non- competitive position conducted by an agency board of
examiners or by an institutional examiner, as the case may be, shall be
transmitted to the commissioner of citywide administrative services or
appropriate forms, when approved by such board at the end of each month or as
otherwise prescribed in the regulations by the commissioner of citywide
administrative services. If such reports are disapproved in whole or in part by
the commissioner of citywide administrative services, the employees therein
disapproved shall have their appointments terminated.
3.2.8. Compensation.
Except as otherwise provided, the maximum compensation for positions in the
non-competitive class shall be stated on a without maintenance basis. However,
appointments may be made with or without maintenance. Where appointments are
made with maintenance, the cash compensation for persons receiving maintenance
shall be determined by subtracting the value of maintenance from the stated
salary. A schedule showing allowable maintenance shall be prepared.
3.2.9. (Deleted 6/30/86)
3.2.10. Positions for the Physically or Mentally Disabled.
   (a)   The commissioner of citywide administrative services may determine a
prescribed number of positions, not to exceed the maximum set by state law,
with limited duties which can be performed by physically or mentally disabled
persons who are found qualified, in the manner prescribed by law, to perform
such duties.
   (b)   Upon such a determination, such positions shall be classified in the
non- competitive class, and shall be filled by persons who shall have been
certified by either the commission for the blind and visually handicapped in
the state office of children and family services as physically disabled by
blindness or by the state education department as otherwise physically or
mentally disabled and, in any event, qualified to perform satisfactorily the
duties of any such position. At least three hundred of such positions shall be
filled by persons who have been certified as physically disabled. If no
qualified physically disabled persons have applied for such positions, the
commissioner of citywide administrative services may determine to fill those
unfilled positions with qualified mentally disabled persons.
   (c)   The commissioner of citywide administrative services shall issue
procedures for approval of appointments of physically or mentally disabled
persons to such non-competitive positions as are established pursuant to this
rule.
3.2.11. Service Outside the City of New York.
The commissioner of citywide administrative services may except from
competitive examination any qualified person who is to render services in a
locality outside the city and who is a resident of such locality, where
competitive examination is not practicable. No such person shall be eligible
for transfer or assignment to work within the city.
SECTION III – THE LABOR CLASS
3.3.1. Definition; Classification; Requirements.
   (a)   The labor class shall comprise all unskilled laborers in the
classified service as are not classified in the competitive or non-competitive
class.
   (b)   The commissioner of citywide administrative services shall prescribe
the requirements and tests to be held for positions in the labor class.
3.3.2. Termination.
Upon the termination of an employment in the labor class, the agency head shall
certify to the department of citywide administrative services the reasons
therefor.
SECTION IV – THE COMPETITIVE CLASS
3.4.1. Definition.
The competitive class shall include all positions for which it is practicable
to determine the merit and fitness of applicants by competitive examination and
shall include all positions now existing or hereafter created, of whatever
functions, designations, or compensation, except such positions as are in the
exempt class, the non-competitive class or the labor class.
3.4.2. Application to Otherwise Classify.
An application by an agency to classify in the exempt, non-competitive or labor
class, a position not specifically thus classified by law shall not be
considered unless it is accompanied by a statement setting forth the reasons
why competitive examination is impracticable.
3.4.3. Examination.
The merit and fitness of applicants for positions which are classified in the
competitive class shall be ascertained by such examinations as may be
prescribed by the commissioner of citywide administrative services and as
provided for in these rules.
3.4.4. Jurisdictional Reclassification.
Whenever a position in the exempt, non-competitive or labor class is
reclassified into the competitive class, the permanent incumbent of such
position, if there be any at the time of such reclassification, shall continue
to hold the position with all the rights and status of a competitive employee.
RULE IV - EXAMINATION PROCEDURES, VETERANS PREFERENCE, ELIGIBLE LISTS AND
CERTIFICATION
SECTION I – GENERAL EXAMINATION PROCEDURES
4.1.1. General Provisions; Applicability.
   (a)   The commissioner of citywide administrative services shall conduct
examinations for such positions as may be necessary to anticipate the needs of
the city service.
   (b)   The head of an examining agency shall conduct non-written promotion
examinations for such positions in the agency as may be necessary to anticipate
the needs of the agency.
   (c)   The provisions of this section shall apply to examinations conducted
by the department of citywide administrative services and by examining
agencies.
4.1.2. Scheduling of Examinations.
The department of citywide administrative services shall maintain the general
schedule of all examinations for positions in the city service.
4.1.3. Examining Agency Examination Plans.
Agency examination plans for non-written promotion examinations shall contain
such material as set forth in these rules or provided in the regulations. Such
plans shall be submitted to the commissioner of citywide administrative
services for approval prior to the holding of such examination.
4.1.4. Job Analysis.
   (a)   A job analysis shall be conducted for each examination.
   (b)   Agencies shall assist the department of citywide administrative
services in the preparation of job analyses for examinations conducted by the
department of citywide administrative services.
   (c)   Job analyses conducted by examining agencies for non-written promotion
examinations shall be submitted to the department of citywide administrative
services by the examining agency.
4.1.5. Examination Experts.
The commissioner of citywide administrative services may secure outside expert
assistance in examinations or may approve an agency examination plan providing
for such assistance in such cases as the commissioner of citywide
administrative services deems appropriate and necessary.
4.1.6. Responsibility for Examination.
   (a)   Every examination shall be under the direction of the assistant
commissioner for examinations or designated officer of the examining agency,
who shall consult with agency heads concerning the qualifications for the
position for which an examination is to be held.
   (b)   Such examination shall be free from the influence or participation of
the agency head or subordinates, except those who may be assigned to assist
such assistant commissioner for examinations or designated officer of the
examining agency who shall have the sole direction and control of such
individuals during the period of such assignments.
4.1.7. Test and Weight.
   The tests comprising an examination and the relative weight given to each
shall be fixed prior to each examination by the assistant commissioner for
examinations or in the examining agency's examination plan subject to the
approval of the commissioner of citywide administrative services.
4.1.8. Preparation of Examinations.
   (a)   The assistant commissioner for examinations or designated officer of
the examining agency shall assign examiners for a particular examination.
   (b)   All written questions prepared by such examiner shall be placed in
safe compartments provided by such assistant commissioner for examinations or
designated agency officer. Such questions shall be printed from type or other
process under the immediate supervision of such assistant commissioner for
examinations or designated agency officer or a designated subordinate.
   (c)   The assistant commissioner for examinations or designated agency
officer shall be responsible for the safekeeping of such questions unless
relieved by the commissioner of citywide administrative services or agency
head, as the case may be. So far as practicable, such printing shall be done
immediately prior to the date of the examination.
4.1.9. Announcement.
   (a)   In advance of an examination, the commissioner of citywide
administrative services shall prepare and publish an announcement setting forth
the title of the position, the minimum qualifications required, the tests of
the examination, and such other information as the commissioner of citywide
administrative services may deem necessary.
   (b)   Where an agency is conducting a non-written promotion examination such
announcement shall be included in the agency's examination plan and upon
approval by the commissioner of citywide administrative services the
announcement shall be published by such agency.
4.1.10. Publication.
Such announcement shall be published daily throughout the entire filing period.
Where the announcement does not specify a closing date, a filing period shall
not be closed without at least three days' notice by publication. Such
announcement and list of examinations for which applications are being received
shall be posted conspicuously in the office of the department of citywide
administrative services or of the examining agency, as the case may be. The
provisions of paragraph
4.1.9 of this section relative to the publication of announcements shall not be
applicable where a nomination for promotion is made pursuant to paragraph
5.3.7 of these rules.
4.1.11. Modification.
The commissioner of citywide administrative services may, after the
announcement has been published, subdivide the several tests into subjects or
parts, or approve such action by an examining agency. Notice of such action
must be given at the time such tests are held.
4.1.12. Limitation.
Eligibility may be limited to one sex where the duties of the position involve
the institutional or other custody or care of persons of the same sex, or
visitation, inspection or work of any kind the nature of which constitutes a
bona fide occupational qualification requiring sex selection.
SECTION II – APPLICATIONS AND RECRUITMENT
4.2.1. Application Forms and Completion.
   (a)   The standard application forms for examinations shall be furnished by
the commissioner of citywide administrative services or examining agency
without charge to all persons requesting the same.
   (b)   An applicant shall state upon the prescribed form such information as
is required including the applicant's background, experience and qualification
for the position sought and merit and fitness for the public service.
Applications shall be subscribed by the applicant and shall contain a
declaration that the statements are made subject to the penalties of perjury.
   (c)   The personal history form or other prescribed form provided in
connection with the investigation of an applicant shall be deemed a part of the
application.
4.2.2. Filing Period.
Unless otherwise provided in the announcement of the examination, the
commissioner of citywide administrative services shall fix the period, or shall
approve the period fixed by the examining agency, to be not less than two
weeks, during which applications shall be received. There shall be not less
than ten days between the last day for the receipt of applications as
originally publicly announced and the date of the first test in an examination
unless otherwise provided in the announcement of the examination.
4.2.3. Filing Fees.
Filing fees shall be accepted by the department of citywide administrative
services for all examinations including those conducted by an examining agency.
The amounts of such fees and the terms and conditions for receipt and
acceptance and any waivers shall be set forth in the regulations.
4.2.4. Non-Return of Applications.
All applications shall be dated. An accepted application shall not be returned
to the applicant or the applicant's agent, as the case may be.
4.2.5. Defective Application.
An application found to be defective shall be suspended. Where an application
is found to be incomplete or defective or not accompanied by the proper fee, if
any, such application shall not be accepted unless the defect or omission has
been corrected by the applicant and returned within seven days from the date of
notification to the applicant of the required corrections.
4.2.6. Recruitment.
Recruitment of persons for positions in the city service shall be conducted by
the department of citywide administrative services and by agencies. Recruitment
procedures shall include those set forth in the regulations or otherwise
prescribed by the commissioner of citywide administrative services.
SECTION III – DISQUALIFICATION OF APPLICANTS OR ELIGIBLES
4.3.1. General Provisions.
   (a)   The commissioner of citywide administrative services, upon
investigation of applicants for positions in the civil service or review of
their qualifications, may refuse to examine an applicant or after examination
refuse to certify or refuse to permit the certification of an eligible for
reasons and in the manner prescribed by law or these rules.
   (b)   Investigation of the qualifications and background of an eligible may
be made after appointment and, upon finding facts which, if known prior to
appointment, would have warranted disqualification, or upon a finding of
illegality, irregularity or fraud of a substantial nature in the eligible's
application, examination or appointment, the certification of such eligible may
be revoked by the commissioner of citywide administrative services and the
employment directed to be terminated, provided, however, that no such
certification shall be revoked or appointment terminated more than three years
after it is made, except in the case of fraud.
   (c)   No person shall be disqualified by the commissioner of citywide
administrative services unless such person has been given a written statement
by the commissioner of citywide administrative services of the reasons therefor
and afforded an opportunity to make an explanation and to submit facts in
opposition to such disqualification. An examining agency's determination of
eligibility of candidates for such agency's non-written promotion examination
shall be subject to the provisions of
8.2.2 and
8.2.3 of these rules.
   (d)   Agencies shall assist the department of citywide administrative
services in investigations in the manner prescribed by the commissioner of
citywide administrative services.
4.3.2. General Requirements.
   (a)   An applicant or eligible must possess the established minimum
requirements and qualifications for admission to an examination or for
appointment to a position.
   (b)   Satisfactory character and reputation shall be deemed a part of the
established minimum requirements and qualifications for admission to an
examination or for appointment to a position.
   (c)   A person convicted of petit larceny may in the discretion of the
commissioner of citywide administrative services be examined or certified as a
police officer or firefighter. A person dishonorably discharged from the armed
forces of the United States shall not be examined, certified or appointed as a
police officer or firefighter.
   (d)   Except as provided in subdivisions (e) and (f) hereof, any physical or
mental disability, disease, injury, abnormality, or defect which renders a
person unfit for the performance in a reasonable manner of the duties of the
position the person seeks or the failure to meet the required medical or
physical standards of a position, shall constitute grounds for the
disqualification of such person.
   (e)   In the case of blind or otherwise physically disabled persons as
described in section fifty-five of the civil service law, who do not qualify
under subdivision (d) hereof, due consideration shall be given to such findings
as may be submitted by the state commission for the blind and visually
handicapped or the state education department, as the case may be, and such
persons, if otherwise qualified, may be certified to positions from eligible
lists upon which their names appear either generally or upon limited terms and
conditions, as provided by regulations and procedures adopted by the
commissioner of citywide administrative services.
   (f)   Where a person on an eligible list does not qualify under subdivision
(d) hereof for the position for which the list was established, and where such
list is declared appropriate for a position requiring lesser medical and
physical standards than those required for the original position, such person
shall, upon application during the life of the list, if he or she meets such
lesser standards, be qualified for the latter position and shall be certified
thereto in his or her regular order on such list.
4.3.3. Burden.
The burden of establishing the required qualifications shall be upon the
applicant or eligible.
SECTION IV – ADMINISTRATION AND RATING OF EXAMINATIONS
4.4.1. Applicability.
The provisions of this section shall apply to examinations conducted by the
department of citywide administrative services and by examining agencies.
4.4.2. Admission to Examination; Identification.
A candidate shall not be admitted to an examination or any test thereof whose
application therefor has not been presented and accepted in accordance with the
rules. The name of a candidate who has not been fingerprinted at the time of
examination shall not be placed on the eligible list.
4.4.3. Processing of Examination Papers.
On the day of the examination, the admission cards of the candidates shall be
enclosed in an envelope and sealed. In an examination in which the papers are
rated in whole or in part by examiners, the identity of each candidate shall
remain concealed until the ratings are completed. In an examination in which
all procedures from the rating of tests to the production of the list are
accomplished entirely by machine, the seal may be broken prior to rating solely
to permit verification of mark-sensed application numbers.
4.4.4. Oral Tests.
Oral tests, wherever practicable, shall be recorded by a suitable method to
provide a reviewable record.
4.4.5. Second or Special Examinations.
Except as provided in paragraph
4.4.6 hereof, or as provided in the military law of the State of New York, no
candidate shall be given a second or special competitive test in connection
with an examination held, unless it be shown to the satisfaction of the
commissioner of citywide administrative services or the head of the examining
agency that the candidate's failure to take or complete such test was due to:
   (a)   a manifest error or mistake for which the department of citywide
administrative services or the examining agency is responsible, the nature of
which shall be recorded;
   (b)   compulsory attendance before a court or other public body or official
having the power to compel attendance;
   (c)   physical disability incurred during the course of and within the scope
of the municipal employment of such candidate where such candidate is an
officer or employee of the city; or
   (d)   absence from the test within a period of one week after the date of
death of a spouse, mother or father, sister or brother, or child of such
candidate where such candidate is an officer or employee of the city. No such
claim shall be granted unless it is submitted in writing to the department of
citywide administrative services or the examining agency either in person or by
certified or registered mail within two months following the date of the
regular examination.
4.4.6. Sabbath Observers.
A candidate claiming to be unable to participate in an examination when
originally scheduled because of the candidate's religious beliefs may seek
consideration as a sabbath observer by requesting a special examination by
submitting to the department of citywide administrative services or examining
agency such request in writing either in person or by certified or registered
mail no later than five days prior to the date of the examination. A written
statement signed by the candidate's religious leader attesting to the
candidate's religious beliefs and certifying that the candidate is a sabbath
observer and that it is contrary to the candidate's tenets to participate in an
examination during the sabbath must accompany said written request.
4.4.7. General Rating Procedures.
Except when otherwise specified by the assistant commissioner for examinations
or by the designated officer of the examining agency, each test, subject or
part of an examination shall be rated by not less than two examiners. They, or
employees designated by the assistant commissioner for examinations in charge
or by the designated officer of the examining agency, shall then affix to each
paper or record a rating expressing the average of their judgment attested by
their respective signatures or initials.
4.4.8. General Rating Standards.
The rating shall be comparative and in accordance with such standards as the
needs of the service may require.
4.4.9. Passing Rating.
   (a)   Unless otherwise specified by resolution or regulation of the
commissioner of citywide administrative services, or by the announcement of
examination, candidates must attain a final examination rating of not less than
seventy percent in an examination in order to be placed upon an eligible list
for certification and appointment.
   (b)   The required passing rating in any test, subject or part of an
examination shall be fixed not later than the time of the holding thereof or as
soon as practicable thereafter by the assistant commissioner for examinations
or by the designated officer of the examining agency.
   (c)   Where it is anticipated that the number of eligibles will not meet the
needs of the service, the commissioner of citywide administrative services or
the head of an examining agency, as the case may be, may, in order to provide
an eligible list to meet the needs of the service, authorize the use of any
type or combination of types of conversion methods or a mathematical formula of
penalties for incorrect answers on the basis of test difficulty and other
relevant factors involved in the rating of any test.
   (d)   The commissioner of citywide administrative services or the head of an
examining agency may prescribe that the passing mark shall be the lowest grade
received among a certain fixed number of candidates graded highest in the
examination or in any subject or part thereof.
   (e)   In the case of an examining agency, any action proposed to be taken
pursuant to subparagraphs (b), (c) or (d) hereof which was not provided for in
the agency plan for examination approved by the commissioner of citywide
administrative services shall be submitted for such approval prior to any such
action.
4.4.10. Finality of Rating.
Except as otherwise provided by paragraph
4.4.13 hereof or by resolution or regulation of the commissioner of citywide
administrative services, no final rating of a test, subject or part of an
examination shall be subject to alteration or re-rating.
4.4.11. Candidates With Same Final Examination Rating.
Whenever two or more candidates in an examination receive the same final
examination ratings, their respective place on the resulting eligible list
shall be determined for administrative reasons only by a sequence of the number
derived from the last five and then the first four positions of their social
security numbers.
4.4.12. Certification and Use of Eligible List Where Paragraph 4.4.11 Has Been
Applied.
   (a)   If the name of any eligible whose place on the eligible list has been
determined in accordance with the procedures set forth in paragraph
4.4.11 is included in the certification for appointment, the names of all other
eligibles on the list having the same final examination rating as such eligible
shall likewise be included in such certification.
   (b)   Appointments and promotions then may be made by the selection of any
such eligible whose final examination rating is equal to or higher than the
final examination rating of the third highest standing eligible qualified and
willing to accept appointment or promotion.
4.4.13 Correction of Manifest Error or Mistake.
The commissioner of citywide administrative services, at any time prior to the
establishment or during the existence of an eligible list, may correct any
manifest error or mistake made in connection with an examination, on the
initiative of the commissioner of citywide administrative services or that of
the head of an examining agency, or in the granting of a claim of manifest
error or mistake. Such action shall be taken in accordance with the procedures
set forth in
rule VIII of these rules and may result in a higher or lower rating. The nature
of such manifest error or mistake shall be recorded.
SECTION V – ADDITIONAL CREDIT ON COMPETITIVE EXAMINATIONS FOR VETERANS AND
DISABLED VETERANS
4.5.1. Application for Additional Credit.
   (a)   A veteran or disabled veteran who elects to claim additional credit as
provided in the civil service law, shall so notify the commissioner of citywide
administrative services and establish by appropriate documentary evidence
eligibility for such additional credit.
   (b)   No such claim shall be accepted as approved which has not been filed
prior to the establishment of the eligible list. However, such timely claim
may, prior to appointment, be amended to reflect the disabled or non-disabled
veteran status recognized by the veterans administration at the time the list
was established.
4.5.2. General Procedures.
   (a)   Prior to appointment or promotion, as the case may be, a veteran or
disabled veteran reached for appointment or promotion on an eligible list by
virtue of such additional credits, shall subscribe a statement on a form
provided by the commissioner of citywide administrative services that no
permanent original appointment or permanent promotion to a position in the
civil service of the state or any civil division or city thereof had previously
been obtained as a result of the additional credits prescribed in the civil
service law.
   (b)   The agency head shall at the time of appointment require a person
appointed by virtue of such additional credits to execute an instrument on a
form prescribed by the commissioner of citywide administrative services,
setting forth such person's public employment since January 1, 1951.
4.5.3. Use of Additional Credit.
   (a)   A person who has received a permanent original appointment or
permanent promotion to a position in the civil service of the state or any of
its civil divisions as a result of additional credit shall not thereafter be
entitled to additional credit, either as a veteran or disabled veteran, in any
competitive examination for original appointment or promotion to any position
in the civil service of the state or any civil division thereof.
   (b)   The appointment or promotion of a veteran or disabled veteran as a
result of additional credits shall be void if such veteran or disabled veteran,
prior to such appointment or promotion, had received a permanent original
appointment or permanent promotion to a position in the civil service of the
state or any of its civil divisions as a result of additional credits.
4.5.4. Exhaustion of Credits; Exceptions.
When a veteran or disabled veteran accepts a permanent position from an
eligible list by virtue of such additional credits, such person shall be deemed
to have exhausted those credits unless:
   (a)   prior to the expiration of the probationary term, such veteran or
disabled veteran resigns from the position; or
   (b)   the services of such veteran or disabled veteran are terminated at the
end of or during the probationary term; or
   (c)   at the time of establishment of an eligible list, the position of a
veteran or disabled veteran on such list has not been affected by the addition
of credits; or
   (d)   at the time of appointment from an eligible list, a veteran or
disabled veteran is in the same relative standing among the eligibles who are
willing to accept appointment as if the veteran or disabled veteran had not
been granted additional credits.
4.5.5. Withdrawal of Application; Election to Relinquish.
   (a)   An application for additional credits may be withdrawn by the
applicant in writing at any time prior to the establishment of an eligible list
or during its existence and prior to appointment or promotion therefrom. In
such case, the election shall be irrevocable and the applicant's place on the
eligible list shall be revised accordingly.
   (b)   Where such election is made in connection with certification to a
position for which the list has been declared appropriate other than to the
position for which the examination was held, it shall not affect the
applicant's standing on the list in respect to the latter position.
4.5.6. Roster.
There shall be established in the department of citywide administrative
services a roster of all veterans and disabled veterans appointed or promoted
as a result of the additional credits granted pursuant to the civil service
law.
4.5.7. Disabled Veteran's Records.
All certificates and other documents, memoranda, reports and information
furnished by the United States veterans administration to the department of
citywide administrative services in connection with claims for disabled
veterans' preference shall be deemed confidential unless the commissioner of
citywide administrative services determines that the withholding thereof is
contrary to the public interest.
SECTION VI – ELIGIBLE LISTS
4.6.1. Establishment of Lists.
   (a)   The provisions of this section shall apply to examinations conducted
by the department of citywide administrative services and by examining
agencies.
   (b)   The results of each examination shall be reported by the assistant
commissioner for civil service administration or by the head of the examining
agency, as the case may be, to the commissioner of citywide administrative
services and the names of the candidates passing such examination shall be
listed in the order of their respective final examination ratings. The names of
disabled and non-disabled veterans who have duly established claims to
additional credits shall be reported in the manner prescribed by law.
   (c)   The list thus reported shall be officially established only by order
of the commissioner of citywide administrative services. The date prescribed in
such order shall be the date of such establishment.
4.6.2. Terms and Conditions.
An eligible list may be established subject to the conduct of such medical,
physical, or other appropriate non-competitive qualifying tests, investigations
and conditions as may be deemed appropriate by the commissioner of citywide
administrative services.
4.6.3. Publication of Established Lists.
An established eligible list shall be published as soon as practicable after
establishment. Upon the establishment of an open competitive eligible list
notification thereof shall be published as soon as practicable thereafter
stating the title of the examination, the examination number, the number of
passing candidates, the date of establishment, and such other information as
the commissioner of citywide administrative services shall prescribe.
4.6.4. Notification to Candidates.
Unless otherwise provided for in the notice of examination with respect to a
continuing eligible list, the commissioner of citywide administrative services,
upon the establishment of an eligible list, shall notify each candidate of the
candidate's ratings and, if the candidate has received a passing final
examination rating, of the numerical place on such list. Any candidate rejected
for reasons other than failure to attain a passing final examination rating
shall be advised of such reasons.
4.6.5. Inspection of Examination Papers.
Except as otherwise provided by the commissioner of citywide administrative
services, candidates may personally inspect their examination papers at the
offices of the department of citywide administrative services, or the examining
agency, as the case may be, at specified times in the presence of employees
designated by the commissioner of citywide administrative services or by the
head of the examining agency.
4.6.6. Duration of Eligible Lists.
   (a)   The duration of either an open competitive or promotion eligible list
shall be not less than one nor more than four years from the date of
establishment.
   (b)   Unless otherwise provided, an eligible list which has been in
existence for one year or more shall terminate upon the establishment of an
appropriate subsequent like list for the same title.
   (c)   Where the duration of an eligible list is fixed in the announcement of
examination at less than four years, the commissioner of citywide
administrative services may by resolution prior to the expiration date of such
list extend the duration of such list up to the maximum limitation of four
years, provided that such announcement of examination states that such
extension may be made.
   (d)   The commissioner of citywide administrative services may also by
resolution prior to the expiration date of an eligible list extend the duration
of such list as provided for in section fifty-six of the civil service law, as
amended by section one of chapter four hundred and forty-three of the laws of
nineteen hundred and seventy-six.
SECTION VII – CERTIFICATION OF ELIGIBLE LISTS AND SELECTION THEREFROM
4.7.1. General Provisions.
   (a)   The provisions of this section shall apply to the certification of
eligible lists by the commissioner of citywide administrative services or, in
the case of classes of positions unique to an agency, the certification of
eligible lists for such classes by the agency head.
   (b)   Appointments or promotions shall be made from the established list
most nearly appropriate for the position to be filled, as determined by the
commissioner of citywide administrative services.
   (c)   Appointment or promotion from an established eligible list to a
position in the competitive class shall be made by the selection of one of the
three persons certified by the commissioner of citywide administrative services
or the head of the certifying agency, as the case may be, as standing highest
on such established list who are qualified and willing to accept such
appointment or promotion. Where applicable, such selection shall be made as
provided for in paragraph
4.4.12 of these rules.
   (d)   The rating of each eligible shall be stated in the certification.
   (e)   The agency head may review the examination application and records of
each certified eligible at the office of the department of citywide
administrative services.
4.7.2. Existing Eligible Lists.
   (a)   When an eligible list has been in existence for less than one year and
contains the names of less than three eligibles willing to accept appointment,
and a new list for the same position or group of positions is established, the
names of the eligibles remaining on the old list shall have preference in
certification over the new list until such old list is one year old. During
such period such names shall be certified along with enough names from the new
list to provide a sufficient number of eligibles from which selection may be
made.
   (b)   Where an old list which has been in existence for one year or more is
continued upon the establishment of a new list which contains less than three
names, the commissioner of citywide administrative services may certify or may
authorize the head of the certifying agency to certify the names on the old
list along with enough names from the new list to provide a sufficient number
of eligibles from which selection may be made.
   (c)   Agency and city-wide promotion eligible lists shall not be certified
for an agency until after the promotion unit eligible lists for that agency, if
any, have been exhausted.
4.7.3. Additions to Certification.
   (a)   If there be more than one position to be filled, or if the
commissioner of citywide administrative services or certifying agency head has
reason to anticipate declinations, or where the certification is to be
completed as set forth in this paragraph, the commissioner of citywide
administrative services or certifying agency head shall supplement the
certification for the selection by the addition of the names of those next in
order on the established list. However, selection shall be made singly and in
each case from the three highest names remaining qualified and eligible and
willing to accept appointment or promotion, or from among those eligibles as
provided for in paragraph
4.4.12 of these rules, as the case may be.
   (b)   On notification from an agency head that one or more eligibles have
declined appointment and on receipt by the department of citywide
administrative services from such officer of any such declination in writing,
or of evidence of the failure of any such eligible to respond to a notice
properly sent, such certification shall be completed by the addition of the
name or names of the eligibles next in order of standing on the list.
   (c)   Upon receipt by the head of a certifying agency of a written
declination of appointment by one or more eligibles named in a certification or
of evidence of the failure of any such eligible to respond to a notice properly
sent, such certification shall be completed by the addition of the name or
names of the eligibles next in order of standing on the list.
   (d)   Where objection to the certification of one or more eligibles has been
duly made by an agency head and the commissioner of citywide administrative
services sustains such objection, the certification shall be completed by the
addition of the name or names of the eligibles next in order of standing on the
eligible list.
4.7.4. Limitation on Certifications.
No name shall be certified more than three times to the same agency head for
the same or similar position unless at such officer's request. However, only
those who have been actually entitled to consideration for selection shall be
charged with certification. For appointment to the position of police officer
in the police, transit police, or housing police services, no name certified
three times to one agency head shall be certified to another unless at such
agency head's request.
4.7.5. Duration of Certification.
A certification shall not remain in force and effect for a period longer than
thirty days nor beyond the existence of the eligible list from which
certification was made. Until such certification has been exhausted or
terminated, no new certification shall be made for the same position in the
same agency.
4.7.6. Revocation of Individual Certification or Appointment.
Whenever a person not entitled to certification is certified, such
certification and appointment, if any, shall be revoked by the commissioner of
citywide administrative services.
4.7.7. Ineligibility for Further Certification.
An eligible who has been appointed to a permanent position for which the list
was established or to a similar position in the same or higher grade, shall no
longer be eligible for certification from such list.
4.7.8. Conditional Certification.
   (a)   Upon the initiative of the commissioner of citywide administrative
services or upon request of the agency head, the commissioner of citywide
administrative services may certify eligibles subject to investigation, medical
test or other qualifying test or requirement, where such conditions were not
provided for at the time an eligible list was established. Upon approval by the
commissioner of citywide administrative services, such conditional
certification may be made by the head of a certifying agency.
   (b)   Written notice of such conditional certification pursuant to this
paragraph shall be given to eligibles at the time of appointment or promotion,
as the case may be.
   (c)   Whenever, upon subsequent investigation, medical test or other
qualifying test or requirement, an eligible thus certified is found to be not
qualified, such certification shall be revoked by the commissioner of citywide
administrative services and the employment, if any, of such eligible
terminated, provided, however, that no such certification shall be revoked or
appointment terminated more than three years after it is made, except in the
case of fraud.
4.7.9. Certification by Sex.
The commissioner of citywide administrative services may authorize the
limitation of certification from an eligible list to one sex when the duties of
the position involve institutional or other custody or care of persons of the
same sex, or the visitation, inspection, or work of any kind the nature of
which is a bona fide occupational qualification requiring sex selection.
4.7.10. Selective Certification.
   (a)   Selective certification may be made from an eligible list to fill
similar or related positions which require additional or special qualifications
not tested for specifically in the prescribed requirements or tests of an
examination, in the manner provided in this paragraph.
   (b)   Upon the initiative of the commissioner of citywide administrative
services or at the request of the head of an agency, the commissioner of
citywide administrative services may selectively certify from an eligible list
where the announcement of examination originally contained a specific provision
for such selective certification.
   (c)   With respect to certifying agencies, the agency head may so
selectively certify, where the announcement of examination originally contained
a specific provision for such selective certification, upon approval by the
commissioner of citywide administrative services.
   (d)   Selective certification shall be made only upon due notice to all
affected eligibles on such list.
   (e)   Eligibles on such list who possess the additional or special
qualifications required as evidenced by experience, appropriate licensure,
possession of essential tools, equipment and facilities, or who pass an
appropriate qualifying test shall be qualified for selective certification and
shall be certified to such similar or related positions in the order of
standing on the original list.
   (f)   Where the announcement of examination did not originally contain a
provision for such selective certification, it shall not be made or authorized
until intention to make such certification has been duly advertised in a
designated newspaper and a public hearing thereon held by the commissioner of
citywide administrative services in the same manner as is required for the
adoption or amendment of a rule.
4.7.11. Certification Pools.
Certification pools may be conducted at the discretion of the commissioner of
citywide administrative services for the purpose of filling positions more
expeditiously. Such certification pools shall be conducted pursuant to
appropriate terms and conditions not inconsistent with the civil service law or
these rules.
4.7.12. Continuing Eligible Lists.
   (a)   The commissioner of citywide administrative services may establish
continuing eligible lists for such classes of positions where the needs of the
service require. Such continuing eligible lists shall consist of the names of
candidates successful in tests which may be conducted from time to time and
which shall be so constructed and rated so as to be as nearly equivalent as
possible in coverage and difficulty.
   (b)   The name of any candidate who passes any such test and who is
otherwise qualified shall be placed on such eligible list in the rank
corresponding to the candidate's final rating on such test.
   (c)   The period of eligibility of successful candidates for certification
and appointment from such continuing eligible lists shall be one year following
the date on which such candidates first became eligible for certification.
   (d)   A candidate may take more than one test provided, however, that no
such candidate shall be certified simultaneously with more than one rank on the
continuing eligible list.
SECTION VIII – DECLINATION OF APPOINTMENT
4.8.1. Applicability.
The provisions of this section shall apply to appointments from established
eligible lists certified by the commissioner of citywide administrative
services or by the head of a certifying agency.
4.8.2. Effect of Declination; Failure to Respond; Failure to Report.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, the name of an eligible who has
been certified for employment in and offered an appointment to a position,
whether or not the list was expressly established therefor, shall be withheld
from certification for any position upon the occurrence of one of the
following:
   (a)   declination by the eligible of an offer of appointment to any such
position;
   (b)   failure of the eligible to respond to an offer of appointment within
the period fixed by the agency head, provided that such period is not less than
four days after the date of such offer;
   (c)   failure of the eligible to report for duty after accepting such
position.
4.8.3. Exceptions for Declinations.
   (a)   Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph
4.8.2, declination by an eligible of an offer of appointment to a position,
whether or not the list was expressly established therefor, shall result only
in withholding such eligible's name from certification to a like position if
the declination is for one of the following reasons:
      (1)   temporary inability to accept the position;
      (2)   in the case of original appointment the location in which the
duties are to be performed. However, if the location is within the city of New
York, such declination shall apply to the entire city, and if outside the city
of New York, such declination shall apply to the entire county;
      (3)   in the case of a promotion, where the certification is from a
citywide promotion list and the position offered is in an agency other than the
agency where the eligible is employed;
      (4)   in the case of a promotion, location on the basis of borough or
county in which the duties are to be performed.
   (b)   Where the offer of appointment is to a position other than that for
which the list was expressly established and is declined by an eligible for
that reason, such declination shall result only in withholding such eligible's
name from further certification to any such other like position.
   (c)   Where the eligible declines appointment to a specific position for
which the list has not been expressly established, because of the objectionable
nature of the duties of such position, and the commissioner of citywide
administrative services finds the duties to be of such nature, such eligible's
name shall be withheld only for certification to a like specific position.
However, where the list has been expressly established for such specific
position, such person's name shall be withheld from certification upon
declination of appointment for such reason.
   (d)   If a list established for permanent appointment is certified for
temporary, seasonal or part-time employment, declination of an offer of
appointment shall result only in withholding such eligible's name from
certification for a position of a like duration of employment. However, where
the eligible list has been expressly established for a position of a temporary,
seasonal or part-time duration, declination of appointment to such position
shall result in withholding the eligible's name from further certification.
4.8.4. Effect of Withholding from Certification on Certification to a Like
Position.
A person whose name has been withheld from certification shall not be eligible
for like certification until all eligibles on the eligible list upon which such
person's name appears have been reached for like certification unless such
person submits an explanation satisfactory to the commissioner of citywide
administrative services for the declination or failure to reply or to accept
appointment. Such explanation must be filed in writing with the department of
citywide administrative services at any time prior to the expiration date of
the eligible list.
4.8.5. Conditions for Restoration.
   (a)   The name of an eligible for an original appointment which has been
withheld from certification shall not be restored to such list for
certification, except upon written request therefor by such eligible. No more
than a total of three restorations shall be permitted.
   (b)   The name of an eligible for promotion to a higher position, which has
been withheld from certification shall automatically be restored to the bottom
of such list for certification. No more than a total of three restorations
shall be permitted.
   (c)   The commissioner of citywide administrative services may, if the needs
of the service require, restore names of eligibles covered by this paragraph
4.8.5 to a list without their written request. Such restorations shall not be
included in the total of three restorations permitted.
4.8.6. Declination for Insufficiency of Compensation.
When declination for insufficiency of compensation offered results in the
selection of an eligible lower on the eligible list than the person who thus
declined, the compensation of the person selected shall not be increased within
one year after such selection beyond the amount declined, unless each eligible
originally declining has received or declined appointment or promotion at the
increased amount. However, at the discretion of the commissioner of citywide
administrative services, for reasons to be recorded, this limitation may be
waived.
4.8.7. Different Compensation.
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 4.8.6, upon the written request of
an agency head setting forth the reasons therefor, the commissioner of citywide
administrative services may certify to specified agencies, eligibles having
specified additional qualifications at a rate of compensation above that
offered to other persons on the same eligible list.
RULE V - APPOINTMENTS AND PROMOTIONS
SECTION I – APPOINTMENTS AND PROMOTIONS GENERALLY
5.1.1. Prohibition Against Out-of-Title Work.
No person shall be appointed, promoted or employed under any title not
appropriate to the duties to be performed and, except upon assignment by proper
authority during the continuance of a temporary emergency situation, no person
shall be assigned to perform the duties of any position unless duly appointed,
promoted, transferred or reinstated to such position in accordance with the law
and rules prescribed therefor. No credit shall be granted in a promotion
examination for out- of-title work.
5.1.2. Procedures for Identification and Oath.
   (a)   Upon appointment or promotion an eligible shall be fingerprinted and
shall execute in the presence of the agency head or representative the
prescribed identification form.
   (b)   An eligible shall likewise take and file such oath or affirmation as
may be required by law. Such oath shall not be required from an employee in the
labor class and shall be required only in other cases upon original appointment
or upon a new appointment following an interruption of continuous service and
shall not be required upon promotion, demotion, transfer or other change of
title during the continued service of the employee, or upon the reinstatement
pursuant to law or rules of an employee whose services have been terminated and
whose last executed oath is on file.
   (c)   The duly executed identification form of the eligible or employee,
together with the notice of appointment or promotion, shall be transmitted to
the department of citywide administrative services.
5.1.3. Appointment Subsequent to Qualification.
Whenever a person has been declared qualified after investigation, medical or
other qualifying tests or requirements, and is certified either by the
commissioner of citywide administrative services or the head of a certifying
agency for appointment after such qualification, such person upon appointment
shall execute a supplemental statement, as the commissioner of citywide
administrative services may prescribe, pertaining to such investigation,
medical or other qualifying tests or requirements.
SECTION II – PROBATIONARY TERMS
5.2.1. Probationary Term.
   (a)   Every appointment and promotion to a position in the competitive or
labor class shall be for a probationary period of one year unless otherwise set
forth in the terms and conditions of the certification for appointment or
promotion as determined by the commissioner of citywide administrative
services. Appointees shall be informed of the applicable probationary period.
   (b)   Every original appointment to a position in the non-competitive or
exempt class shall be for a probationary period of six months unless otherwise
set forth in the terms and conditions for appointment as determined by the
commissioner of citywide administrative services. Appointees shall be informed
of the applicable probationary period. However, such probationary period may be
terminated by the commissioner of citywide administrative services or by the
agency head before the end of the probationary period, and the appointment
shall thereupon be deemed revoked. Nothing herein shall be deemed to grant
permanent tenure to any non-competitive or exempt class employee.
5.2.2. Effect of Certain Prior Service and Military Law.
   (a)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in paragraph
5.2.1, if a permanent employee has served in a promotional title and particular
job assignment on a provisional or temporary basis for a continuous period
equal to or greater than the probationary period for that title immediately
prior to a permanent promotion to such title or, as determined by the
commissioner of citywide administrative services, in a title in a similar grade
and in such particular job assignment or similar job assignment in the same
agency, the promotee shall not be required to serve a probationary period upon
such promotion.
   (b)   Subject to the provisions of the military law of the state of New
York, the computation of the probationary period shall be based on the time
during which the employee is on the job in a pay status.
5.2.3. Status of Former Position Upon Promotion.
Upon promotion, the position formerly held by the person promoted shall be held
open for the promotee, and shall not be filled, except on a temporary basis,
pending completion of the probationary term.
5.2.4. Waiver Upon Promotion.
Upon promotion, the agency may waive the requirement of satisfactory completion
of the probationary term at any time during such term.
5.2.5. Leave of Absence During Probationary Term.
Whenever a probationer who has not completed a probationary term has been
granted a leave of absence to accept appointment on a provisional, temporary,
emergency or exceptional basis to another position in the city service or to
accept permanent appointment to a position in another jurisdictional
classification, the period of service in such position or positions may, in the
discretion of the agency head who appointed such person as a probationer, be
counted as satisfactory probationary service in determining the completion of
such probationary term.
5.2.6. Restoration After Separation From Service; Conditions.
A probationer separated from the service for any reason other than fault or
delinquency may be restored by, and at the discretion of, the commissioner of
citywide administrative services to the eligible list from which selected, if
it be in existence, with the same relative standing thereon for general
certification therefrom or for certification to agencies other than the one
from which the probationer was separated provided that:
   (a)   the time during which such person has actually served shall be
deducted from the probationary term if such person be again selected by the
same agency head;
   (b)   if selected by another agency head, such person shall be required to
serve a full probationary term unless such agency head elects to credit such
person with the time theretofore served.
5.2.7. Termination.
   (a)   At the end of the probationary term, the agency head may terminate the
employment of any unsatisfactory probationer by notice to such probationer and
to the commissioner of citywide administrative services.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph
5.2.1, whenever any agency has with the approval of the commissioner of
citywide administrative services established a prescribed formal course of
study or training for all probationary employees in a given title or titles,
the agency head may, at the close of such course of study or training,
terminate the employment of any probationer who fails to complete successfully
such course of study or training, as the case may be.
   (c)   Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs
5.2.1 and
5.2.7(a) the agency head may terminate the employment of any probationer whose
conduct and performance is not satisfactory after the completion of a minimum
period of probationary service and before the completion of the maximum period
of probationary service by notice to the said probationer and to the
commissioner of citywide administrative services. The specified minimum period
of probationary service, unless otherwise set forth in the terms and conditions
of the certification for appointment or promotion as determined by the
commissioner of citywide administrative services, shall be:
      (1)   two months for every appointment to a position in the competitive
or labor class and
      (2)   four months for every promotion to a position in the competitive or
labor class.
5.2.8. Extension of Probationary Period.
   (a)   Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph
5.2.1, upon the written request of the agency head setting forth the reasons
therefor and with the written consent of the probationer, the commissioner of
citywide administrative services may authorize the extension of the
probationary term for one or more additional periods not exceeding in the
aggregate six months; provided, however, that the agency head may terminate the
employment of the probationer at any time during any such additional period or
periods.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs
5.2.1,
5.2.2 and
5.2.8(a), the probationary term is extended by the number of days when the
probationer does not perform the duties of the position, for example: limited
duty status, annual leave, sick leave, leave without pay, or use of
compensatory time earned in a different job title; provided, however, that the
agency head may terminate the employment of the probationer at any time during
any such additional period.
5.2.9. Restoration After Termination.
Where the services of a probationer have been terminated, the commissioner of
citywide administrative services has the discretion to and may restore the name
of such probationer to the eligible list, if it be in existence. Such
probationer's name shall be duly certified to other agency heads or to the same
agency head if the latter so requests.
5.2.10. Continued Employment Pending Appeal.
Whenever a probationer who has been declared not qualified by the commissioner
of citywide administrative services for the position held by the probationer
files an appeal with the commission, upon the written request of the agency
head setting forth the reasons therefor, the probationer's continued employment
may be authorized at the discretion of the commissioner of citywide
administrative services pending final decision of such appeal; provided,
however, that the period of service between such declaration of
disqualification and the disposition of the appeal shall not be counted in
determining the completion of such probationary term.
5.2.11. Reports to Commissioner of Citywide Administrative Services.
The commissioner of citywide administrative services may require an agency head
to report in writing on the quality of the performance of any probationer.
SECTION III – PROMOTIONS
5.3.1. General Provisions.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided, promotion examinations and promotions
shall be governed by the rules relating to original appointments.
   (b)   The provisions of this section shall apply to promotion examinations
conducted by the department of citywide administrative services and to non-
written promotion examinations conducted by examining agencies.
5.3.2. Limitations On Promotion.
   (a)   No promotion shall be made from one position or title to another
position or title unless specifically authorized by the commissioner of
citywide administrative services, nor shall a person be promoted to a position
or title for which there is required an examination involving essential tests
or qualifications different from or higher than those required for the position
or title held by such person unless the person has passed the examination and
is eligible for appointment to such higher position or title.
   (b)   An increase in the salary or other compensation of any person holding
an office or position in the competitive class beyond the limit fixed for the
grade of such position in the classification rules or an advancement from one
rank to a higher rank shall be deemed a promotion except as provided otherwise
in a labor contract, a labor relations order or personnel order and be subject
to the prohibition of this paragraph.
5.3.3. Filling Vacancies by Promotion.
   (a)   Except as provided in paragraph
5.3.5, vacancies in positions in the competitive class shall be filled, so far
as practicable, by promotion from among persons holding competitive class
positions in a lower grade in the agency in which the vacancy exists, provided
that such lower grade positions are in the direct line of promotion, as
determined by the commissioner of citywide administrative services.
   (b)   Where the commissioner of citywide administrative services determines
that it is impracticable or against the public interest to limit eligibility
for promotion to persons holding lower grade positions in the direct line of
promotion, the commissioner of citywide administrative services may extend
eligibility for promotion to persons holding:
      (1)   competitive class positions in lower grades which are determined by
the commissioner of citywide administrative services to be in related or
collateral lines of promotion; or
      (2)   comparable positions in any other unit or units of governmental
service and may prescribe minimum training and experience qualifications for
eligibility for such promotion.
   (c)   The commissioner of citywide administrative services may open
promotion examinations to eligibles, otherwise qualified, in two or more grades
who shall have served for the required period in any or all of such grades to
which such examination is open. The commissioner of citywide administrative
services also may extend eligibility in a promotion examination to persons
holding positions of a corresponding character in the same grade as that of the
position for which the examination is held. Eligibility shall be limited to
persons who meet the requirements prescribed in the announcement of
examination.
   (d)   Agency requests for any extension of eligibility provided for in this
paragraph shall be made in accordance with the regulations of the commissioner
of citywide administrative services.
5.3.4. Promotion Units.
Promotion examinations may be held for such subdivisions of an agency as the
commissioner of citywide administrative services may determine to be an
appropriate promotion unit. Where promotion examinations are held for a
promotion unit in an agency there shall be no certification of agency and
citywide promotion eligible lists until after the promotion unit eligible lists
for that agency have been exhausted.
5.3.5. Filling Vacancies by Open Competitive Examination.
   (a)   Upon the initiative of the commissioner of citywide administrative
services or upon the written request of an agency head stating the reasons
therefor the commissioner of citywide administrative services may determine to
conduct an open competitive examination for filling a vacancy or vacancies
instead of a promotion examination.
   (b)   An agency head may determine that an open competitive examination
should be conducted for filling a vacancy or vacancies in positions within the
agency, instead of a promotion examination, subject to the provisions of this
paragraph.
   (c)   Prior to any determination under paragraph
5.3.5(a) or (b) a determination shall be made by the commissioner of citywide
administrative services:
      (1)   whether there are less than three persons eligible for promotion in
the promotion unit where the vacancy exists or in the agency, if such vacancy
is not in a separate promotion unit; or
      (2)   whether, in consultation with the agency head, an open competitive
and promotion examination should be held simultaneously for vacancies in such
positions.
If an affirmative determination is made under this subparagraph (c), the notice
provisions of this paragraph shall not apply.
   (d)   A notice of intention to conduct such open competitive examination or
a copy of the agency head's request for an open competitive examination, as the
case may be, shall be publicly and conspicuously posted in the offices of both
the agency and the department of citywide administrative services, where such
determination is made by the commissioner of citywide administrative services
under the provisions of
5.3.5(a). The determination or request shall not be acted upon until said
notice has been so posted for a period of not less than fifteen days.
   (e)   A notice of intention to conduct such open competitive examination
shall be publicly and conspicuously posted in the offices of the agency, where
such determination is made by the agency head under the provisions of
5.3.5(b). Said notice shall be so posted for a period of not less than fifteen
days. The agency head's determination and the reasons therefor, in writing,
shall have been sent to the commissioner of citywide administrative services
simultaneously with such posting.
   (f)   Any employee who believes that a promotion examination should be held
for filling such vacancy, may submit to the commissioner of citywide
administrative services and the agency head a request in writing, for a
promotion examination rather than an open competitive examination, stating the
reasons why such employee believes it to be practicable and in the public
interest to fill the vacancy by promotion examination.
   (g)   The commissioner of citywide administrative services shall decide
whether to disapprove an agency determination pursuant to
5.3.5(b) within thirty days of its receipt.
5.3.6. Citywide Lists.
The commissioner of citywide administrative services may establish citywide
promotion lists which shall not be certified to an agency until after the
promotion eligible list for that agency has been exhausted.
5.3.7. Promotion by Non-Competitive Examination.
Whenever there are no more than three persons eligible for examination for
promotion to a vacant competitive class position, or whenever no more than
three persons file applications for examination for promotion to such position,
the agency head may nominate one of such persons and such nominee, upon passing
an examination appropriate to the duties and responsibilities of the position
may be promoted, but no examination shall be required for such promotion where
such nominee has already qualified in an examination appropriate to the duties
and responsibilities of the position.
5.3.8. Factors in Promotion.
Promotion shall be based on merit and fitness as determined by examination.
Seniority, previous training and experience of candidates, and performance
based on performance evaluation may be considered and given due weight as
factors in determining the relative merit and fitness of candidates for
promotion.
5.3.9. Credit for Provisional Service.
No credit in a promotion examination shall be granted to any person for any
time served as a provisional appointee in the position to which promotion is
sought or in any similar position, provided, however, such provisional
appointee by reason of such provisional appointment shall receive credit in the
permanent position from which promotion is sought for such time served in such
provisional appointment.
5.3.10. (Deleted 10/19/81)
5.3.11. (Deleted 10/19/81)
5.3.12. Eligibility to Compete in a Promotion Examination: Preferred List or
Leave of Absence Status.
An employee who has been suspended from a position through no fault of the
employee and whose name is on a preferred list, and any employee on leave of
absence from a position shall be allowed to compete in a promotion examination
for which such employee would otherwise be eligible on the basis of actual
service before suspension or leave of absence.
5.3.13. (Deleted 10/19/81)
5.3.14. Eligibility for Certification from a Promotion List.
Eligibility for certification by the commissioner of citywide administrative
services or head of a certifying agency from a promotion list shall be limited
to permanent employees whose names appear on such list who have successfully
completed their probationary periods in the eligible title from which promotion
is being made.
5.3.15. Eligible List Status of Employees Involuntarily Transferred, Reinstated
From a Preferred List or Transferred to Avoid Layoff.
Whenever a permanent employee is involuntarily transferred from one agency to
another due to a transfer of personnel upon a transfer of functions or whenever
such employee is reinstated from a preferred list to an agency other than the
one from which the employee was separated:
   (a)   If both the examination for the agency to which the employee is being
transferred and the examination for the agency from which the employee was
transferred were not given simultaneously nor are they identical, the employee
shall be entitled, upon written application, to have his or her name
transferred from such agency promotion list upon which it may appear in the
first agency and entered upon a corresponding special promotion list for the
agency to which such employee was reinstated from the preferred list or was
involuntarily transferred. However, such corresponding special promotion list
shall not be certified for promotion to such agency until any existing
corresponding agency and unit promotion list or lists shall have been exhausted
or terminated;
   (b)   If both the examination for the agency to which the employee is being
transferred and the examination for the agency from which the employee was
transferred were given simultaneously and are identical, the said employee
shall be entitled upon written application to have his or her name transferred
from such agency promotion list upon which it may appear and entered upon the
appropriate eligible list in the agency to which such employee was reinstated
from the preferred list or was involuntarily transferred based upon the final
adjusted mark of such employee;
   (c)   If both the examination for the agency to which the employee is being
transferred and the examination for the agency from which the employee was
transferred were given simultaneously and although not identical the
commissioner of citywide administrative services has determined that said
examinations are comparable, the said employee shall be entitled upon written
application to have his or her name transferred from such agency promotion list
upon which it may appear and to have his or her name entered upon the
appropriate eligible list in the agency to which such employee was reinstated
from the preferred list or was involuntarily transferred based upon the final
adjusted mark of such employee.
   (d)   The provisions of this section shall apply to a permanent employee who
is transferred either voluntarily or involuntarily to avoid imminent suspension
or demotion of employees within an agency due to an abolition or reduction of
positions. The determination that suspensions or demotions are imminent shall
be made by the commissioner of citywide administrative services.
   (e)   Where employees in the second agency, in the same title as the
transferred employees provided for in this section, would have been eligible to
participate in a promotion examination given at the same time as the one given
to such transferred employees, but no such promotion examination was given, the
provisions of this section shall not apply to such transferred employees.
5.3.16. Provisions for Promotion in the Correction, Fire, Housing Police,
Police, Rapid Transit Railroad and Transit Police Services.
   (a)   The provisions of paragraph
5.3.14 shall not be applicable in the case of promotion examinations and
promotions in the correction, fire, police, and rapid transit railroad
services.
   (b)   Eligibility to compete in promotion examinations for positions in the
rapid transit railroad service shall be limited to employees, otherwise
qualified, who have served permanently in the eligible title or titles for a
period of not less than one year if the examination is for a position in group
II or for a period of not less than six months if the examination is for a
position in group I, except as otherwise provided by law or rule or fixed in
the notice of examination.
   (c)   In examinations for promotion to positions in the police, fire, rapid
transit railroad, transit police, housing police and correction services, the
method of rating seniority and performance and the terms and conditions of
eligibility for competition and promotion therefor shall be set forth in the
announcement of examination.
SECTION IV – TEMPORARY APPOINTMENTS
5.4.1. Temporary Appointments from Eligible Lists.
   (a)   A temporary appointment for a period not exceeding three months, where
the need therefor is important and urgent, may be made without regard to
existing eligible lists.
   (b)   A temporary appointment for a period exceeding three months but not
exceeding six months may be made by the selection of a person from an
appropriate eligible list, if available, without regard to the relative
standing of such person on such list.
   (c)   Any further temporary appointment beyond such six-month period or any
temporary appointment originally made for a period exceeding six months shall
be made by the selection of an appointee from among those graded highest on an
appropriate eligible list, if available, upon certification thereof by the
commissioner of citywide administrative services to the agency head in the
manner prescribed in the rules for certification and appointment from eligible
lists, provided however, that:
      (1)   such appointee may be withheld from certification at the request of
the agency head for a period of four months or for the duration of such
employment, whichever period is shorter.
      (2)   This limitation, however, shall not apply during the last four
months of the life of such eligible list.
   (d)   The head of a certifying agency shall certify eligible lists for
classes of positions unique to the agency pursuant to the provisions of this
section and shall report thereon as prescribed by the commissioner of citywide
administrative services.
5.4.2. Temporary Appointments Exceeding One Month Duration.
   (a)   Temporary appointment may be made to a position when an employee is on
leave of absence from such position for a period not exceeding the duly
authorized duration of such leave of absence.
   (b)   Temporary appointment may be made for a period not exceeding six
months when the commissioner of citywide administrative services shall find,
upon due inquiry, that the position to which such appointment is proposed will
not continue in existence for a longer period; provided, however, that where
such appointment is made and it subsequently develops that such position will
remain in existence beyond such six-month period such temporary appointment may
be extended with the approval of the commissioner of citywide administrative
services for a further period not to exceed an additional six months.
5.4.3. Successive Temporary Appointments.
Except as otherwise provided, successive temporary appointments pursuant to
paragraphs
5.4.1 or
5.4.2 shall not be made to the same position after the expiration of the
authorized period of the original temporary appointment to such position.
5.4.4. Effect of Temporary Appointment on Promotion Eligibility.
Any employee who is appointed or promoted to a position left temporarily vacant
by the leave of absence of the permanent incumbent thereof (pursuant to rule
5.4.2) after having qualified therefor in the same manner as required for
permanent appointment or promotion thereto, shall have all the rights and
benefits with respect to promotion eligibility of permanent status.
SECTION V – PROVISIONAL APPOINTMENTS
5.5.1. Appointment Requirements.
Whenever there is no appropriate eligible list available for filling a vacancy
in the competitive class, the agency head may nominate a person to the
commissioner of citywide administrative services for non-competitive
examination, and:
   (a)   if such nominee shall be certified by the commissioner of citywide
administrative services as qualified after such non-competitive examination,
the nominee may be appointed provisionally to fill such vacancy until a
selection and appointment can be made after competitive examination;
   (b)   such non-competitive examination may consist of a review and
evaluation of the training, experience and other qualifications of the nominee
without written, oral or other performance tests.
5.5.2. Duration.
A provisional appointment shall not continue for a period in excess of nine
months.
5.5.3. Termination.
A provisional appointment to any position shall be terminated within two months
following the establishment of an appropriate eligible list for filling
vacancies in such positions; provided, however, that:
   (a)   when there is a large number of provisional appointees in any agency
to be replaced by permanent appointees from a newly established eligible list
and the agency head deems that the termination of the employment of all such
provisional appointees within two months following the establishment of such
list would disrupt or impair essential public services, evidence thereof may be
presented to the commissioner of citywide administrative services; and
   (b)   after due inquiry, and upon finding that it is in the best interests
of the public service, the commissioner of citywide administrative services may
thereupon waive the provision of this paragraph requiring the termination of
the employment of provisional appointees within two months following the
establishment of an appropriate eligible list and authorize the termination of
the employment of various numbers of such provisional appointees at prescribed
stated intervals;
   (c)   in no case however shall the employment of such provisional appointee
be continued longer than four months following the establishment of such
eligible list.
5.5.4. Successive Provisional Appointments.
   (a)   Successive provisional appointments shall not be made to the same
position after the expiration of the authorized period of the original
provisional appointment to such position except as provided in this paragraph.
   (b)   Where an examination for a position or group of positions fails to
produce a list adequate to fill all positions then held on a provisional basis,
or where such list is exhausted immediately following its establishment, a new
provisional appointment may be made to any such position remaining unfilled by
permanent appointment. Such new provisional appointment may, in the discretion
of the agency head, be given to a current or former provisional appointee in
such position, except that a current or former provisional appointee who
becomes eligible for permanent appointment to any such position shall, if he/
she is then to be continued in or appointed to any such position be afforded
permanent appointment to such position.
5.5.5. Credit for Provisional Service.
The commissioner of citywide administrative services may, by regulation,
provide a suitable method for the computation of experience credit for
provisional service in open competitive or labor class examinations.
5.5.6. Review of Provisional Appointments.
The commissioner of citywide administrative services shall review any
appointments of persons as provisional employees within sixty days after
appointment to assure compliance with the New York City Charter, the civil
service law and other applicable law and the rules and regulations of the
commissioner of citywide administrative services.
SECTION VI – SEASONAL APPOINTMENTS
5.6.1. Seasonal Appointments Authorized.
All positions in the competitive class, where the nature of the service is such
that it is not continuous throughout the year, but recurs in each successive
calendar year, may be designated by the commissioner of citywide administrative
services as seasonal positions and appointments thereto shall be designated as
seasonal appointments.
5.6.2. Seasonal Re-employment Roster.
   (a)   At the end of an employment season, the names of all persons employed
during such season or major portion thereof shall be entered upon a seasonal
re-employment roster in the order of their first appointment to the title
vacated by them on the expiration of such employment season provided that:
      (1)   the services rendered by such persons shall have been certified as
satisfactory during such season or major portion thereof by the agency head;
and
      (2)   they are otherwise still qualified.
   (b)   The names of the persons appearing on such roster shall be certified
in numerical order during the next succeeding season to an agency head upon
that official's request for seasonal re-employment in the positions previously
held by such persons or similar positions.
   (c)   The qualifications of any such person may be further reviewed by the
commissioner of citywide administrative services with respect to such person's
continuing fitness to perform the required duties and such person may be
disqualified for re-employment in the same manner and for any of the reasons
applicable to disqualification for permanent employment.
5.6.3. Effect Upon Status.
Such seasonal re-employment roster shall in no event be deemed to be a
preferred eligible list and persons employed in seasonal positions shall
acquire no civil service status or right or privilege other than is set forth
in this section.
SECTION VII – EXCEPTIONAL APPOINTMENTS
5.7.1. Temporary Appointments Without Examination in Exceptional Cases.
   (a)   The commissioner of citywide administrative services may authorize a
temporary appointment, without examination, when the person appointed will
render professional, scientific, technical or other expert services:
      (1)   on an occasional basis; or
      (2)   on a full-time or regular part-time basis in a temporary position
established to conduct a special study or project for a period not exceeding
eighteen months.
   (b)   Such appointment may be authorized only in a case where because of the
nature of the services to be rendered and the temporary or occasional character
of such services it would not be practicable to hold an examination of any
kind.
5.7.2. (Deleted 7/8/80)
5.7.3. Records.
All exceptions made pursuant to this section shall be recorded by the
commissioner of citywide administrative services.
5.7.4. Effect Upon Status.
Persons engaged for employment pursuant to this section shall acquire no civil
service status or right or privilege of tenure other than those set forth
herein.
5.7.5. City Services Aides.
Appointments to positions in the title city services aide title code no. 91405
which are paid on a per diem basis entirely from state and/or federal funds and
are designed for the purpose of training individuals for specific skills and/or
providing work opportunity in accordance with the provisions of an agreement
between the City of New York or one of its agencies or authorities and the New
York State or federal agency involved, shall be designated as exceptional
appointments. Such appointments shall be made after authorization by the
commissioner of citywide administrative services and in accordance with the
terms and conditions of the appropriate agreement and for a period not to
exceed eighteen months.
Appointments to positions in the title city services aide title code no. 91405
which are needed to perform or directly supervise the performance of general
work requiring little or no experience or education and which result from a
natural or humankind emergency that has been declared by the mayor, shall also
be designated as exceptional appointments. Such per diem appointments shall be
made after authorization by the commissioner of citywide administrative
services and shall exist for the duration of the emergency, not to exceed a
total of six months.
SECTION VIII – TRAINEE OR AIDE APPOINTMENTS
5.8.1. Trainee or Aide Appointments Authorized; Conditions.
The commissioner of citywide administrative services may require that permanent
appointments to designated positions in the competitive class shall be
conditioned upon the satisfactory completion of a period of service as a
trainee or aide in an appropriate lower, trainee or aide position in such class
and/or, where required, the completion of specified formal courses of training.
   (a)   The period of such trainee or aide service shall be prescribed and set
forth in the announcement of examination.
   (b)   Upon the satisfactory completion of such trainee or aide service and/
or of specified formal courses of training, as the case may be, an appointee
shall attain permanent status in the designated position.
   (c)   Any trainee or aide appointment shall be subject to such probationary
term as is prescribed in the rules.
   (d)   The employment of such trainee or aide may be terminated at the end of
the period of the trainee or aide service, or at any time within such period,
if the trainee's or aide's conduct, capacity or fitness is not satisfactory or
if such person fails to pursue or to continue satisfactorily such formal
courses as may be required, provided, however, that the announcement of
examination shall set forth appropriate information relative to such
termination.
5.8.2. Effect of Service in a Trainee Title Upon Probationary Period in the
Permanent Title.
If, in the opinion of the agency head, an appointee conclusively demonstrates
during service in a trainee title ability and fitness to perform the duties of
the permanent title to which the appointee is thereafter assigned, completion
of service in the trainee title, in the discretion of the agency head, may be
deemed to be satisfactory completion of the probationary period in the
permanent title, provided that the agency head files a written statement to
that effect with the department of citywide administrative services at the time
of such assignment to the permanent title.
RULE VI - PERSONNEL CHANGES
SECTION I – TRANSFERS
6.1.1. General Provisions.
Except as provided in paragraph
6.1.9 of this section, an employee shall not be transferred to a position for
which there is required an examination involving essential tests or
qualifications different from or higher than those required for the position
held by such employee.
6.1.2. Functional Transfers.
Upon the transfer of a function from one agency to another agency, the
permanent employees in the competitive or labor class so transferred shall be
transferred without further examination or qualification and shall retain their
respective civil service classification and status as employees in such new
agency in accordance with the provisions of law governing functional transfers.
6.1.3. General Requirements.
Every transfer, other than a functional transfer, shall require the consent, in
writing, of the proposed transferee and of the respective heads of the agencies
concerned therewith and the approval of the commissioner of citywide
administrative services.
6.1.4. Existing Eligible Lists, Restriction.
A transfer, other than a functional transfer, shall not be approved to a
position for which an adequate appropriate preferred or agency promotion list
exists, except as provided for in paragraph
6.1.5 of this section.
6.1.5. Special Transfer Lists.
Whenever it is determined to the satisfaction of the commissioner of citywide
administrative services that the abolition of a permanent position in the
competitive class is imminent:
   (a)   the head of the agency in which such position exists shall furnish
forthwith to commissioner of citywide administrative services the name, title,
date of original appointment and the salary of the employee expected to be
suspended; and
   (b)   the commissioner of citywide administrative services shall thereupon
establish a special transfer list for such title and shall place the name of
such employee thereon in the order of original appointment as though suspended
in accordance with section eighty of the civil service law; and
   (c)   for a period not exceeding six months prior to the prospective
abolition of such position, an employee whose name appears on such special
transfer list shall be eligible for the filling of vacancies in the same or
similar position before certification is made from any open competitive or
promotion list; and
   (d)   the name of any employee appearing on such special transfer list who
is not so transferred prior to the abolition of such employee's position shall
be placed on an appropriate preferred list pursuant to section eighty-one of
the civil service law.
6.1.6. Eligibility of Probationers for Transfer.
An employee on probation shall be eligible for transfer; provided however,
that:
   (a)   if such transfer is voluntary such employee shall serve the entire
period of probation on the job in a pay status in the new position in the same
manner and subject to the same conditions as required upon such employee's
employment in the position from which transfer is made, and in accordance with
the provisions of paragraph
5.2.1;
   (b)   if such employee is involuntarily transferred from one agency to
another due to a transfer of personnel upon a transfer of function, or if such
employee transfers voluntarily to avoid layoff resulting from a reduction in
force, then, in either of such events, such employee shall receive credit for
the period of time already served on probation.
6.1.7. Assignment During Period of Disability.
An employee who has incurred a disability which prevents the employee from
performing the normal duties of the position may be assigned during the period
of such disability to other appropriate duties for which the employee is deemed
duly qualified as determined by the commissioner of citywide administrative
services.
6.1.8. Transfers: Other Jurisdictions.
Transfers between positions subject to the jurisdiction of the commissioner of
citywide administrative services and positions subject to the jurisdiction of
the state civil service commission, the administrative board of the judicial
conference or any other municipal civil service commission in the state may be
approved by the commissioner of citywide administrative services, provided that
the state civil service commission, the administrative board of the judicial
conference or other municipal civil service commission has adopted reciprocal
rules therefor and approves such transfers.
6.1.9. Transfer and Change of Title.
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph
6.1.1 of this section or any other provision of law, any permanent employee in
the competitive class who meets all of the requirements for a competitive
examination, and is otherwise qualified as determined by the commissioner of
citywide administrative services, shall be eligible for participation in a non-
competitive examination in a different position classification provided,
however, that such employee is holding a position in a similar grade.
SECTION II – REINSTATEMENTS
6.2.1. General Provisions.
   (a)   An employee who has completed a probationary term in a permanent
position in the competitive or labor class, and who has resigned or retired
therefrom may be reinstated with the approval of the commissioner of citywide
administrative services to:
      (1)   the position from which the employee has resigned or retired, if
vacant, or to any similar vacant position in the agency in which the employee
was employed; or
      (2)   to a position in another agency to which the employee would have
been eligible for transfer.
   (b)   Such reinstatement may be made only if the separation from employment
was without fault or delinquency on the employee's part and the head of the
agency to whom the employee has applied for such reinstatement is willing to
reinstate the employee.
6.2.2. General Conditions.
   (a)   Such reinstatement shall be subject to the provisions of this section
and shall be made without further examination except that the employee
reinstated under this section may be subject to such probationary period,
investigation, medical or other qualifying tests or requirements as the
commissioner of citywide administrative services shall determine.
   (b)   The head of the agency wherein such reinstatement occurs may elect to
waive the requirement of satisfactory completion of the probationary term at
any time during such term.
6.2.3. Period of Eligibility for Reinstatement.
   (a)   Such reinstatement must be accomplished within a period of time
equivalent to the time the employee has actually served in the civil service of
New York City, but in no event shall such period for reinstatement be less than
one year nor more than four years from the date of resignation or retirement
provided, however, that:
      (1)   the commissioner of citywide administrative services may fix a
period equal to or twice the period actually served, but in no event less than
one year nor more than four years within which an employee may be reinstated
for designated classes of positions, where the commissioner of citywide
administrative services determines that there is a lack of a sufficient number
of qualified persons available for recruitment; and
      (2)   the commissioner of citywide administrative services shall annually
re- examine the reason for establishing such period for reinstatement and shall
revoke the prior determination upon a finding that there is a sufficient number
of qualified persons available for recruitment.
   (b)   In computing the aforementioned time limitation, any time subsequent
to separation spent in active service in the armed forces of the United States
or of the State of New York resulting in discharge under honorable conditions
and any time spent subsequent to separation in another position in the civil
service of the city shall not be considered.
   (c)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this paragraph, with
respect to members of the uniformed forces of the police and fire departments,
the uniformed force of the New York City transit authority police department,
and the uniformed force of the police department of the New York City housing
authority, such reinstatement must be applied for by the former employee within
a period of one year from the date of resignation or retirement.
6.2.4. Effect on Continuous Service.
Any such reinstatement effected more than one year after such separation shall
not constitute continuous service.
6.2.5. Reinstatement After Separation for Disability.
   (a)   Where an employee has been separated from the service by reason of a
disability resulting from occupational injury or disease as defined in the
workers' compensation law, such employee shall be entitled to a leave of
absence for at least one year unless the disability is of such a nature as to
permanently incapacitate the employee from the performance of the duties of the
position.
   (b)   Such employee may, within one year after the termination of such
disability, make application to the commissioner of citywide administrative
services for a medical examination to be conducted by a medical examiner
selected by the commissioner of citywide administrative services. If, upon such
examination, such examiner shall certify that such person is physically and
mentally fit to perform the duties of the former position, such person shall be
reinstated to it, if vacant, or to a vacancy in a similar or lower position in
the same occupational field or to a vacant position for which such person was
eligible for transfer.
   (c)   If no appropriate vacancy shall exist to which reinstatement may be
made, or if the work load does not warrant the filling of such vacancy, the
name of such person shall be placed upon a preferred list for the person's
former or similar position, and such person shall be eligible for reinstatement
therefrom for a period of four years from the date of medical and physical
qualification. In the event that such person is reinstated to a position in a
lower grade, the person's name shall likewise be placed on a preferred list.
   (d)   This paragraph shall not be deemed to modify or supersede any other
provisions of law applicable to the re-employment of persons retired from the
public service on account of disability.
6.2.6. Reinstatement of Dismissed Employee.
   (a)   An agency under the jurisdiction of the commissioner of citywide
administrative services, upon written application for reinstatement by a person
who was dismissed from a permanent competitive or labor class position in such
agency, which sets forth the reasons for requesting an opportunity of making a
further explanation, may consider such application.
   (b)   If the agency shall determine that such application and explanation
are meritorious, it may, in its discretion and with the approval of the
commissioner of citywide administrative services, reinstate such person;
provided however, that:
      (1)   such person shall be eligible for reinstatement for a period of one
year only from the date of dismissal; and
      (2)   such person shall execute a prescribed waiver, in writing, with
respect to claims for back pay, civil service rights and status for the period
of the dismissal.
6.2.7. Other City Service.
A permanent competitive class employee, separated from a position by
appointment or promotion to another position in the unclassified or classified
service of the city and who has served continuously therein, shall be eligible
for reinstatement to the competitive class position formerly held by the
employee or to another similar position or lower position in the same or
similar occupational group or service.
SECTION III – VOLUNTARY DEMOTIONS
6.3.1. General Provisions.
No permanent competitive class employee shall be demoted unless such employee
consents thereto in writing. The agency head concerned shall transmit to the
commissioner of citywide administrative services such consent together with a
statement of the reasons therefor. This paragraph shall not be applicable to
penalties of demotion resulting from disciplinary proceedings.
6.3.2. Restoration.
A person who has been demoted may, upon written request by the agency head
concerned, be restored to such person's former position or a similar position,
with the approval of the commissioner of citywide administrative services.
SECTION IV – REMOVAL AND OTHER DISCIPLINARY ACTION
6.4.1. Removal Notification to Department of Citywide Administrative Services.
Where a person has been removed from a position for cause, a copy of the
reasons therefor together with a copy of the proceedings thereon shall be
transmitted to the department of citywide administrative services.
6.4.2. Service of Charges and Determination.
   (a)   Where the employee is a resident of the city, a copy of charges
preferred in a disciplinary action pursuant to sections seventy-five and
seventy-six of the civil service law shall be served in person upon the
employee thus charged.
   (b)   Where personal service cannot be made or where the employee is not a
resident of the city, it shall be sufficient for the agency head to serve such
charges by registered mail to the last known address of such person. Where
service is made by registered mail such person shall be allowed an additional
three days in which to answer or otherwise appear.
   (c)   Service by the agency head of written notice of determination to be
reviewed pursuant to sections seventy-five and seventy-six of the civil service
law shall be sufficient if such written notice is delivered personally or by
registered mail to the last known address of such person and when notice is
given by registered mail such person shall be allowed an additional three days
in which to file such appeal.
6.4.3. Absence Without Leave.
   (a)   When an employee is absent without leave and fails to communicate with
the department in which employed in the manner prescribed by that department
for a period of twenty consecutive work days, such absence shall be deemed to
constitute a resignation effective on the date of its commencement unless the
appointing officer, at the discretion of that officer, accepts an explanation
for such unauthorized absence.
   (b)   In the case of an employee covered by the provisions of section
seventy-five of the civil service law such absence shall constitute a cause for
action against such employee under and subject to the provisions of that
section.
SECTION V – ABOLITION OF POSITION, SUSPENSION, DEMOTION, PREFERRED LISTS
6.5.1. Suspension or Demotion.
The suspension or demotion of competitive class employees upon the abolition or
reduction of positions shall be governed by the provisions of section eighty of
the civil service law.
6.5.2. Units for Suspension or Demotion.
   (a)   The commissioner of citywide administrative services may, by rule,
designate as separate units for suspension or demotion under this section, any
institution or any division of any agency.
   (b)   There are hereby designated within the department of health the
following separate units for suspension or demotion:
      (1)   urine testing laboratory of the methadone maintenance treatment
program;
      (2)   Williamsburg methadone maintenance clinic of the methadone
maintenance treatment program;
      (3)   evaluation and control unit of the methadone maintenance treatment
program.
   (c)   There are hereby designated within the department of mental health,
mental retardation and alcoholism services the following separate units for
suspension and demotion:
      (1)   criminal and supreme court mental health program;
      (2)   family court mental health program.
   (d)   There are hereby designated within the department of citywide
administrative services the following separate units for suspension or
demotion:
      (1)   executive offices, which shall include the commissioner's office,
office of the general counsel, office of technology and information services,
office of fleet administration and transportation and office of external
affairs and communications;
      (2)   offices of the chief financial officer and the chief administrative
officer;
      (3)   office of administrative trials and hearings;
      (4)   division of facilities management and construction services;
      (5)   division of municipal supply services;
      (6)   division of real estate services;
      (7)   division of citywide personnel services.
   (e)   There are hereby designated within the department of housing
preservation and development the following units for suspension or demotion:
      (1)   office of property management;
      (2)   office of development;
      (3)   office of rent and housing maintenance;
      (4)   office of central administration.
   (f)   There are hereby designated within the Department of Finance the
following units for suspension or demotion:
      (1)   Department of Finance;
      (2)   Tax Appeals Tribunal.
6.5.3. Preferred Lists; Certification and Reinstatement.
In the event of suspension or demotion, preferred lists and certification and
reinstatement therefrom shall be governed by the provisions of section eighty-
one of the civil service law.
6.5.4. Effect of Failure or Refusal to Accept Reinstatement.
   (a)   The failure or refusal of a person on a preferred list to accept
reinstatement therefrom to the person's former position, or any comparable
position in a comparable salary or salary range for which such list is
certified, shall be deemed to be relinquishment of eligibility for
reinstatement, and such person's name shall thereupon be stricken from such
preferred list.
   (b)   The name of such person may be restored to such preferred list, and
certified to fill such appropriate vacancies as may thereafter occur, only upon
the written request of such person containing a submission of reasons
satisfactory to the commissioner of citywide administrative services for the
previous failure or refusal to accept reinstatement.
6.5.5. Labor Class.
Whenever in any agency a position in the labor class is abolished or made
unnecessary in any manner, or whenever the number of such positions is reduced,
the permanent employee in such position shall be deemed suspended without pay
and such employee's name shall be placed upon a preferred list for
certification to appropriate vacancies for a period of one year from the date
of suspension in the same manner as provided by sections eighty and eighty-one
of the civil service law for the competitive class.
SECTION VI – EDUCATIONAL LEAVE OF ABSENCE UNDER THE MILITARY LAW
6.6.1. Certification.
In the event an employee on an educational leave of absence pursuant to the
military law is on an eligible list and is certified but passed over for
appointment from such a list during the period of absence, such employee shall
not be charged with the certification.
6.6.2. Seniority.
The seniority of an employee on educational leave of absence pursuant to the
military law shall accrue for purpose of suspension pursuant to section eighty
of the civil service law during the period of such absence and the employee may
in the same manner as all regular candidates file for and compete in any
scheduled promotion examination held during the period of absence for which the
employee meets the eligibility requirements, but inability to file or to appear
for the examination at the regularly scheduled time and place because of such
absence shall not be sufficient grounds for granting a special examination.
6.6.3. Probation.
Whenever an employee shall have been granted an educational leave of absence
pursuant to the military law prior to the completion of the probationary term
prescribed by these rules, such probationary term shall not continue to run
during the period of absence, but the employee shall be required to serve the
remainder of such prescribed term upon return to active duty in pay status in
city service before the employment shall be considered permanent.
6.6.4. Performance Rating or Evaluation.
No performance rating or evaluation shall be assignable to an employee on an
educational leave of absence pursuant to the military law unless such employee
shall have served at least three months on active duty in pay status in city
service during a rating or evaluation period as prescribed by the rules or
regulations governing performance ratings or evaluation.
RULE VII - GENERAL PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
SECTION I – MAINTENANCE OF ROSTERS, ADDRESSES AND RECORDS
7.1.1. Roster.
The department of citywide administrative services shall maintain an official
roster of the classified service, setting forth in detail the employment
listing of each employee and each change of status from the time the employee
enters service until separation therefrom.
7.1.2. Address.
   (a)   Each officer or employee in the classified service shall, upon
appointment or promotion, notify the agency head of his or her address. Such
officer or employee shall likewise inform the agency head of any change of
address during the period of employment.
   (b)   A candidate for examination or an eligible on a list shall promptly
notify the department of citywide administrative services and the examining or
certifying agency, as the case may be, of any change of address which occurs
between the time of filing the application and the expiration of the eligible
list upon which such person's name appears.
   (c)   Any communication or service to the last address thus furnished shall
be deemed a valid and sufficient communication of service upon such person.
7.1.3. Records.
Personnel records created and maintained by each agency shall include such
records as prescribed by the commissioner of citywide administrative services
to be maintained by the agency or submitted to the department of citywide
administrative services.
SECTION II – CERTIFICATION OF PAYROLLS
7.2.1. Certification.
Payrolls shall not be certified except upon declaration by the agency
submitting them to the commissioner of citywide administrative services that
the persons named therein are employed in their respective positions in
accordance with law and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. The
payroll of any person whose employment is in contravention of the foregoing
provision shall not be certified by the commissioner of citywide administrative
services.
7.2.2. Notification.
Notification prior to each action or decision of an agency pursuant to Chapter
35 of the Charter which changes the status of an individual employee, a
position or a class of positions shall be provided by the agency to the
commissioner of citywide administrative services.
7.2.3. Additional Employment.
Except as otherwise provided by law, no person receiving remuneration from
employment in a position in the classified service shall be eligible to receive
remuneration for employment in any additional position or positions in the
civil service of the city or in the civil service of any other governmental
agency or jurisdiction unless the agency head or heads concerned shall certify
that such additional employment or employments are not in violation of any law,
rule or regulation and that such additional employment or employments are not
incompatible with the position held by such person.
SECTION III – POSITION CLASSIFICATION AND ALLOCATION
7.3.1. Position Classification.
   (a)   The commissioner of citywide administrative services shall, in
accordance with the law and rules, duly classify and reclassify positions in
the city service and shall prescribe regulations and procedures therefor.
   (b)   Agencies shall participate, in accordance with the provisions of this
paragraph, with the department of citywide administrative services in job
analyses for classification of positions and shall assist in setting the
minimum requirements therefor.
7.3.2. Position Allocation: Existing Titles.
   (a)   Any new or existing positions which are allocated by an agency to a
title of an existing class of positions shall be appropriate to the duties and
responsibilities of such title and conform to the class specifications
therefor.
   (b)   Agency allocations of such positions shall be made in accordance with
these rules and with the standards set forth in the regulations or otherwise
prescribed by the commissioner of citywide administrative services.
7.3.3. Position Allocation: New Class of Positions.
   (a)   If a new position is to be allocated by an agency to a new class of
positions, the agency head shall request of the commissioner of citywide
administrative services, and the commissioner of citywide administrative
services shall furnish to the agency head and the commissioner of finance, a
certificate stating:
      (1)   the appropriate civil service title for the proposed position;
      (2)   the range of salary of comparable civil service positions;
      (3)   a statement of required class specifications and line of promotion,
if any, into which such new position shall be placed.
   (b)   Any such new position shall be created only with the title approved by
the commissioner of citywide administrative services and in accordance with the
rules.
SECTION IV – MANAGEMENT SERVICE [RESERVED]
SECTION V – PERFORMANCE EVALUATION FOR SUB-MANAGERIAL EMPLOYEES
7.5.1. Agency Performance Evaluation Programs.
Each agency shall establish and administer a performance evaluation program for
sub-managerial employees in accordance with these rules or as prescribed by the
commissioner of citywide administrative services in the regulations or
procedures. Such programs shall be subject to approval by the commissioner of
citywide administrative services.
7.5.2. Definition.
The performance evaluations of all sub-managerial employees, other than members
of the uniformed forces of the police, fire, transit police, housing police,
correction services and operating staff of the independent authorities, shall
be based upon evidence of the work actually performed by such employees as
compared with pre-established performance standards.
7.5.3. Use.
Performance evaluations of sub-managerial employees shall be used by agencies
during the probationary period and for promotions, assignments, incentives and
training.
7.5.4. General Administration.
   (a)   Each agency shall establish and maintain an employee service board to
oversee the operation and effectiveness of the agency's sub-managerial
performance evaluation program.
   (b)   Rating criteria in the form of performance standards shall be
developed through a process of job analysis that will include consultation with
employees to be evaluated.
   (c)   Sub-managerial employees shall be rated by supervisors who directly
observe and/or review their work. All such evaluations shall be reviewed by a
superior who is at least one level above that of the evaluator.
   (d)   Final evaluations shall be issued by the agency's employee service
board subject to review by the agency head.
   (e)   Sub-managerial employees shall receive at least one performance
evaluation a year and shall be informed in writing at the beginning of the
evaluation period of the performance standards that are to be used as the basis
for evaluation. All such employees shall be shown their evaluation reports.
7.5.5. Appeals.
   (a)   Each agency shall establish and maintain an appeals board which shall
determine appeals by permanent sub-managerial employees of their performance
evaluations.
   (b)   The determination of the appeals board may be appealed by such
permanent employee to the head of the agency.
   (c)   Procedures for such appeals shall be contained in the sub-managerial
performance evaluation program submitted by the agency to the commissioner of
citywide administrative services.
7.5.6. Sub-Managerial Performance Evaluations for Probationary Employees.
   (a)   Interim evaluations shall be made for sub-managerial probationary
employees at least every three months and a final report shall be made at the
end of the probationary period. Each interim evaluation shall contain a
recommendation that the probationary employee either be retained for an
additional three-month period or terminated from the position.
   (b)   Such probationary employee shall not have the right to appeal a
performance evaluation but any unsatisfactory interim reports and all final
probationary reports shall be reviewed by the agency's employee service board.
7.5.7. Notices.
Each agency shall publicize in a timely fashion any salary increases, other
monetary rewards or assignments which result from sub-managerial performance
evaluations. The names of employees who receive overall ratings above
satisfactory shall also be made public.
SECTION VI – PERSONNEL PROGRAMS FOR EMPLOYEE INCENTIVES AND RECOGNITION,
TRAINING AND SAFETY
7.6.1. Employee Incentives and Recognition.
   (a)   The commissioner of citywide administrative services shall administer
citywide employee incentive and recognition programs.
   (b)   Agency plans and programs for agency employee incentive and
recognition shall be prepared and submitted to the commissioner of citywide
administrative services for approval in accordance with the regulations or as
otherwise prescribed by the commissioner of citywide administrative services.
7.6.2. Employee Training and Development.
Employee training and development programs shall be conducted on a citywide
basis by the department of citywide administrative services and on an
individual agency basis by agencies.
7.6.3. Employee Safety.
Employee safety programs shall be administered on a citywide basis by the
department of citywide administrative services and on an individual agency
basis by agencies.
7.6.4. General Provisions.
   (a)   Standards for the personnel programs described in this section shall
be as prescribed by the commissioner of citywide administrative services.
   (b)   Personnel programs which are of a citywide nature or which are such
that administration by separate agencies would be impracticable and
uneconomical shall be administered by the commissioner of citywide
administrative services.
SECTION VII – EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY
7.7.1. Equal Employment Opportunity.
Equal employment opportunity programs administered by the department of
citywide administrative services and by agencies shall ensure and promote equal
opportunity in employment.
RULE VIII - APPEALS
SECTION I – DEPARTMENT OF CITYWIDE ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES ACTIONS
8.1.1. Procedures for Claim of Manifest Error or Mistake – Examinations.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided by resolution or regulation of the
commissioner of citywide administrative services, whenever a claim of manifest
error or mistake is made, such claim shall be referred to a committee on
manifest errors. This committee shall consist of three qualified persons
designated as members thereof by the commissioner of citywide administrative
services, which committee shall either have as a member or consult with an
expert in the subject matter with which such claim is concerned. A claim of
manifest error or mistake shall open for review the candidate's answers to all
the questions in the examination. Such review may result in a higher or lower
final rating.
   (b)   Such committee shall inquire into the merits of each claim and shall
submit the signed determination of each member as to whether or not there has
been a manifest error or mistake together with such correction or remedy, if
any, as may be recommended.
   (c)   Except as hereafter provided, such claim of manifest error or mistake
must be made in writing by the candidate within one month from the date of
notice to the candidate of the results of such examination, tests, subjects or
parts thereof.
   (d)   Whenever a claim of manifest error or mistake is made in connection
with the rejection of a candidate because the candidate has failed to meet the
preliminary requirements of such examination, such claim must be made in
writing by the candidate within two weeks following the date upon which notice
was transmitted to the candidate of such rejection.
   (e)   Whenever a claim of manifest error or mistake is made by a person on
an eligible list who has been rejected after investigation because such person
has failed to meet the preliminary requirements of such examination, such claim
must be made in writing by the person within two weeks following the date upon
which notice was transmitted to the person of such rejection.
   (f)   Any correction of manifest error or mistake shall be without prejudice
to the status of any person previously appointed from the eligible list
resulting from such examination. However, if, as a result of any correction of
manifest error or mistake, an eligible on a list or any person appointed from
such list is found to have failed the examination, any such eligibility or
appointment shall be cancelled and revoked forthwith, and notice of such action
shall be sent to the eligible or appointee. The right to cancel and revoke for
the reasons set forth herein shall not apply where an appointee has served
satisfactorily for a period of at least one year after appointment to such
position.
SECTION II – AGENCY ACTIONS - APPEALS TO THE COMMISSIONER OF CITYWIDE
ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES
8.2.1. General Provisions.
A person aggrieved by the following agency actions or determinations may submit
an appeal to the commissioner of citywide administrative services:
   (1)   the allocation of an individual position to an existing civil service
title with respect to whether the duties and responsibilities of the individual
position so allocated are in conformance with the duties and responsibilities
of such title;
   (2)   the administration and certification of eligible lists for classes of
positions unique to the agency by a certifying agency;
   (3)   except as otherwise provided in paragraph
8.2.3 of this section, the scheduling and conduct of non-written promotion
examinations by an examining agency.
8.2.2. General Procedures.
   (a)   An appeal to the commissioner of citywide administrative services
pursuant to the provisions of paragraph
8.2.1 shall be made in writing within thirty calendar days of the final agency
action or determination.
   (b)   Where a candidate has been disqualified by an examining agency on the
grounds that the candidate was found to lack any of the established
requirements for admission to the examination, such appeal must be made in
writing within two weeks after the date of notification of such agency action.
8.2.3. Claims of Manifest Error or Mistake.
The procedures set forth in section
8.1.1 of these rules shall apply to claims of manifest error or mistake on non-
written promotion examinations conducted by an examining agency.
SECTION III – CITY PERSONNEL DIRECTOR OR AGENCY ACTIONS-APPEALS TO THE CITY
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION (Deleted 10/30/81)
8.3.1. (Deleted 10/30/81)
8.3.2. (Deleted 10/30/81)
8.3.3. (Deleted 10/30/81)
8.3.4. (Deleted 10/30/81)
RULE IX - AUDITS AND INVESTIGATION
SECTION I – AUDITS
9.1.1. Audit Function.
The commissioner of citywide administrative services shall audit the
performance by agencies of their personnel management functions, and may
reverse or rescind any agency personnel action or decision taken pursuant to an
assignment or delegation of authority under Chapter 35 of the Charter, upon a
finding of abuse, after notification to the agency and an opportunity to be
heard.
9.1.2. General Audit Procedures.
Such audits shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this
section and the regulations of the commissioner of citywide administrative
services.
   (a)   The agency personnel and budget officer or the designated
representative of such officer shall coordinate the agency preparation for
department of citywide administrative services audits and assist the auditors
during the period of the audit.
   (b)   The audit report and recommendations shall be transmitted to the
agency head who, within two weeks of receipt thereof, shall make a response to
the commissioner of citywide administrative services.
9.1.3. Reports.
The commissioner of citywide administrative services shall report to the mayor
on the performance by agencies of their personnel management functions.
SECTION II – INVESTIGATION
9.2.1. Investigation Function.
The commissioner of citywide administrative services shall have the power to
make investigations concerning all matters touching the enforcement and effect
of the provisions of civil service law pursuant to and in the manner provided
by law.
RULE X - CLASSIFICATION OF POSITIONS NOT INCLUDED IN THE CAREER AND SALARY PLAN
OR IN THE NEW YORK CITY HOUSING AUTHORITY CLASSIFICATION PLAN
SECTION I – POSITIONS IN THE EXEMPT CLASS
10.1.1. Number of Positions.
Not more than one appointment shall be made to or under the title of any office
or position in the exempt class unless a different number is specifically
prescribed hereafter.
10.1.2. Classification and Compensation Schedule E.
The titles and number of positions authorized for each title in the exempt
class subject to this rule are set forth in the "classification and
compensation schedules of the classified service," schedule E.
SECTION II – POSITIONS IN THE NON-COMPETITIVE CLASS
10.2.1. Number of Positions.
Unless a different or an unlimited number is specifically prescribed hereafter,
only one appointment may be made to or under the title of any offices or
positions in the non-competitive class listed under this rule.
10.2.2. Classification and Compensation Schedule N.
   (a)   The titles, part numbers, number of positions authorized, and
limitations on tenure, if any, for each title in the non-competitive class
subject to this rule are set forth in the "classification and compensation
schedules of the classified service," schedule N, under their respective
departments, under the caption positions subject to
rule X.
   (b)   The maximum salaries appearing in this schedule are not part of this
rule, but are part of the classification of the classified service of the City
of New York.
SECTION III – POSITIONS IN THE LABOR CLASS
10.3.1. Classification and Compensation Schedule L-10.
   (a)   The titles and grades, if graded, of positions in the class subject to
this rule shall not be deemed to form part of these rules. The titles and
positions subject to this rule are set forth in the "classification and
compensation schedules of the classified service," schedule L-10.
   (b)   No part of this schedule is part of this rule. The schedule is,
however, part of the classification of the classified service of the City of
New York.
SECTION IV – POSITIONS IN THE COMPETITIVE CLASS
10.4.1. Classification and Compensation Schedule C-10.
The services, titles and grades, if graded, of positions in the competitive
class subject to this rule shall not be deemed to form part of these rules. The
titles and positions subject to this rule are set forth in the "classification
and compensation schedules of the classified service," schedule C-10.
RULE XI - CLASSIFICATION AND COMPENSATION OF CAREER AND SALARY PLAN POSITIONS
SECTION I – SALARY GRADES
11.1.1. Career and Salary Plan.
The salary grade for positions which are now or may hereafter be made subject
to the career and salary plan hereinafter provided, is as follows:
 
 
Salary Grade Salary Grade Minimum Salary Grade Maximum
32           13,100               Unlimited
 
SECTION II – CLASSIFICATION OF POSITIONS
11.2.1. Commissioner of Citywide Administrative Services.
The commissioner of citywide administrative services shall, in the manner
provided by law, duly classify and reclassify positions which are now or which
may hereafter be made subject to the classification and compensation plan.
SECTION III – IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CAREER AND SALARY PLAN
11.3.1. Functions and Procedures.
In order to implement the career and salary plan, each position or class of
positions subject thereto shall be classified under a standard title and
allocated to an appropriate salary grade as soon as practicable following the
adoption of this rule, and, upon such position classification and salary grade
allocation, the commissioner of citywide administrative services shall
establish schedules of equivalent titles indicating in each case the former
title of each position and the standard title and salary grade to which such
position is classified and allocated. Such original position classifications
and salary grade allocations shall be made, in the case of each position or
class of positions, on the basis of the duties, responsibilities and
examination qualifications naturally and properly pertaining to the present
title of such position or class of positions, without regard to out-of-title
work performed by any incumbent thereof. Thereafter, the reclassification and
salary grade reallocation of positions shall be made on the basis of the actual
duties and responsibilities thereof and the examination requirements based on
such duties and responsibilities as determined by the department of citywide
administrative services.
SECTION IV – EFFECTIVE DATE OF POSITION CLASSIFICATION AND POSITION
RECLASSIFICATION
11.4.1. Prior to July 1, 1955.
Any position classification or position reclassification made hereunder prior
to July 1, 1955 shall become effective as of July 1, 1954.
SECTION V – CREATION OF NEW POSITIONS
11.5.1. Requirements.
A new position or class of positions shall be established hereunder only under
the title and salary grade determined therefor in accordance with this rule,
the provisions of the New York City Charter and the provisions of the
resolution of the board of estimate adopted July 9, 1954, calendar no. 1,
establishing the pay plan not inconsistent with such Charter.
SECTION VI – RIGHTS AND STATUS OF NEW INCUMBENTS AND ELIGIBLES ON LISTS
11.6.1. Existing Rights and Status.
The rights and status of the permanent incumbent of any position subject to the
career and salary plan, including rights and status of employees provided for
under the provisions of previous resolutions of classification or
reclassification, shall not be adversely affected or impaired by the provisions
of this rule or any position classification, position reclassification, salary
grade allocation, or salary grade reallocation adopted in accordance therewith.
Any permanent employee entitled to an unlimited salary grade prior to the
classification or reclassification of such employee's position pursuant to the
provisions of this rule shall continue to have such right and shall not be
subject to a maximum salary, notwithstanding the fact that the position held by
such employee may be classified or allocated to a salary grade having a
maximum.
11.6.2. Eligible List Status.
The status of any person whose name appears upon an eligible list in existence
on July first, nineteen hundred and fifty-four, or whose name appears on an
eligible list established as a result of an examination in process on such
date, shall not be adversely affected or impaired by the provisions of this
rule or any position classification, position reclassification, salary grade
allocation, or salary grade reallocation adopted in accordance therewith.
SECTION VII – RATES OF COMPENSATION OF POSITIONS NOT COMPENSABLE ON AN ANNUAL
BASIS
11.7.1. Commissioner of Citywide Administrative Services; Procedures.
In order to effectuate the allocation or reallocation of positions paid at
other than a per annum rate, the commissioner of citywide administrative
services shall duly establish, in the manner provided by law, formulae for the
purpose of computing the salaries of such positions on a per annum basis.
SECTION VIII – REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES
11.8.1. Commissioner of Citywide Administrative Services.
The commissioner of citywide administrative services may prescribe such
regulations and procedures as the commissioner of citywide administrative
services may deem necessary or advisable to carry out the provisions of this
rule.
SECTION IX – APPLICABILITY
11.9.1. Applicability and Effect of Rule XI.
The provisions of this rule shall be applicable only to positions covered by
the career and salary plan and shall supersede any provisions of other rules
and regulations of the commissioner of citywide administrative services
inconsistent therewith.
SECTION X – POSITIONS IN THE NON-COMPETITIVE CLASS
11.10.1. Number of Positions.
Unless a different or unlimited number is specifically prescribed hereafter,
only one appointment may be made to or under the title of any offices or
positions in the non-competitive class listed under this rule.
11.10.2. Classification and Compensation Schedule N.
   (a)   The titles, part numbers, number of positions authorized, and
limitations on tenure, if any, for each title in the non-competitive class
subject to this rule are set forth in the "classification and compensation
schedules of the classified service," schedule N, under their respective
agencies, under the caption "positions subject to rule XI".
   (b)   The salary grades or maximum salaries appearing in this schedule are
not part of this rule, but are part of the classification of the classified
service of the City of New York.
SECTION XI – POSITIONS IN THE LABOR CLASS
11.11.1. Classification and Compensation Schedule L-11.
   (a)   The titles and salary grades or grades of positions in the labor class
subject to this rule shall not be deemed to form part of these rules. The
titles and positions subject to this rule are set forth in the "classification
and compensation schedules of the classified service," schedule L-11.
   (b)   The salary grades appearing in this schedule are not part of this
rule, but are part of the classification of the classified service of the City
of New York.
SECTION XII – POSITIONS IN THE COMPETITIVE CLASS
11.12.1. Classification and Compensation Schedule C-11.
   (a)   The occupational groups, titles, and salary grades or grades of
positions in the competitive class subject to this rule shall not be deemed to
form part of these rules. The titles and positions subject to this rule are set
forth in the "classification and compensation schedules of the classified
service," schedule C-11.
   (b)   No part of this schedule is part of this rule. The schedule is,
however, part of the classification of the classified service of the City of
New York.
RULE XII - CLASSIFICATION OF POSITIONS IN THE NEW YORK CITY HOUSING AUTHORITY
CLASSIFIED PURSUANT TO AND SUBJECT TO RULE XI PRIOR TO JULY 1, 1958
SECTION I – GENERAL PROVISIONS
12.1.1. Deletion from Rule XI.
Effective July 1, 1958, the positions and classes of positions in the New York
City housing authority heretofore classified under and subject to
rule XI and the resolutions of classification and reclassification adopted
pursuant thereto are hereby deleted from
rule XI.
12.1.2. Coverage Under Rule XII.
All such positions and classes of positions are hereby made subject to the
provisions of
rule XII as herein set forth.
12.1.3. Continuity and Preservation.
All occupational groups, titles, classes of positions, salary grades, tables of
equivalencies, rights, status, and privileges accorded heretofore under
rule XI and the classifications and reclassifications adopted pursuant thereto,
and in respect to classifications and reclassifications hereafter adopted
pursuant to
rule XII are hereby continued undiminished and unimpaired with respect to
incumbents, eligibles, positions, and classes of positions in the New York City
housing authority and shall not be adversely affected by reason of the adoption
of this
rule XII or by reason of the adoption of any classification, reclassification,
allocation or reallocation hereafter adopted.
12.1.4. Applicability of Rule XII.
The provisions of this rule shall be applicable only to positions in the New
York City housing authority subject to
rule XI prior to July 1, 1958 and such other classes of positions as may be
hereafter established in the New York City housing authority pursuant to the
provisions of this rule, any other rule or classification to the contrary
notwithstanding.
SECTION II – POSITIONS IN THE NON-COMPETITIVE CLASS
12.2.1. Number of Positions.
Unless a different or unlimited number is specifically prescribed hereafter,
only one appointment may be made to or under the title of any offices or
positions in the non-competitive class listed under this rule.
12.2.2. Classification and Compensation Schedule N.
   (a)   The titles, part numbers, number of positions authorized, and
limitations on tenure, if any, for each title in the non-competitive class
subject to this rule are set forth in the "classification and compensation
schedules of the classified service," schedule N, under the heading "New York
City housing authority" and under the caption "positions subject to rule XII".
   (b)   The salary grade appearing in this schedule is not part of this rule,
but is part of the classification of the classified service of the City of New
York.
SECTION III – POSITIONS IN THE LABOR CLASS
12.3.1. Classification and Compensation Schedule L-12.
   (a)   The titles and salary grades or grades of positions in the labor class
subject to this rule shall not be deemed to form part of these rules. The
titles and positions subject to this rule are set forth in the "classification
and compensation schedules of the classified service," schedule L-12.
   (b)   No part of this schedule L-12 is part of this rule. The schedule is,
however, part of the classification of the classified service of the City of
New York.
SECTION IV – POSITIONS IN THE COMPETITIVE CLASS
12.4.1. Classification and Compensation Schedule C-12.
   (a)   The titles and salary grades or grades of positions in the competitive
class subject to this rule shall not be deemed to form part of these rules. The
titles and positions subject to this rule are set forth in the "classification
and compensation schedules of the classified service," schedule C-12.
   (b)   No part of this schedule C-12 is part of this rule. The schedule is,
however, part of the classification of the classified service of the City of
New York.
EXPLANATION
The following basic resolution is included as part of the history of this
Department's rules.
Whereas, By virtue of the provisions of Chapter 35 of the revised New York City
Charter as adopted by the electors of The City of New York on November 4, 1975,
certain changes in personnel administration were adopted and the related rule
making power and certain other powers of the New York City Civil Service
Commission were vested in the personnel director of the New York City
Department of Personnel; and
Whereas, By virtue of the provisions of Section 1142 of such revised Charter,
such powers and duties heretofore exercised by the New York City Civil Service
Commission have been exercised by the Personnel Director of the New York City
Department of Personnel in continuation of their exercise by such Commission,
and the provisions of the rules and regulations of such Commission have been
applicable to such Personnel Director insofar as not inconsistent with such
Chapter and Charter; now, therefore, be it
Resolved, Effective January 1, 1977, in order to conform with the provisions of
such Chapter and Charter, all rules of the New York City Civil Service
Commission in force and effect on December 31, 1976 be and the same are hereby
declared to be the rules of the Personnel Director of the New York City
Department of Personnel insofar as such rules are not in conflict with such
Chapter or Charter; and be it further
Resolved, In order to conform with certain of the provisions of such Chapter
and Charter, the rules of the Personnel Director of the New York City
Department of Personnel so declared be and the same are hereby amended at this
time in the manner and form as hereinafter set forth; and be it further
Resolved, Effective January 1, 1977, in order to conform with the provisions of
such Chapter and Charter, all regulations of the New York City Civil Service
Commission in force and effect on December 31, 1976 be and the same are hereby
declared to be the regulations of the Personnel Director of the New York City
Department of Personnel insofar as such regulations are not in conflict with
such Chapter or Charter or the rules are hereby amended, pending a general
revision of such regulations.
