Title 21: Social Services
Chapter 1: Department of Social Services
§ 21-101 Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter the following words shall have the following
meanings:
   a.   "Commissioner" shall mean the commissioner of social services of the
city.
   b.   "Department" shall mean the department of social services of the city.
   c.   "Institution" shall include any charitable corporation, one of the
objects of which is the care of children or the placing of children in
families.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1992/009.
§ 21-102 Powers of commissioner as to destitute children.
The commissioner shall have power to commit, place out, discharge, or transfer
any child who may be in his or her custody, or who may have been placed by him
or her in an institution as a public charge, whenever in his or her judgment it
shall be for the best interests of such child so to do. In placing out such
children, the commissioner may assign one or more of his or her subordinates to
make the necessary investigations. He or she may employ any duly incorporated
charitable institution or society and may reimburse such institution or society
for any expenses, other than salaries, actually incurred in the placing out,
supervision, and transfer, if necessary, of children who are public charges. An
institution to which a child has been committed, as in this section provided,
shall have the authority to place such child in a family, or consent to his or
her adoption.
§ 21-103 Limitations on powers of commissioner as to destitute children.
In placing out, transferring or committing any such child, the commissioner, or
any institution or society employed by the commissioner, when practicable,
shall place out the child with an individual of the same religious faith as the
parents of the child, or transfer or commit the child to an institution
governed by persons of the same religious faith as the parents of the child.
The commissioner shall commit such child only to an institution which the state
board of social welfare has certified as having complied with the rules and
regulations as established by such board for such institutions, pursuant to
section one of article eight of the state constitution. The commissioner may
commit such child to an institution situated without the city only if such
board has also certified that such institution is properly protected against
fire and other dangers.
§ 21-104 Term of commitment of children; discharge.
   a.   The term of commitment of each destitute and neglected child shall be:
      1.   Until such child shall attain the age of sixteen years, or
      2.   Until such child shall be given over in adoption by the institution
to which it shall have been committed to some suitable person, or
      3.   Until such child shall be returned to its parents, relatives, or
guardians, or otherwise discharged.
   b.   The commissioner, may, however, provide care in an institution, agency
boarding home, or family free or boarding home for any destitute minor between
sixteen and eighteen years of age who cannot be properly cared for in his or
her own home, either directly or through authorized agencies, except that
direct placements in agency boarding homes may be made by the commissioner only
if the state board of social welfare shall have authorized him or her to
operate such homes and only if suitable care is not otherwise available through
an authorized agency under the control of persons of the same religious faith
as the child. Such care may be continued after the eighteenth birthday of the
minor and until he or she is discharged from care or becomes twenty-one years
of age.
§ 21-105 Reports and records of institutions.
Each such institution caring for destitute and neglected children shall file
with the commissioner at the end of every three months a list containing both
the names of all the children received or discharged during the month, and the
names and residence of the parents and guardians of such children so far as
known. Each such institution shall keep a book in which it shall cause to be
entered the name and address of each parent, relative or other person visiting
an inmate of such institution who is in whole or in part a charge upon the
city, and such name and address shall be entered upon the occasion of each
visit by any such person.
§ 21-106 Payments to private institutions.
Payments shall not be made by the city to any charitable, eleemosynary or
reformatory institutions wholly or partly under private control, for the care,
support, secular education or maintenance of any destitute, neglected or
delinquent child therein, except upon the certificate of the commissioner that
such child has been received and is retained by such institution pursuant to
the rules and regulations established by the state board of social welfare.
Moneys paid by the city to any such institution for the care, support, secular
education or maintenance of its inmates shall not be expended for any other
purpose. Whenever the commissioner shall decide, after reasonable notice to
such institution and a hearing, that any such child who is received and
retained in such institution is not a proper charge against the public, and
written notice of such decision is given by the commissioner to such
institution, thereupon all right on the part of such institution to receive
compensation from the city for the further retention of the child shall cease.
The commissioner shall file in the office of the department a statement of the
reasons for his or her decision and of the facts upon which it is founded, and
shall furnish a copy to such institution where the child is detained. The
commissioner's decision may be reviewed on certiorari by the supreme court. No
money shall be paid out of any appropriation to any charitable, eleemosynary or
reformatory institution which shall deny or limit admission to any destitute,
neglected or delinquent children duly committed by the commissioner or a court
of appropriate jurisdiction, because of the race, color or religion of such
children, provided, however, that no institution of a particular religious
faith shall be required to accept children adhering to a religious faith other
than its own. The commission on foster care of children shall have the power
and continuing duty to investigate and determine, upon complaint made and shall
have the power on its own initiative to investigate and determine whether any
institution is practicing discrimination in violation of the provisions of the
preceding paragraph. The commission may direct that such investigation shall be
conducted by one or more of its members or by its secretary or assistant
secretary. Whenever in the judgment of the commission, such investigation
discloses that there is reason to believe that an institution is practicing
discrimination, the commission shall cause a hearing to be held before the
commission or before two or more of its members, as it may direct, upon
reasonable notice to such institution. The commission shall dismiss the
proceedings if it finds upon the basis of such hearing, that such institution
is not practicing discrimination. In the event the commission shall find on the
basis of such hearing, that such institution is practicing discrimination, it
shall certify to the commissioner its findings of fact, together with its
determination of the period of time, not to exceed one year, within which the
institution shall be permitted to amend its practices and comply with said
provisions. The commissioner shall thereupon serve notice of such certification
on such institution. All right on the part of such institution to receive
moneys from the city shall cease upon the date specified in said certification
unless, prior to the expiration thereof, such institution shall have submitted
to the commission proof that it has ceased to engage in said violations and the
commission shall have found and certified to the commissioner that said
institution has complied with said provisions. The institution shall not be
deprived of payments for services rendered prior to the date specified in the
certification. The determination of the commission that an institution is
practicing discrimination, or having been ordered to cease said discrimination
has failed to cease, may be reviewed by the supreme court, which may, for good
cause shown, during the pendency of such review, stay the termination of the
right of such institution to receive moneys from the city. The commission, or
any of its members authorized by it to conduct a hearing, may, at any such
hearing, compel the attendance of witnesses, administer oaths, take the
testimony of any person under oath and require the production of any evidence
relating to the matter in question at the hearing. The department and the
corporation counsel are authorized upon request by the commission, to make
members of their respective staffs available, upon a temporary basis, to the
commission, to assist it in conducting the investigations and hearings provided
by this section.
§ 21-107 Power of commissioner as to removal of destitute persons.
The commissioner shall have power to pay for the cost of the removal or
transportation of any person who may come under the commissioner's charge
whenever in his or her judgment the city will thereby be relieved from an
unnecessary or improper charge.
§ 21-108 Support of poor persons by relatives.
   a.   The spouse or parent of a recipient of public assistance or care or of
a person liable to become in need thereof shall, if of sufficient ability, be
responsible for the support of such person, provided that a parent shall be
responsible only for the support of his or her minor child. Step-parents shall
in a like manner be responsible for the support of minor step-children.
   b.   If a sufficiently able relative of a poor person fails to support him
or her, as in this section provided, and such person is being cared for or is
about to be cared for by the commissioner, such commissioner may apply to the
family court for an order to compel him or her to pay the reasonable charge
determined by such commissioner for the care of such relative during his or her
stay in the public or private institution, or home where the commissioner has
placed him or her. The proceedings to be taken to make such order and to
enforce the same shall be in the name of and conducted by the commissioner. The
determination of such commissioner as to the reasonableness of such charges may
at any time be reviewed in the family court.
   c.   Evidence that the poor person mentioned in this section is without
adequate means of support shall be presumptive proof of the possibility of his
or her becoming a public charge. The relative against whom proceedings are
begun for the support of a poor person shall be taken to be of sufficient
ability to contribute to the support, unless the contrary shall affirmatively
appear to the satisfaction of the court or a judge or justice thereof.
   d.   Instead of bringing legal proceedings as in this section specified, the
commissioner can directly enter into an agreement with a relative for the
payment of the charges determined by such commissioner to be the reasonable
charge for the care of the person maintained or about to be maintained by such
commissioner as a public charge.
§ 21-109 Recovery from recipient who has property or other means.
   a.   If it shall at any time be ascertained that any person, who has
received support or care or treatment from the city through the commissioner,
has real or personal property or other means of enabling him or her to
reimburse the city, an action may be maintained in a court of competent
jurisdiction, by such commissioner, against such person or his or her estate to
recover such sums of money as may have been expended by the city through such
commissioner in the support or care or treatment of such person during the
period of ten years next preceding such discovery or the death of such person.
   b.   Instead of bringing the legal proceedings as in this section specified,
such commissioner may determine the reasonable value of such support or care or
treatment, and enter into an agreement for its payment.
§ 21-110 Potter's field.
The commissioner shall have charge of the Potter's Fields, and when the
necessity therefor shall arise, shall have power to lay out additional Potter's
Fields or other public burial places for the poor and strangers and from time
to time enclose and extend the same to make enclosures therein and to build
vaults therein, and to provide all necessary labor and for interments therein.
The Potter's Field on Hart island, however, shall remain under the control of
the department of correction until the earlier of (i) the commissioner laying
out additional Potter's Fields, or (ii) July 1, 2021, at which time Hart island
shall be under the control of the department of parks and recreation. At such
time, burial of deceased paupers at Hart island shall occur under rules and
regulations established by either the joint action of the departments of social
services and parks and recreation, or by action of another agency designated by
the mayor.
(Am. L.L. 2019/210, 12/4/2019, eff. 6/1/2020)
§ 21-110.2 Office of burial services.
   a.   The department shall establish an office to provide support and, where
eligible, financial assistance to survivors, next of kin, legally responsible
relatives, friends or other designated entities of deceased indigent or
unclaimed persons who require information about, and help facilitating the
disposal of, decedent remains through public burial, accessing public burial, a
burial allowance or any similar program. Such office shall provide services
including, without limitation, explaining the availability of public burial
options and assistance in applying for a burial allowance.
(L.L. 2019/213, 12/4/2019, eff. 6/15/2020)
§ 21-111 Soliciting of contributions in public.
   a.   It shall be unlawful for any person, organization, society, association
or corporation or their agents or representatives to solicit money, donations
of money or property, or financial assistance of any kind upon the streets, in
office or business buildings, by house to house canvass, or in public places in
the city, except upon a license issued by the commissioner and an
identification card issued by the chairperson or district chairperson of any
charitable drive and any such regulations as hereinafter provided.
   b.   Application to solicit funds for any cause whatever as provided for in
this section shall be addressed to the commissioner and such application shall
contain the following information:
      1.   Name and purpose of the cause for which permission is sought.
      2.   Names and addresses of the officers and directors of the
organization.
      3.   Time for which permission is sought and localities and places of
solicitation.
      4.   Whether or not any commissions, fees, wages or emoluments are to be
expended in connection with such solicitation.
      5.   Such other information as the commissioner shall require.
   c.   It shall be the duty of the commissioner, before granting permission to
solicit funds or donations as provided for in this section, to compel the
applicant to file with him or her a signed statement of all moneys collected in
the calendar year or the fiscal year of such organization, society, association
or corporation previous to the application, the expenditures connected
therewith, together with the names and addresses of all persons receiving
wages, commissions or emoluments and the amounts so expended.
   d.   The commissioner may establish such regulations as he or she may deem
necessary in effectuating the purposes and objects of this section.
   e.   Licensees operating under this section shall be compelled to label all
collection boxes or containers used in the solicitation of funds either by
appeal in person or the placing of receptacles for the receipt of such public
contributions in stores, factories, shops, offices, theatres, hotels,
restaurants, railway stations, ferry houses, or other public places, with the
name of the organization for which the permit is issued, and in such
conspicuous manner as the commissioner may direct. In addition, where the
solicitation of funds is by appeal in person and where the solicitor receives
no compensation for such solicitation, the box or container shall bear on it
the word "volunteer" in a conspicuous place. Any solicitor receiving
compensation for such solicitation who uses a box or container bearing the word
"volunteer" shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars or to
imprisonment for a period not to exceed thirty days or both.
   f.   Any person or persons who shall violate any of the provisions of this
section, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than
five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety days, or by both.
   g.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any corporation
organized under the religious corporations law; nor to solicitation at the
regular exercises or services of any lodge, benevolent order or fraternity, or
any branch thereof, whenever such solicitation is made at the regularly
appointed meetings and regular places of worship or exercises of such lodge,
order or fraternity.
§ 21-112 Records to be kept by commissioner.
It shall be the duty of the commissioner to keep and preserve a proper record
of:
   1.   All persons who shall come under his or her care or custody, and of the
disposition made of such persons, and
   2.   All persons who are inmates of private institutions who are accepted by
him or her as proper charges upon the city.
§ 21-113 Information to be furnished to commissioner and other agencies.
Transcripts or searches or certified copies of records in any agency of the
city, shall be furnished without charge or fee to the department or any
authority charged with the duty of administering laws relating to the poor or
for the relief of veterans or the families or dependents of veterans in the
city.
§ 21-113.5 Interpretation services.
The Commissioner shall require the immediate provision of interpretation
services for non-English speaking residents in all income maintenance centers
located in New York City, when such non-English speaking residents comprise at
least ten percent of the service population of a particular center.
§ 21-114 Municipal lodging houses.
   a.   The commissioner shall have jurisdiction over, and it shall be his or
her duty to take charge of all municipal lodging houses belonging to or
hereafter acquired or established by the city.
   b.   It shall be the duty of the commissioner or of the superintendent of
any municipal lodging house acting under such commissioner or superintendent,
to provide for any applicants for shelter who, in his or her judgment, may
properly be received, plain and wholesome food and lodging for a night, free of
charge, and also to cause such applicants to be bathed on admission and their
clothing to be steamed and disinfected.
§ 21-115 Establishment of day nurseries.
The commissioner may establish, in his or her discretion, one or more day
nurseries, and may adopt rules and regulations for the free admission thereto
of children under ten years of age.
§ 21-116 Commissaries.
   a.   The commissioner may establish a commissary at camp LaGuardia and a
commissary at the Neponsit home for the aged for the use and benefit of the
residents and employees thereof. All moneys received from the sales in such
commissaries shall be paid over semimonthly to the commissioner of finance
without deduction. The provisions of section
12-114 of the code shall apply to every officer or employee who receives such
money in the performance of his or her duties in such commissaries. The
accounts of the commissaries shall be subject to supervision, examination and
audit by the comptroller and all other powers of the comptroller in accordance
with the provisions of the charter and code.
   b.   All moneys received from the sales in such commissaries shall be kept
in a separate and distinct fund to be known as the commissary fund. Such fund
shall be used for:
      1.   The purchase of all merchandise for resale in such commissaries;
      2.   The purchase of supplies, materials, and equipment for such
commissaries;
      3.   The furnishing of work or labor to be done for such commissaries;
      4.   The salaries of all employees of the Neponsit home for the aged
commissary and the incentive allowance authorized by certificate of the
director of the budget to be paid to the residents of camp LaGuardia who are
permitted to work in the camp LaGuardia commissary; and
      5.   All other costs and expenses of operating such commissaries.
   c.   Any surplus remaining in the commissary fund after deducting all items
described in subdivision b hereof shall be used for the general welfare of the
residents of camp LaGuardia and the Neponsit home for the aged. In the event
such fund at any time exceeds ten thousand dollars, the excess shall be
transferred to the general fund.
   d.   All expenditures for items described in paragraph one of subdivision b
of this section shall be made upon vouchers issued by the commissioner and
subject to audit by the comptroller. All other expenditures described in
subdivision b and subdivision c of this section shall be made by the
commissioner in accordance with schedules approved by the mayor or of the
director of the budget acting in accordance with a delegation of power from the
mayor. All supplies, materials, equipment and merchandise to be furnished and
all work or labor to be done, the cost of which is payable from the commissary
fund, shall be furnished or provided in accordance with the provisions of
chapter thirteen of the charter and chapter one of title thirteen of the code.
   e.   All appointments to positions in the Neponsit home for the aged
commissary shall be made in accordance with the civil service law and rules.
The salaries of employees of such commissary shall be fixed by the mayor. Such
salaries and all pension contributions required to be made by the city on
behalf of such employees shall be paid from the commissary fund.
   f.   Any officer, employee or resident, whose duties in connection with the
commissary fund involve possession of or control over funds, shall execute a
bond to the city for the faithful performance of his or her duties in such sum
as may be fixed and with sureties to be approved by the comptroller, or shall
in the alternative be included in the coverage of a blanket bond insuring the
city for the faithful performance of his or her duties in such sum as may be
fixed and with sureties to be approved by the comptroller.
§ 21-117 Contracts to make rental payments.
   1.   The commissioner shall have the power to and may, within the amount
appropriated therefor, enter into a contract to make rental payments to the
owner, landlord, lessee, managing agent of, or other person entitled to rent
and receive rental payments for, housing accommodations whenever (a) a
recipient of public assistance and care has neglected or failed to make rental
payment and payment has not otherwise been made, or (b) a housing accommodation
is vacant and the owner, landlord, lessee, managing agent or such other person
agrees in such contract to hold such housing accommodation vacant and to accept
as a new tenant a recipient of public assistance and care designated by the
commissioner, and until such housing accommodation is occupied by and rental
payments are made by such new tenant; provided, however, that no rental
payments shall be made in accordance with this provision if such housing
accommodation remains vacant for more than sixty days.
   2.   The commissioner shall not be deemed to have assumed the duties of a
tenant under lease because he or she has entered into a contract to make rental
payments.
§ 21-118 New York city commission for the foster care of children. [Repealed]
(Repealed L.L. 2023/068, 5/29/2023, eff. 6/28/2023)
§ 21-119 Screening of child care services personnel by persons, corporations or
other entities under contract with the city.
   a.   Each person, corporation, or other entity under contract with the city
to provide child care services shall be responsible for the recruitment of
appropriate personnel; verification of credentials and references; review of
criminal record information; screening of all current and prospective
personnel; and selection and hiring of all personnel necessary to furnish child
care services. Screening shall include, but not be limited to (1)
fingerprinting; (2) review of criminal convictions and pending criminal
actions, provided that the contractor shall not dismiss or permanently deny
employment to current and prospective personnel who are subjects of pending
criminal actions, but may suspend such current personnel or defer employment
decisions on such prospective personnel until disposition of the pending
criminal action; (3) inquiry with the statewide central register of child abuse
and maltreatment and; (4) for prospective personnel, inquiry with the
applicant's three most recent employers. Each such contractor is hereby
authorized and required to have all current and prospective personnel
fingerprinted by an appropriate city agency.
   b.   As a condition of employment and continued employment, the contractor
shall obtain written consent from all current and prospective child care
services personnel for fingerprinting and criminal record review. Denial of
such consent shall be grounds for dismissal or refusal to hire.
   c.   The department shall require appropriate documentation from the
contractor indicating compliance with this section. The requirements of
subdivisions a and b of this section shall be incorporated in contracts for
child care services entered into by the city, and any violation thereof shall
be a material breach of the contract sufficient to cause termination.
   d.   For purposes of this section, "personnel" shall include day care
employees, family day care providers and members of their households, and head
start employees.
§ 21-120 Training in detection and the dissemination of information about child
abuse.
   a.   In addition to any other requirement pursuant to any other law or
regulation, the department shall provide training in the detection and
reporting of child abuse for all appropriate current and prospective day care
and head start personnel.
   b.   The department shall issue and circulate an appropriate publication
containing information with respect to child abuse. Such information shall be
distributed to all providers of child day care services and to the parent or
guardian of, or person legally responsible for, each child receiving day care
services. Such publication shall contain the emergency telephone number to
report suspected child abuse.
   c.   The department shall establish a telephone number to provide assistance
and information with respect to child abuse and shall publicize the telephone
number and require that such number be prominently displayed in all child day
care centers.
§ 21-120.1 Family child care and group family child care.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply:
      1.   "Family child care provider" shall mean an individual who is
registered pursuant to section three hundred ninety of the social services law.
      2.   "Group family child care provider" shall mean an individual who is
licensed pursuant to section three hundred ninety of the social services law.
      3.   "Administration" shall mean the administration for children's
services.
      4.   "Child care provider" or "provider" shall mean a family child care
provider or a group family child care provider.
      5.   "Authorized family child care service" shall mean an individual,
association, corporation, partnership, institution, organization, or other
entity that has been designated by the administration, or other appropriate
agencies of the city and in consultation with the administration, as qualified
to inspect the home of a family child care provider or group family child care
provider seeking eligibility to provide subsidized child care, assist in
bringing such provider into full compliance with all applicable laws,
regulations and rules in order for such family child care provider or group
family child care provider to be designated as eligible to provide subsidized
child care and/or monitor the performance of a child care provider that is
providing subsidized child care.
      6.   "Subsidized child care" shall mean all child care services provided
by a child care provider paid for wholly or partially with public funds, where
payment is made by or pursuant to grants or contracts with a child care
provider or authorized family child care service or by issuance of a child care
certificate to a parent.
      7.   "Child care certificate" shall mean a certificate or voucher that is
issued directly to a parent who may use such certificate or voucher only as
payment for child care services or as a deposit for child care services if such
a deposit is required of other children being cared for by the provider.
      8.   "Parent" shall mean a custodial parent, legal guardian or other
person having legal custody of a child.
   b.   The administration shall perform the tasks and provide the services
described in this subdivision with respect to providers of subsidized child
care provided, however, that such tasks and services may be delegated to an
authorized family child care service to the extent permitted by law:
      1.   monitoring the care provided to each child and ensuring that each
child's individual needs are being met, identifying children in need of further
evaluation and making appropriate referrals for individual or family-related
services;
      2.   inspecting a child care provider's home within thirty days of the
placement of the first child receiving subsidized child care with that child
care provider for the purpose of determining that such child care provider
meets the requirements of section three hundred ninety of the social services
law, the regulations promulgated thereunder, and any plan approved pursuant to
section three hundred ninety of the social services law, and that the child
care provider is capable of providing safe and suitable care to children which
is supportive of their physical, intellectual, emotional and social well-being.
When the inspection is to be conducted by an authorized family child care
service, the child care provider shall furnish to such authorized family child
care service a true copy of the provider's completed application form and all
other supporting documents and related materials in the provider's possession.
However, this paragraph shall not apply to those providers of subsidized child
care who were providing such care prior to the effective date of this section
and received payment for such care exclusively through child care certificates;
      3.   arranging for a visit to a child care provider's home by a parent
prior to the placement of such parent's child receiving subsidized child care
with that child care provider for the purpose of determining that such child
care provider is capable of providing safe and suitable care which is
supportive of that child's physical, intellectual, emotional and social well-
being;
      4.   inspecting the operation of every home where subsidized child care
is provided no less than five times each year, which shall be in addition to
and separate and distinct from any visits performed pursuant to paragraph (3)
of this subdivision or mandated by the United States department of agriculture
pursuant to the child and adult care food program, for the purpose of ensuring
that child care is provided in accordance with the requirements of all
applicable laws, regulations and rules, provided, however, that twenty percent
of those providers of subsidized child care who are providing such child care
on the effective date of this section and receive payment for such child care
exclusively through child care certificates shall be inspected each month
following approval of the provisions of this paragraph by the New York state
office of children and family services, so that each such provider shall be
inspected within five months subsequent to such approval, and all such
providers shall be inspected four additional times during the first year
following such approval;
      5.   inspecting the operation of every home where subsidized child care
is provided no less than two times during the first six months in which a child
care provider is providing subsidized child care and at least one additional
time during the next six months, which shall be in addition to and separate and
distinct from any visits and inspections required by paragraphs (2), (3) and
(4) of this subdivision, except that this paragraph shall not apply to a
provider who is participating in the child and adult care food program of the
United States department of agriculture and those providers of subsidized child
care who were providing such child care prior to the effective date of this
section and received payment for such child care exclusively through child care
certificates;
      6.   in addition to and separate and distinct from those visits and
inspections required by paragraphs (3) and (4) of this subdivision, inspecting
the operation of every home where subsidized child care is provided no less
than two times during the first six months after the provider has had
eligibility to provide subsidized child care restored subsequent to the
effective date of this paragraph or has been adjudicated to have violated any
provision of any applicable law, regulation or rule unless it is determined at
the time the violation is adjudicated that the violation (a) did not adversely
affect public health, (b) did not relate to on-site sanitation, fire hazards or
safety hazards, (c) did not relate to staff qualifications or program
requirements and (d) did not relate to the discipline, supervision or nutrition
of any child in the provider's care. The administration shall also perform such
additional inspections as it determines are necessary for it to establish that
a provider whose eligibility to provide subsidized child care has been restored
is capable of providing safe and suitable care to children which is supportive
of their physical, intellectual, emotional and social well-being and to
establish that any violations of the type described in this paragraph have been
corrected.
      7.   assisting in the collection and review of medical and immunization
information which is required to be maintained for all children for which the
provider is providing subsidized child care and the monitoring of those medical
and immunization requirements;
      8.   providing instruction and training to child care providers, as
needed, in order to comply with all applicable laws, regulations and rules;
      9.   assisting in the establishment and maintenance of all files
necessary for the administration and any city agency acting on behalf of the
state of New York to oversee the activities of the provider and to assist the
provider in complying with all applicable laws, regulations and rules including
the maintenance of attendance records;
      10.   assisting applicants and providers in properly preparing
applications for licensing and registration and for the renewal of a license or
registration;
      11.   assisting every child care provider in creating and maintaining a
file containing fingerprint records of such provider and fingerprint records of
every employee of such child care provider, any volunteer acting on behalf of
such child care provider and any member of the household of such child care
provider who is sixteen years of age and older, and overseeing the activities
of each such provider to assure that fingerprint records are maintained for
each person in a category described herein;
      12.   monitoring the files required to be maintained by every child care
provider containing medical records of such provider and medical records of
every employee of such child care provider, any volunteer acting on behalf of
such child care provider and any member of the household of such child care
provider and overseeing the activities of each such provider to assure that
medical records containing the most up-to-date information are maintained for
each person in a category described herein;
      13.   making determinations as to whether an individual who has submitted
an application to be registered or licensed as a child care provider or a
registered or licensed child care provider will be able to provide family child
care or group family child care in accordance with all applicable laws,
regulations, rules, and any plan approved pursuant to section three hundred
ninety of the social services law and, where appropriate, designating such
provider as eligible to provide subsidized child care. In making such a
determination, the administration shall consider, but is not limited to
considering, the following:
         (i)   that clearance with the State Central Register of Child Abuse
and Maltreatment has been completed for the applicant or child care provider,
every employee of such child care provider, volunteer acting on behalf of such
child care provider and for any person eighteen years of age or older who
resides in the home of such applicant or child care provider;
         (ii)   whether the applicant or child care provider, every employee of
such child care provider, volunteer acting on behalf of such child care
provider or any person residing in the applicant's or child care provider's
household who is sixteen years of age or older has a record of criminal
conviction, to the extent such information is available;
         (iii)   that the applicant or child care provider and every employee
of such child care provider, volunteer acting on behalf of such child care
provider and all other members of the household have had a health examination
and been examined for tuberculosis within the previous twelve months;
         (iv)   that the child care provider maintains a register, or an
approved equivalent, in a form to be provided by the New York state office of
children and family services or provided for such purpose by another city or
state office showing for each child for whom child care is provided:
            (a)   the name and date of birth of such child;
            (b)   the names and addresses of his or her parents, including
designated emergency contact persons and their telephone numbers; and
            (c)   such other information as may be required by the state office
of children and family services or other appropriate agency or office;
         (v)   that the child care provider has received or shall receive not
less than the training required by section three hundred ninety-a of the social
services law and any regulations promulgated pursuant thereto or the plan
approved pursuant to paragraph f of subdivision three of section three hundred
ninety of the social services law where such plan establishes different
training requirements;
         (vi)   that children in child care have received or will receive
instruction, consistent with their age, needs and circumstances as well as the
needs and circumstances of the child care provider, in techniques and
procedures which will enable such children to protect themselves from abuse and
maltreatment; and
         (vii)   that the child care provider has a daily program that meets
all applicable requirements set forth in parts 416 and 417 of title eighteen of
the official compilation of the codes, rules and regulations of the state of
New York, or any superseding regulations;
      14.   providing technical assistance to a child care provider in order to
assure compliance with all applicable laws, regulations and rules and other
services to ensure safe and suitable care to children which is supportive of
their physical, intellectual, emotional and social well-being;
      15.   assisting parents in choosing an appropriate child care provider
from among the child care providers eligible to provide subsidized child care;
      16.   providing detailed written information about the child and adult
care food program operated by or on behalf of the United States department of
agriculture to every provider of subsidized child care who is not enrolled in
such program and to every applicant seeking to become a provider of subsidized
child care at the time such application is submitted; and
      17.   encouraging providers and applicants to enroll in the child and
adult care food program and assisting such persons in enrolling and to offer
child care during times of day or days that enhance the capacity of parents to
seek out and avail themselves of employment and educational opportunities.
   c.   In the event that an authorized family child care service obtains
information that a provider of subsidized child care cannot provide or is not
providing child care in accordance with the requirements of all applicable
laws, rules and regulations, the authorized family child care service shall
immediately provide the administration with such information. If the
administration concludes that safe and suitable care to children which is
supportive of their physical, intellectual, emotional, and social well-being
cannot be or is not being provided, such child care provider shall not be
eligible to provide subsidized child care in such home. The administration
shall not continue to subsidize through any mechanism the child care of
children in such home until such time as the administration has determined that
such child care provider can provide such safe and suitable care.
   d.   1.   Not later than sixty days following the effective date of this
section, the administration shall submit in accordance with section three
hundred ninety of the social services law a plan or all amendments to any
existing plan necessary to make such plan consistent with the provisions of
this section, together with an explanation justifying the need to impose
additional requirements upon providers of subsidized child care and a plan to
monitor compliance with such additional requirements and all applicable laws,
regulations and rules.
      2.   The plan submitted by the administration shall request authority for
the administration to provide the training mandated by section 390-a of the
social services law or the plan or delegate the provision of such training to
an authorized family child care service. The administration shall include in
this request an application for the release of such funds as may be available
for such training within the city of New York. The authority of the
administration to provide training under such a plan shall be contingent upon
granting of the authority and the release of funds from the state.
      3.   The plan submitted by the administration shall also include
provisions imposing upon every provider of subsidized child care the following
requirements:
         (i)   such child care provider's home shall be made available for
inspection by the administration or an authorized family child care service for
the purpose of determining that such child care provider meets the requirements
of section three hundred ninety of the social services law, the regulations
promulgated thereunder and any plan approved pursuant to section three hundred
ninety of the social services law and that the child care provider is capable
of providing safe and suitable care to children which is supportive of their
physical, intellectual, emotional and social well-being. When the inspection is
to be conducted by an authorized family child care service, the child care
provider shall furnish to such authorized family child care service a true copy
of the provider's completed application form and all other supporting documents
and related materials in the provider's possession;
         (ii)   when it is determined that the home of a child care provider
who desires to provide subsidized child care is not in full compliance with all
applicable laws, regulations and rules, the child care provider shall bring
such home into full compliance with all applicable laws, regulations and rules;
         (iii)   a child care provider shall be eligible to provide subsidized
child care only if such provider will:
            (a)   personally provide the child care in the provider's own home;
            (b)   be the only provider of child care in that home; and
            (c)   provide assistant caregivers in a group family child care
home with any and all employment benefits as may be required by state and
federal law, including paying such caregivers at least the minimum wage set
forth in article nineteen of the labor law;
         (iv)   ensure that each caregiver and any assistant caregiver has
received or will receive not less than fifteen hours of training within the
first year of their registration or licensure, and each biennial period
thereafter, which training shall begin prior to or within the first three
months after the placement with such child care provider of the first child
whose child care is subsidized through attending or completing programs that
upon completion provide six hours of training. Such training shall include, but
shall not be limited to, the following topics:
            (a)   principles of early childhood development;
            (b)   nutrition and health needs of infants and children;
            (c)   child care program development;
            (d)   safety and security procedures;
            (e)   business record maintenance and management;
            (f)   child abuse and maltreatment identification and prevention;
            (g)   all laws, regulations and rules pertaining to child care and
child abuse and maltreatment.
   e.   Within sixty days of receipt of written approval of the plan or
amendments to any existing plan submitted pursuant to subdivision d of this
section, the administration shall take all steps necessary to implement such
plan or amended plan and monitor compliance by child care providers and any
authorized family child care service.
   f.   In drafting a plan or amendments to any existing plan as required by
subdivision d of this section, the administration shall include such other
provisions as are necessary to implement the requirements of this section.
   g.   In the event that any portion of the plan or any of the proposed
amendments to an existing plan submitted pursuant to subdivision d of this
section is not approved, that disapproval shall not affect any other provision
of such plan or amendment and each provision shall be implemented and enforced
to the extent approved by the state.
   h.   Nothing in the plan submitted pursuant to subdivision d of this section
is intended to be nor shall it be construed in such a manner as to be
inconsistent with any provision of federal law or any regulation promulgated
thereunder, nor shall be it be construed as affecting any provision of section
three hundred ninety of the social services law and any regulations promulgated
thereunder authorizing any enforcement activity against a child care provider
including, but not limited to, a proceeding to suspend, revoke, limit or
terminate a license or registration to provide child care. If any provision is
so construed by a court of law or if a written determination or other notice is
issued by a state or federal agency or office that there will be a significant
loss of funding as a result of any provision, such provision shall be null and
void.
   i.   Smoking shall not be permitted and no person shall smoke within one
hundred feet of the entrances, exits or outdoor areas of any after-school
program licensed pursuant to this section; provided, however, that the
provisions of this subdivision shall only apply on those days and during those
hours in which such after-school programs are operational; and provided that
the provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to smoking in a residence,
or within the real property boundary lines of such residential real property.
Signs may be posted, pursuant to subdivision three of section thirteen hundred
ninety-nine-p of the public health law, specifying the specific time period
during which smoking shall be prohibited.
(2015 N.Y. Laws Ch. 100, 8/13/2015, eff. 9/12/2015)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2000/031.
§ 21-120.2 Home care services.
Not later than January 1, 1993, pursuant to social services law section 367-n
(3), the commissioner of social services shall submit to the state departments
of social services and health a request for a waiver, in lieu of a delegation
plan, from the requirement of social services law section 367-n(2).
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1992/099.
§ 21-120.3 Temporary task force on child care funding. [Repealed]
(Repealed L.L. 2023/068, 5/29/2023, eff. 6/28/2023)
* § 21-121 [Reserved.] *
* § 21-122 [Reserved.] *
§ 21-123 Temporary commission on childhood and child caring programs.
[Repealed]
(Repealed L.L. 2023/068, 5/29/2023, eff. 6/28/2023)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1990/016.
§ 21-124 Prohibiting the use of Tier I shelters.
   a.   The city shall not establish henceforth any Tier I shelters as defined
in 18 NYCRR § 900.2 through § 900.18. After September 30, 1991, the city of New
York shall not operate any Tier I shelters. b.
      1.   No homeless family shelter shall be established which does not
provide a bathroom, a refrigerator and cooking facilities and an adequate
sleeping area within each unit within the shelter and which otherwise complies
with state and local laws. All Tier II shelter units shall be such that they
may be converted to be used for permanent housing with a minimum of structural
change.
      2.   The following units are exempted or partially exempted from the
provisions of paragraph one of this subdivision: (i) the Tier II units
presently in operation shall be exempt; (ii) the 2,450 units of Tier II shelter
housing currently in the construction pipeline shall be exempt; and (iii) units
in facilities for battered women or substance and alcohol abusers which meet
all state requirements for such programs may provide congregate dining and
bathing arrangements.
      3.   The requirements of this subdivision shall not apply in cases where
the provisions of § 21-121(3) are invoked.
   c.   Until June 30, 1992, notwithstanding any provision of this section, the
mayor may authorize homeless families to be sheltered in any facility approved
by the appropriate state authority for such purpose upon a finding by the
commissioner that the city has more homeless families in need of shelter than
the system can accommodate, for the following reasons:
      (1)   the pattern of length of stay of families entering the system each
month shows that the length of stay is increasing over time;
      (2)   the city has experienced unexpected impediments to the construction
or rehabilitation of permanent or transitional housing units, including, but
not limited to work stoppages, natural disasters, unanticipated site conditions
relating to such matters as soil conditions, contractor delays, availability of
sewers, or the presence of asbestos which requires remedial action;
      (3)   the city has not obtained necessary approval for sites selected for
facilities to shelter homeless families;
      (4)   construction or rehabilitation of permanent or transitional housing
for homeless families has been and continues to be enjoined by court order;
      (5)   an emergency such as a flood, earthquake or fire, or a medical
emergency as certified by the commissioner of health, has rendered existing
shelters unsuitable for use to house homeless families;
      (6)   the number of homeless families requesting emergency housing
exceeds the capacity of the system at any point in time; or
      (7)   any other emergency circumstance. Such finding shall be made in
writing and shall specify the time the commissioner anticipates will be needed
for the city to meet the requirements of subdivisions a and
   b.   Such finding shall be delivered promptly, and, when practicable, prior
to the use of facilities pursuant to this subdivision, to the mayor, the
speaker of the council, any council member in whose district families are to be
sheltered pursuant to this subdivision, and to the families who receive shelter
in facilities not meeting the requirements of subdivisions a and b. Within
fifteen days of having made such finding, and at such other times as the
council may request, the mayor shall report to the council on the plans to meet
the requirements of subdivisions a and b and the progress that has been made in
implementing such plans. The commissioner shall insure that the social service
and medical needs of families sheltered pursuant to this subdivision shall be
met in accordance with state regulations in 18 NYCRR § 900.2 through § 900.18
for Tier II shelters. Notwithstanding any provision of this paragraph, between
September 30, 1991 and June 30, 1992, the shelters located at 282 East 3rd
Street and 151 East 151st Street may be used for families except for homeless
families with children.
   d.   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, on and after July 1,
1992, the commissioner of social services, after consultation with the speaker
of the council, may certify that an emergency exists, pursuant to the criteria
expressed in subdivision c, that requires the use of tier I shelters to meet
legal mandates to provide shelter for homeless persons and, upon transmission
of such certification for publication in the City Record together with a
statement of the reasons therefor, which shall include a statement and
documentation that there is no other alternative form of shelter available that
complies with state and local regulations including invoking the powers under §
21-121(3), may direct the use of such tier I shelters which are consistent with
state and local laws as are necessary to meet the emergency; provided, however,
that the commissioner of social services may not utilize a tier I shelter for
more than forty-five days unless a local law shall be enacted permitting such
use for the shelter.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1990/018 and
L.L. 1995/075.
§ 21-124.1 Homeless diversion teams.
The commissioner shall fully staff "homeless diversion teams" at each income
support center and emergency assistance unit except those that exclusively
service individuals. Such homeless diversion teams shall screen families who
present themselves as being homeless and in need of transitional housing in an
effort to assist those who can to return to former housing situations.
Beginning on October 1, 1995 and on the first day of each succeeding calendar
quarter thereafter, the commissioner shall report to the speaker of the city
council in writing on the homeless diversion teams including, but not limited
to, the following information aggregated on a quarterly and fiscal year
annualized basis;
   a.   the number of clients interviewed;
   b.   the number of clients diverted, how and to where diverted; and
   c.   the number of clients who presented themselves as homeless during the
reporting period subsequent to a diversion and the number of days since such
initial diversion.
§ 21-125 Computer linkages to any emergency assistance unit and assessment
center. [Expired]
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1995/075.
§ 21-126 Provision of services to people living with HIV.
There shall be a division within the New York city department of social
services to provide access to benefits and services, as defined in section
21-128(a)(1), to every person with HIV who requests assistance, and such
division shall ensure the provision of benefits and services to eligible
persons, as defined in section
21-128(a)(4), with HIV.
(Am. L.L. 2025/053, 4/25/2025, eff. 7/24/2025)
§ 21-127 Case management and allowances.
The commissioner shall direct staff of the division established pursuant to
section
21-126 to provide to persons with HIV who satisfy the income eligibility
requirements for medicaid as set forth in section 1396 et. seq. of title 42 of
the United States code: (i) intensive case management with an average ratio
which shall not exceed 1 caseworker or supervisor to 25 family cases, and with
an overall average ratio for all cases which shall not exceed 1 caseworker or
supervisor to 34 cases; and (ii) transportation and nutrition allowances. Such
transportation and nutrition allowances shall be provided to each such person
in an amount not less than the amount per person provided on the effective date
of the local law that added this section. Notwithstanding the requirements of
this section, in the event of a material reduction in the state of New York’s
funding allocation, the council and the mayor shall modify such amount of
allowances pursuant to section 107 or sections 254, 255, and 256 of the charter
of the city of New York.
(Am. L.L. 2025/053, 4/25/2025, eff. 7/24/2025)
§ 21-128 Benefits and services to be provided to persons with HIV.
   a.   Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      1.   Access to benefits and services. The term “access to benefits and
services” means the provision of assistance by staff of the division to a
person with HIV at a single location in order to apply for publicly subsidized
benefits and services, to establish any and all elements of eligibility
including, but not limited to, those elements required to be established for
financial benefits, and to maintain such eligibility and shall include, but not
be limited to, assistance provided at a field office of the department, at the
home of the applicant or recipient, at a hospital where such applicant or
recipient is a patient or at another location, in assembling such documentation
as may be necessary to establish any and all elements of eligibility and to
maintain such eligibility.
      2.   Completed application. The term “completed application” means:
         (a)   the date on the client's receipt indicating that the application
is complete pursuant to paragraph 1 of subdivision c of this section; or
         (b)   where no receipt is provided, the date on which the client has
provided the division with all of the information and documentation necessary
to complete the client's application for a benefit or service; or
         (c)   in the case of a separate determination of eligibility for
medicaid or food stamps, the date on which a person's application for public
assistance was denied or a recipient's public assistance case was closed.
      3.   Division. The term “division” means the division established
pursuant to section
21-126, or its functional or legal equivalent.
      4.   Eligible person. The term “eligible person” means a person who
satisfies the eligibility requirements established pursuant to applicable
local, state, or federal statute, law, regulation, or rule for the benefits and
services set forth in subdivision b of this section or for any other benefits
and services deemed appropriate by the commissioner.
      5.   Immediate needs grant. The term “immediate needs grant” means a pre-
investigation grant provided to a person who appears to be in immediate need.
      6.   Legally mandated time frame. The term “legally mandated time frame”
means the time period within which a benefit or service must be provided to an
eligible applicant under federal, state, or local law, rule, regulation or by
order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
      7.   Medically appropriate transitional and permanent housing. The term
“medically appropriate transitional and permanent housing” means housing which
is suitable for persons with severely compromised immune systems, and if
necessary, accessible to persons with disabilities as defined in section
8-102 . Such housing shall include, but not be limited to, individual
refrigerated food and medicine storage and adequate bathroom facilities which
shall, at a minimum, provide an effective locking mechanism and any other such
measures as are necessary to ensure privacy.
      8.   Non-emergency housing. The term “non-emergency housing” means
housing provided or administered by the division, including but not limited to
programs referred to as scatter site I housing, scatter site II housing, and
congregate housing.
      9.   Person with HIV. The term “person with HIV” means a person who has
been diagnosed by a licensed medical professional as infected with the human
immunodeficiency virus.
      10.   Processing time for applications for benefits or services. The term
“processing time for applications for benefits or services” means the length of
time required to process an application for benefits or services administered
by the division, which shall not be represented in terms of averages, but shall
be reported in terms of categories covering various periods of time as follows:
         (a)   for non-emergency applications for food stamps, medicaid, and
public assistance benefits: 0 to 15 days; 16 to 30 days; 31 to 45 days; 46 to
65 days; 66 to 75 days; and more than 76 days;
         (b)   for immediate needs grants and expedited food stamps: same day:
1 to 5 days; 6 to 10 days; 11 to 17 days; and more than 18 days;
         (c)   for all other non-emergency benefits and services, including but
not limited to exceptions to policy for enhanced rental assistance and
additional allowances: 0 to 15 days; 16 to 30 days; 31 to 45 days; 46 to 75
days; and more than 76 days;
         (d)   for all other benefits and services provided on an emergency
basis, including benefits and services currently referred to as “emergency
CBCFAs”:
            (1)   in reporting the time frame from completed application to
approval or denial: 0 to 2 days; 3-5 days; 6-10 days; 11-15 days; and more than
16 days; and
            (2)   in reporting the time frame from approval to provision of the
benefit: 0-1 days; 2-5 days; 6-10 days; 11-15 days; and more than 16 days; and
         (e)   for applications for non-emergency housing: 0 to 15 days; 16 to
30 days; 31 to 45 days; 46 to 75 days; 76 to 100 days; and more than 100 days.
      11.   Separate determination of eligibility for medicaid or food stamps.
The term “separate determination of eligibility for medicaid or food stamps”
means a determination regarding eligibility for medicaid or food stamps made
either when a person's application for public assistance has been denied or
when a recipient's public assistance case is closed.
   b.   The commissioner shall direct staff of the division to provide access
to benefits and services to every eligible person with HIV who requests
assistance, and shall ensure the provision of benefits and services to eligible
persons with HIV. Any eligible person shall receive only those benefits and
services for which such person qualifies in accordance with the applicable
eligibility standards established pursuant to local, state, or federal statute,
law, regulation, or rule. Such benefits and services shall include, but not be
limited to: medically appropriate transitional and permanent housing; medicaid,
as set forth in section 1396 et. seq. of title 42 of the United States code and
other health-related services; home care and home health services as set forth
in sections 505.21 and 505.23 of title 18 of the official compilation of the
codes, rules and regulations of the state of New York; personal care services
as set forth in section 505.14 of title 18 of the official compilation of the
codes, rules and regulations of the state of New York; homemaker service as set
forth in part 460 of title 18 of the official compilation of the codes, rules
and regulations of the state of New York; food stamps, as set forth in section
2011 et. seq. of title 7 of the United States code; transportation and
nutrition allowances as required by section
21-127; housing subsidies, including, but not limited to, enhanced rental
assistance as set forth in paragraph k of 352.3 of title 18 of the official
compilation of the codes, rules and regulations of the state of New York;
financial benefits; and intensive case management as required by section
21-127. The commissioner shall have the authority to provide access to
additional benefits and services and ensure the provision of such additional
benefits and services whenever deemed appropriate. The requirements with
respect to such access to and eligibility for benefits and services shall not
be more restrictive than those requirements mandated by state or federal
statute, law, regulation, or rule. Within 30 days of the effective date of the
local law that added this section, the commissioner shall establish criteria
pursuant to which an applicant shall be entitled to a home or hospital visit
for the purpose of establishing eligibility and applying for benefits and
services.
   c.   1.   Upon written or oral application to the division for benefits and
services or submission of documents required to establish eligibility for
benefits and services by a person with HIV, such person shall immediately be
provided with a receipt which shall include, but not be limited to, the date, a
description of the information received, and a statement as to whether any
application for such benefits and services is complete or incomplete, and if
incomplete, such receipt shall identify any information or documents needed in
order for the application to be deemed complete.
      2.   Processing of applications for medically appropriate non-emergency
housing.
         (a)   Unless the client shall decline, the division shall provide the
following to every homeless client of the division on the day the client is
determined to be eligible for services as a client of the division:
            (1)   an application for medically appropriate non-emergency
housing; and
            (2)   information regarding financial assistance available to
assist eligible clients in obtaining housing and regarding available housing
options.
         (b)   The division shall ensure that every client receives any
assistance needed to complete the application for medically appropriate non-
emergency housing within 10 business days of the day on which the client is
determined to be eligible for services as a client of the division.
         (c)   Within 90 days of initial placement in emergency housing or of
completion of the physical documentation required from the client for the
application for non-emergency housing, whichever is sooner, the division must
provide every client who is eligible for non-emergency housing a referral to an
available medically appropriate non-emergency housing option, which takes into
consideration the medical, educational and familial needs and social
circumstances of the client, to the extent such option is available.
         (d)   For any client who remains homeless or in emergency housing for
over 45 days after the requirements of subparagraph (c) of this paragraph or
the requirements of this subparagraph have been met, the division shall provide
a referral to another medically appropriate non-emergency housing option, to
the extent such option is available.
      3.   Where no statute, law, regulation, or rule provides a time period
within which a benefit or service shall be provided to an eligible person who
requests such a benefit or service, such benefit or service shall be provided
no later than 20 business days following submission of all information or
documentation required to determine eligibility.
   d.   Where a person with HIV who applies for benefits and services, or
access to benefits and services, indicates that 1 or more minor children reside
with such person or are in such person’s care or custody, such person shall be
given information and program referrals on child care options and custody
planning, including the availability of standby guardianship pursuant to
section 1726 of the surrogate's court procedure act of the state of New York
and referral to legal assistance programs.
   e.   Recertification of eligibility, as required by any state or federal
law, statute, regulation, or rule shall be conducted no more frequently than
mandated by such statute, law, regulation, or rule.
   f.   Eligibility for benefits and services for persons with HIV may not be
terminated except where the recipient is determined to no longer satisfy
eligibility requirements, is deceased, or upon certification by the
commissioner that the recipient cannot be located to verify such recipient’s
continued eligibility for benefits and services. In the latter circumstance,
the division shall conduct a reasonable good faith search for at least 90 days
to locate the recipient, including sending written notice by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the last known address of such recipient,
requiring such recipient to contact the division within 10 days.
   g.   No later than 60 days from the effective date of the local law that
added this section, the commissioner shall prepare a draft policy and
procedures manual for division staff. Such policy and procedures manual shall
include, but not be limited to, strict guidelines on maintaining the
confidentiality of the identity of and information relating to all applicants
and recipients, instructional materials relating to the medical and
psychological needs of persons with HIV, application procedures, eligibility
standards, mandated time periods for the provision of each benefit and service
available to applicants and recipients and advocacy resources available to
persons with HIV. Such list of advocacy resources shall be updated semi-
annually. Within 30 days following the preparation of such draft policy and
procedures manual and prior to the preparation of a final policy and procedures
manual, the commissioner shall distribute such draft policy and procedure
manual to all social service agencies and organizations that contract with the
department to provide HIV-related services and to all others whom the
commissioner deems appropriate, and hold no fewer than 1 noticed public hearing
at a site accessible to individuals with disabilities, at which advocates,
service providers, persons who have tested positive for HIV, and any other
member of the public shall be given an opportunity to comment on such draft
policy and procedures manual. The commissioner shall prepare a final policy and
procedures manual within 30 days after the conclusion of such hearing and shall
thereafter review and where appropriate, revise such policy and procedures
manual on an annual basis. The commissioner shall provide for semi-annual
training, using such policy and procedures manual, for all division staff.
   h.   No later than 60 days from the effective date of the local law that
added this section, the commissioner shall publish a proposed rule establishing
a bill of rights for persons with HIV. Such draft bill of rights shall include,
but not be limited to, an explanation of the benefits and services for which
persons with HIV may be eligible; timetables within which such benefits and
services shall be provided to eligible persons; an explanation of an
applicant's and recipient's right to examine such applicant’s and recipient’s
file and the procedure for disputing any information contained therein; an
explanation of an applicant's and recipient's right to a home or hospital visit
for the purpose of applying for or maintaining benefits or services; an
explanation of the process for requesting a division conference or New York
state fair hearing; and a summary of the rights and remedies for the redress of
discrimination as provided for in title 8. Within 60 days following the
publication of such proposed rule, and prior to the publication of a final
rule, the commissioner shall hold no fewer than 1 noticed public hearing at a
site accessible to individuals with disabilities at which advocates, service
providers, persons who have tested positive for HIV, and any other member of
the public shall be given an opportunity to comment on such draft bill of
rights. The commissioner shall publish a final rule within 30 days after the
conclusion of such hearing and shall thereafter review, and where appropriate,
revise such bill of rights on an annual basis. Such bill of rights shall be
conspicuously posted in all division offices that are open to the public and
shall be available for distribution to the public in English, Spanish and any
other languages that the commissioner deems appropriate.
   i.   No later than 90 days from the effective date of the local law that
added this section, the commissioner shall establish a policy or procedure for
overseeing and monitoring the delivery of services required pursuant to this
section to persons with HIV which shall include, but not be limited to, quality
assurance measurements. The commissioner shall submit such policy or procedure
to the mayor and the council in writing within 10 days from the date such
policy or procedure is established.
   j.   The commissioner shall submit written, quarterly reports to the mayor
and the speaker of the council no later than 60 days after the last day of the
time period covered by the report and shall, at a minimum, provide the
following information:
      1.   The number of persons with HIV who requested benefits or services
set forth in subdivision b of this section or any other benefits or services
provided by the division;
      2.   The processing time for applications for benefits or services,
disaggregated by field office, type of benefit and individual versus family
case, specified as follows:
         (a)   for non-emergency applications for food stamps, medicaid, and
public assistance benefits, including separate determinations of eligibility
for medicaid or food stamps:
            (1)   the number of days from completed application to the
provision of the benefit or service; and
            (2)   in cases of denial, the number of days from the completed
application to denial of the application;
         (b)   for immediate needs grants and expedited food stamps:
            (1)   the number of days from the request date to the date of
issuance of a grant; and
            (2)   in cases of denial, the number of days from the request date
to the date of denial;
         (c)   for all other non-emergency benefits or services provided by or
through any division center or office, including but not limited to exceptions
to policy for enhanced rental assistance and additional allowances:
            (1)   (A)   the number of days from initial request to completed
application; and
               (B)   the number of days from completed application to the
provision of the benefit or service; and
            (2)   in cases of denial, the number of days from completed
application to denial of the application;
         (d)   for all other benefits or services provided on an emergency
basis, including but not limited to exceptions to policy for enhanced rental
assistance and additional allowances:
            (1)   the number of days from initial request to completed
application;
            (2)   the number of days from completed application to approval or
denial of the application; and
            (3)   the number of days from approval of an application to the
provision of the benefit or service;
         (e)   for applications for non-emergency housing:
            (1)   the number of days from a request for housing to completed
application;
            (2)   the number of days from completed application to approval or
denial of the application;
            (3)   the number of days from approval of an application to the
date on which the client takes occupancy of non-emergency housing; and
            (4)   with respect to applications that are approved, the number of
days from completed application to the date on which the client takes occupancy
of non-emergency housing;
      3.   The number of division staff, by job title, whose duties include
providing benefits and services or access to benefits and services pursuant to
this section, disaggregated by field office and family versus overall cases;
the number of cases at each field office, disaggregated by family versus
overall cases; and the ratio of case managers and supervisors to clients at
each field office, disaggregated by family versus overall cases;
      4.   The number of cases closed, disaggregated by the reasons for
closure;
      5.   The number of closed cases that were re-opened, the length of time
required to re-open such closed cases, starting from the date on which the case
was closed, and the total number of cases closed in error and the length of
time required to reopen such closed cases, starting from the date on which the
case was closed, disaggregated by field office and reported in the following
categories: 0 to 15 days; 16 to 30 days; 31 to 45 days; 46 to 60 days; 61 to 75
days; 76 to 90 days; and more than 91 days;
      6.   The number of administrative fair hearings requested, the number of
fair hearing decisions in favor of applicants and recipients and the length of
time for compliance with such fair hearing decisions, disaggregated by
decisions where there was compliance within 30 days of the decision date and
decisions where there was compliance after 30 days of the decision date;
      7.   The number of proceedings initiated pursuant to article 78 of the
civil practice law and rules challenging fair hearing decisions, and the number
of article 78 decisions rendered in favor of applicants or recipients;
      8.   The number of clients in emergency housing and the average length of
stay, disaggregated on a monthly basis;
      9.   The number of facilities used to provide emergency shelter for
clients and the number of units per facility, disaggregated by the type of
facility;
      10.   The number of facilities used to provide emergency shelter placed
on non-referral status for each month in the reporting period and the number of
facilities placed on non-referral status that remedied the situation that led
to non-referral status;
      11.   The number of facilities used to provide emergency shelter placed
on discontinuance of use status and the number of facilities placed on
discontinuance of use status that remedied the situation that led to
discontinuance of use status;
      12.   The number of requests for emergency housing assistance, the number
of persons referred to the department of homeless services, the number of
persons referred to commercial single room occupancy hotels, the average length
of stay in commercial single room occupancy hotels, the number of applications
for non-emergency housing each month, and the number of persons placed in non-
emergency housing each month; and
      13.   The number of inspections of emergency housing conducted by the
division.
   k.   There shall be an advisory board to advise the commissioner on the
provision of benefits and services and access to benefits and services to
persons HIV as required by this section. This advisory board shall consist of
11 members to be appointed for 2-year terms as follows: 5 members, at least 3
of whom shall be eligible for benefits and services pursuant to this section,
who shall be appointed by the speaker of the council; and 6 members, including
the chairperson of the advisory board, at least 3 of whom shall be eligible for
benefits and services pursuant to this section, who shall be appointed by the
mayor. The advisory board shall meet at least quarterly and members shall serve
without compensation. Such advisory board may formulate and recommend to the
commissioner a policy or procedure for overseeing and monitoring the delivery
of services to persons with HIV which may include quality assurance
measurements. Such advisory board shall submit such recommended policy or
procedure to the mayor and the council upon submission to the commissioner.
   l.   Centralized housing referral and placement system. Within 1 year of the
effective date of the local law that added this subdivision, the commissioner
shall establish and maintain a housing referral and placement system to track
referrals to and placements in emergency and non-emergency housing and to track
the conditions at emergency facilities at which clients with HIV reside. At a
minimum, the housing referral and placement system required by this subdivision
shall have:
      1.   a mechanism to track vacancies at non-emergency housing facilities
and to match eligible applicants to appropriate vacancies;
      2.   a mechanism to track conditions at emergency housing facilities; and
      3.   a mechanism to track the outcome of referrals and length of stay at
emergency housing facilities and non-emergency housing facilities.
(Am. L.L. 2025/053, 4/25/2025, eff. 7/24/2025)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/032,
L.L. 2005/050, and
L.L. 2005/051.
§ 21-129 Opioid antagonist administration training.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have
the following meanings:
      HASA facility. The term "HASA facility" means single room occupancy
hotels or congregate facilities managed by a provider under contract or similar
agreement with the department.
      Opioid. The term "opioid" means an opiate as defined in section 3302 of
the public health law.
      Opioid antagonist. The term "opioid antagonist" means naloxone or other
medication approved by the New York state department of health and the federal
food and drug administration that, when administered, negates or neutralizes,
in whole or in part, the pharmacological effects of an opioid in the human
body.
      Opioid antagonist administration training. The term "opioid antagonist
administration training" means a program with the purpose of training
individuals encountering a suspected opioid overdose about the steps to take in
order to prevent a fatality, including contacting emergency medical services,
and administering an opioid antagonist.
   b.   Opioid antagonist administration training. 
      1.   The department shall provide opioid antagonist administration
training to staff working at HASA facilities as identified by the department
that may encounter persons experiencing or who are at high risk of experiencing
an opioid overdose. The department shall require providers to ensure that at a
minimum one such trained staff is on duty at a HASA facility at all times
during the provider's usual business hours.
      2.   For such staff identified by the department, the department shall
(i) provide a refresher training every two years or (ii) otherwise require that
each trained employee undergo a refresher training every two years.
      3.   The department shall develop and implement an opioid overdose
training plan to offer opioid overdose training to residents of HASA facilities
who may encounter persons experiencing or who are at a high risk of
experiencing an opioid overdose. No later than March 1, 2018, the commissioner
of the department of social services shall submit to the mayor and the speaker
of the council, and post online, a comprehensive opioid overdose training plan
for such residents. Such plan shall include, but need not be limited to:
         (a)   Strategies for the agency to offer opioid antagonist
administration training to such residents of HASA facilities;
         (b)   Information on how such residents will be informed about the
availability of such training;
         (c)   Information specific to the availability of such training;
         (d)   Information specific to the availability of opioid antagonist at
HASA facilities; and
         (e)   The date by which the implementation of such plan will commence.
   c.   Beginning no later than September 1, 2018, and no later than every
September 1 thereafter, the commissioner shall submit to the mayor and the
speaker of the council an annual report regarding (i) the number of department
employees and employees of service providers under contract with the department
who have completed the opioid antagonist administration training, (ii) the
number of department employees and employees of service providers under
contract with the department who have completed a refresher training, and (iii)
the number of residents living HASA facilities who have completed the opioid
antagonist administration training. Such report shall also include the number
of times an opioid antagonist was administered to a resident disaggregated by
the type of facility where the administration occurred.
(L.L. 2017/225, 12/1/2017, eff. 12/1/2017)
§ 21-129.1 Referral of additional services.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the term "HASA facility"
means single room occupancy hotels or congregate facilities that serve HASA
recipients and are managed by a provider under contract or similar agreement
with the department.
   b.   The department shall refer any individual who discloses to their case
manager, as defined in section
21-127, that while in a HASA facility, they received an opioid antagonist to
combat symptoms consistent with those of an opioid overdose occurring within a
HASA facility, to appropriate service providers for appropriate additional
services.
(L.L. 2018/127, 6/26/2018, eff. 8/25/2018)
§ 21-130 Shelter and related services for victims of domestic violence.
   a.   The city shall provide emergency shelter and/or related services to
victims of domestic violence to the extent required by sections 131-u and 459-
a of the social services law. A victim of domestic violence shall include any
person over the age of 16, any married person, or any parent accompanied by his
or her minor child or children, in situations in which such person, parent or
person's child is a victim of an act which would constitute a violation of the
Penal Law, including, but not limited to acts constituting disorderly conduct,
harassment, menacing, reckless endangerment, kidnapping, assault, attempted
assault, or attempted murder; and
      (1)   such act or acts have resulted in actual physical or emotional
injury or have created a substantial risk of physical or emotional harm to such
person or such person's child; and
      (2)   such act or acts are or are alleged to have been committed by a
family or household member. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
section, "Family or household members" shall mean the following individuals:
         (i)   persons related by blood or marriage;
         (ii)   persons legally married to one another;
         (iii)   persons formerly married to one another regardless of whether
they still reside in the same household;
         (iv)   persons who have a child in common regardless of whether such
persons are married or have lived together at any time;
         (v)   unrelated persons who are continually or at regular intervals
living in the same household or who have in the past continually or at regular
intervals lived in the same household; or
         (vi)   unrelated persons who have had intimate or continuous social
contact with one another and who have access to one another's household.
   b.   Victims of domestic violence who apply for emergency shelter and/or
related services pursuant to section 131-u of the social services law may not
be denied emergency shelter or related services solely based on lack of
documentary evidence of the incidence of domestic violence, such as a police
report or order of protection.
§ 21-131 Food stamp applications at emergency feeding programs.*
* Editor's note: there are two sections designated as § 21-131.
   a.   The commissioner shall arrange for the distribution of applications for
the food stamp program to all city-funded emergency feeding programs. For
purposes of this section, "emergency feeding program" means a food pantry or
soup kitchen.
   b.   Reports regarding distribution of food stamp applications. Beginning
January 1, 2006, and on the first business day of each succeeding calendar
quarter thereafter, the commissioner shall submit a report to the speaker of
the city council indicating the emergency feeding programs to which it
distributed applications in the prior calendar quarter and the number of
applications distributed to each emergency feeding program.
§ 21-131 [Child welfare parent advocate advisory committee.]*
* Editor's note: there are two sections designated as § 21-131.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:
      1.   "Commissioner" shall mean the commissioner of the administration for
children's services.
      2.   "Foster care" shall mean the out-of-home placement of children who
are in the care, custody or guardianship of the commissioner of the
administration for children's services.
      3.   "Foster care services" shall mean the care of abandoned, destitute,
dependent, neglected or delinquent children or persons in need of supervision
away from their own homes in institutions, foster homes or temporary shelters,
in whole or in part at public expense, under the jurisdiction of a social
services official or other authorized agency.
      4.   "Foster parent" shall mean any person with whom a child in the care,
custody or guardianship of the commissioner of the administration for
children's services is placed for temporary or long-term care, as defined by
section 371 of the social services law.
      5.   "Organization" shall mean any individual, association, corporation,
not-for-profit corporation, partnership, institution, trust, firm or other
entity.
      6.   "Parent" shall mean any biological parent.
      7.   "Parent advocate" shall mean any parent who has been or has had a
child placed in foster care or who has received preventive services and who
works with and provides advice to parents regarding child welfare policies and
practices and parental rights and responsibilities within the foster care
system.
      8.   "Preventive services" shall mean supportive and rehabilitative
services provided to children and their families for the purpose of:
         (i)   averting an impairment or disruption of a family which will or
could result in the placement of a child in foster care;
         (ii)   enabling a child who has been placed in foster care to return
to his or her family at an earlier time than would otherwise be possible; or
         (iii)   reducing the likelihood that a child who has been discharged
from foster care would return to such care.
   b.   There shall be a child welfare parent advocate advisory committee. Such
committee shall provide recommendations on the administration for children's
services policies regarding foster care services and preventive services.
      1.   The advisory committee shall consist of:
         (i)   ten parents or parent advocates from organizations providing
foster care services pursuant to a contract with the administration for
children's services or receiving services directly from the administration for
children's services, or from organizations providing preventive services
pursuant to a contract with the administration for children's services or
receiving services directly from the administration for children's services,
six of whom shall be appointed by the commissioner and four of whom shall be
appointed by the speaker of the city council;
         (ii)   four foster parents, three of whom shall be appointed by the
commissioner and one of whom shall be appointed by the speaker of the city
council; and
         (iii)   four parents who have adopted children formerly in the care,
custody or guardianship of the commissioner, three of whom shall be appointed
by the commissioner and one of whom shall be appointed by the speaker of the
city council.
      2.   Each member of the advisory committee will serve for a term of two
years to commence on the effective date of the local law that added this
section and may be removed from office by the appointing official for cause.
Any vacancy occurring other than by expiration of term shall be filled by the
official who appointed the member in the same manner as the original
appointment. A person so appointed shall serve for the unexpired portion of the
term of the member succeeded. The commissioner shall designate one member to
serve as chairperson and one member to serve as vice-chairperson.
      3.   Each member of the advisory committee shall serve without
compensation.
      4.   No person shall be ineligible for membership on the advisory
committee because such person holds any other public office, employment or
trust, nor shall any person be made ineligible to or forfeit such person's
right to any public office, employment or trust by reason of such appointment.
      5.   The advisory committee shall meet at least four times a year.
      6.   The advisory committee may request and shall receive from the
administration for children's services all documents otherwise available to the
public, including, but not limited to, procedures, requests for proposals,
contracts, training curricula, year-end reviews and descriptions of program
evaluation systems. The advisory committee may not receive information which is
required by law to be kept confidential or which is privileged as attorney-
client communications, attorney work products or material prepared for
litigation.
      7.   The advisory committee shall submit to the mayor and to the speaker
of the city council on an annual basis, no later than October thirtieth of each
year, a report. Such report shall include, but not be limited to,
recommendations regarding the improvement of services provided by the city and
non-government related service delivery systems with respect to foster care
services, preventive services and any other aspects of the child welfare system
such committee deems relevant. Such reports shall be considered public
information.
§ 21-131.1 Supplemental nutrition assistance program enrollment and
recertification for seniors.
   a.   For purposes of this section, the following terms have the following
meanings:
      Senior Center. The term "senior center" has the same definition as set
forth in section
21-201.
      Seniors. The term "seniors" means individuals who are age 60 or older.
   b.   The department shall, in coordination with the department for the
aging, design and implement a public campaign to increase the awareness of
seniors and their caregivers of the benefits of the supplemental nutrition
assistance program and to reduce any stigma associated with enrolling in or
recertifying for such benefits.
   c.   The department shall also, in coordination with the department for the
aging, establish and implement an enrollment and recertification program to
increase enrollment in and recertification for the supplemental nutrition
assistance program, consistent with the requirements of state and federal law.
Such enrollment and recertification program shall ensure that programming is
offered at each senior center to explain the benefits of the supplemental
nutrition assistance program and to enable eligible seniors to enroll in or
recertify for the supplemental nutrition assistance program at each senior
center.
   d.   Beginning April 1, 2021, and annually thereafter, the department, in
coordination with the department for the aging, shall submit a report to the
speaker of the city council regarding the department's activities with respect
to supplemental nutrition assistance enrollment and recertification for
seniors. Such report shall provide an overview of the department's activities
with respect to supplemental nutrition assistance enrollment and
recertification for seniors, including the public campaign and the enrollment
and recertification program, and shall include (i) the number of seniors
enrolled in the supplemental nutrition assistance program in the previous
calendar year; (ii) the number of seniors recertified for the supplemental
nutrition assistance program in the previous calendar year; (iii) a comparison
of the annual rate of enrollment for seniors versus the number of seniors in
the city that the department estimates are likely to be eligible based on
readily available community data such as census data; (iv) identification of
specific barriers to enrolling and recertifying eligible seniors who would
benefit from participation in the supplemental nutrition assistance program,
with particular consideration given to seniors who are unable to travel to
senior centers, whether due to physical limitation or lack of access to
transportation or other reasons, and seniors who are not receiving other social
services; and (v) a plan, developed in collaboration with the department for
the aging, to overcome such barriers to enrollment and recertification to reach
eligible seniors who are unable to travel to senior centers and who are not
receiving other social services. Such report shall also indicate how the data
required by this subdivision compares to the previous year. The report shall
further indicate the method by which seniors enrolled in or recertified for the
supplemental nutrition assistance program, whether online, by mobile
application, by telephone, by paper application, or by other means.
(L.L. 2017/134, 8/8/2017, eff. 12/6/2017; Am. L.L. 2020/039, 3/13/2020, eff. 3/
13/2020)
§ 21-131.2 Information regarding health bucks and farmers' markets.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the term "health bucks"
means coupons issued by the department of health and mental hygiene that are
redeemable for fruits and vegetables at farmers' markets in the city.
   b.   The department, in collaboration with the department of health and
mental hygiene, shall provide information regarding health bucks and farmers'
markets in the city to individuals who receive or apply to receive supplemental
nutrition assistance program benefits. Such information may be provided on
paper or electronically and shall include, but need not be limited to, how to
receive health bucks, how health bucks may be spent and the location of
farmers' markets in the city.
( L.L. 2020/038, 3/13/2020, eff. 9/9/2020 )
§ 21-131.3 Information on emergency feeding programs, food benefits programs,
and senior centers.
   a.   Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      ACCESS HRA. The term “ACCESS HRA” means the website and mobile
application in which individuals obtain information on and apply for some HRA
benefits, and HRA clients obtain certain HRA benefits case information.
      Emergency feeding program. The term “emergency feeding program” means a
food pantry or soup kitchen.
      Food benefits programs. The term “food benefits programs” means the
supplemental nutrition assistance program, administered by the United States
department of agriculture; the special supplemental nutrition program for
women, infants, and children, administered by the United States department of
agriculture; and any successor programs.
      Job center. The term “job center” means any location designated by the
department as a job center where individuals can complete an application for
cash assistance in person.
      Senior center. The term “senior center” has the same meaning as set forth
in section
21-201.
      SNAP center. The term “SNAP center” means any location designated by the
department as a SNAP center where individuals can complete an application in
person for the supplemental nutrition assistance program, administered by the
United States department of agriculture.
   b.   The department shall make information on emergency feeding programs,
food benefits programs, and senior centers available on the department’s
website and through ACCESS HRA, in a format such that users can search for an
emergency feeding program, a location for applying for a food benefits program,
or a senior center by zip code, hours of operation, status as a senior citizen,
and any other relevant category as determined by the commissioner.
   c.   The department shall include a link to the information required by
subdivision b of this section on any online platform through which the city
disseminates information on social services and benefits.
   d.   The department shall, in coordination with the department for the
aging, make written information on emergency feeding programs, food benefits
programs, and senior centers available at job centers, senior centers, SNAP
centers, and any other relevant locations as determined by the commissioner.
Such information shall include but need not be limited to the locations of each
emergency feeding program and senior center, the locations for applying for a
food benefits program, and the hours of operation of such locations.
   e.   The information required by subdivisions b and d of this section shall
be available be in English and in the designated citywide languages as defined
in section
23-1101.
(L.L. 2023/136, 10/15/2023, eff. 2/12/2024)
§ 21-132 Internet submission of applications for the food stamp program.
   a.   Within one year of the effective date of the local law that added this
section, the commissioner shall develop a procedure that enables applicants for
the federal food stamp program to access and submit applications using the
internet.
   b.   To the extent that the requirement set forth in subdivision a of this
section is subject to the approval of the state office of temporary and
disability assistance or the United States department of agriculture or any
other state or federal agency, the commissioner shall request such permission
within 90 days of the effective date of the local law that added this section.
§ 21-132.1 Handling of applications for the food stamp program.
   a.   Submission of applications by facsimile. Within one year of the
effective date of the local law that added this section, the commissioner shall
develop and maintain a procedure that enables applicants for the federal food
stamp program to submit applications by facsimile.
   b.   Waiver of face-to-face interviews. The commissioner shall maintain a
procedure for waiving a face-to-face interview for applicants for food stamps
for whom the requirement constitutes a hardship, including but not limited to
illness, transportation difficulties, care of a household member, or work or
training hours which prevent the applicant from participating in an in-office
interview. Within 180 days of the effective date of the local law that added
this section, a description of the circumstances under which a face-to-face
interview can be waived shall be included in any information developed and
circulated by or on behalf of the department that describes the food stamp
program.
   c.   Receipt. Upon written or oral application to the department for food
stamps an applicant shall immediately be provided with a receipt, which shall
be in the form of a checklist and shall include, at a minimum, the date of the
application, a description of the information received, and an indication as to
whether any application for such benefits and services is complete or
incomplete, and if incomplete, such receipt shall identify any information or
documents needed in order for the application to be deemed complete.
   d.   Ensuring accuracy of public information regarding location and office
hours of food stamp offices. The department shall regularly review all
information available to the public on the department's website or any other
website maintained by or on behalf of the city of New York; any printed
materials developed and circulated by or on behalf of the department or the
city of New York; and any information provided by 311 or any hotline operated
by or on behalf of the department, that describes the locations and office
hours of all food stamp offices in New York city and update such information as
necessary to maintain accuracy. At a minimum, the department shall review all
such information on a monthly basis.
   e.   Approvals. To the extent that the requirements set forth in this
section are subject to the approval of the state office of temporary and
disability assistance or the United States department of agriculture or any
other state or federal agency, the commissioner shall request such permission
within 90 days of the effective date of the local law that added this section.
(Am. L.L. 2025/088, 6/27/2025, eff. 12/24/2025)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2025/088.
§ 21-133 Web-based information for youth and young adults aged sixteen through
twenty applying for or receiving public assistance.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section the following terms shall
have the following meanings:
      1.   "Public assistance" shall mean safety net assistance and family
assistance provided by the New York city department of social services/human
resources administration;
      2.   "Young adult" shall mean any person between and including the ages
of eighteen and twenty; and
      3.   "Youth" shall mean any person between and including the ages of
sixteen and seventeen.
   b.   Web-based Information. No later than sixty days from the effective date
of the local law that added this section, the department shall publish, through
an easily identifiable link on its website, answers to frequently asked
questions relating to the rights of and options available to youth and young
adults who apply for or are receiving public assistance as head of household,
including but not limited to a description of how to apply for public
assistance, the types of public assistance that are available, and how
recipients may satisfy work requirements through educational activities. Such
information shall be updated as often as necessary and at a minimum on an
annual basis.
§ 21-134 Cash assistance application and caseload engagement status reports for
individuals aged sixteen through twenty-four.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section the following terms shall
have the following meanings:
      (1)   "BEGIN" shall mean the New York city department of social services/
human resources administration program, known as begin employment gain
independence now, which collaborates with education and training providers to
offer a coordinated program of employment preparation to support the efforts of
public assistance recipients who are making the transition to employment;
      (2)   "Engageable" shall mean an individual is required to participate in
employment, programs or activities in order to receive public assistance;
      (3)   "Head of household" shall mean the member of the applicant
household designated by the household to represent the household in all matters
pertaining to its eligibility for and receipt of various forms of public
assistance;
      (4)   "Household" shall mean a single individual or family, including
couples without dependent children who, or which, are eligible to receive
public assistance;
      (5)   "Public assistance" shall mean safety net assistance and family
assistance provided by the New York city department of social services/human
resources administration;
      (6)   "Unengageable" shall mean an individual is exempt from having to
participate in employment, programs or activities as a condition of receiving
public assistance;
      (7)   "WeCARE" shall mean the New York city department of social
services/human resources administration program, known as wellness
comprehensive assessment rehabilitation and employment, which addresses the
needs of public assistance recipients with medical and/or mental health
barriers to employment by providing customized assistance and services to help
them achieve their highest levels of self-sufficiency; and
      (8)   "WEP" shall mean the New York city department of social services/
human resources administration program, known as the work experience program,
which is designed to provide a simulated work experience to individuals
receiving public assistance.
   b.   Cash assistance caseload engagement status report for heads of
household aged sixteen through twenty-four. Beginning no later than April 1,
2013, and no later than the first day of each subsequent month, the department
shall post on its website an updated report regarding the engagement status of
heads of household between and including the ages of sixteen and twenty-four,
that includes, at a minimum, the following information disaggregated by the
following categories:
      1)   individuals aged sixteen and seventeen;
      2)   individuals aged eighteen through twenty; and
      3)   individuals aged twenty-one through twenty-four, calculated both as
an actual number and the percentage each such number represents of the overall
cash assistance caseload:
         A.   Total number of recipients of public assistance who self-report
as lacking a high school degree or the equivalent at the time of application.
         B.   Total number of recipients of public assistance exempt from
engagement and reason for exemption, including but not limited to:
            (a)   Total indefinitely unengageable, disaggregated by:
               (i)   head of household on supplemental social security income
or other disability-based income;
               (ii)   HIV/AIDS services administration case; and
               (iii)   child only case (ages 17 and under).
            (b)   Total temporarily unengageable, disaggregated by:
               (i)   temporarily incapacitated due to health situation;
               (ii)   child under 3 months of age;
               (iii)   supplemental security income or other disability-based
income pending or appealing;
               (iv)   temporarily exempt; and
               (v)   pending WeCARE scheduling/outcome.
         C.   Total number of engageable recipients of public assistance,
including but not limited to:
            (1)   Total engaged in:
               (a)   Employment:
                  (i)   budgeted;
                  (ii)   not budgeted: no aid to continue;
                  (iii)   grant diversion; and
                  (iv)   wage subsidy.
               (b)   WEP:
                  (i)   WEP basic;
                  (ii)   WEP medical limitations / WeCARE;
                  (iii)   WEP and BEGIN managed activities, or any
substantially similar successor program;
                  (iv)   WEP special;
                  (v)   WEP and job skills;
                  (vi)   WEP and substance abuse treatment;
                  (vii)   WEP / substance abuse / job search;
                  (viii)   WEP / substance abuse/ training;
                  (ix)   WEP / WeCARE concurrent activity; and
                  (x)   WEP and training.
               (c)   Other work activity.
               (d)   Substance abuse residential treatment.
            (2)   Total engaged in other participation, including but not
limited to:
               (a)   education/training;
               (b)   job search under 12 weeks;
               (c)   job search 12 weeks or more;
               (d)   student over age 15;
               (e)   substance abuse treatment;
               (f)   substance abuse/job search;
               (g)   substance abuse/training;
               (h)   wellness / rehab / WeCARE;
               (i)   WeCARE and substance abuse;
               (j)   WeCARE vocational rehabilitation;
               (k)   WeCARE concurrent activity; and
               (l)   needed at home.
         D.   Total number of recipients in engagement process, disaggregated
by:
            (a)   call-in appointment scheduled;
            (b)   eligibility call-in appointment scheduled;
            (c)   WeCARE assessment scheduled; and
            (d)   in review process.
         E.   Total number of recipients in a sanction process, disaggregated
by:
            (a)   in conciliation;
            (b)   awaiting conciliation scheduling; and
            (c)   taking part in a fair hearing:
               (i)   contesting; and
               (ii)   not contesting.
         F.   Total number of recipients with a sanction in effect.
   c.   Semiannual report for heads of household aged sixteen through twenty.
Within sixty days after June 30, 2013, and within sixty days following each six
month period thereafter, the department shall post on its website a report
regarding the total number of individuals aged sixteen through twenty who
applied for public assistance as head of household during the previous six
months and of those, the total number accepted and rejected, disaggregated by
the following categories: 1) individuals aged sixteen and seventeen; and 2)
individuals aged eighteen through twenty. For purposes of this subdivision,
each six month period shall be deemed to end on June 30 and December 31 of each
calendar year.
§ 21-135 Process for youth and young adults aged 16 through 24 receiving public
assistance as head of household.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section the following terms shall
have the following meanings:
      (1)   "Basic literacy level" shall mean a ninth grade reading level as
evaluated by the New York city department of social services/human resources
administration when conducting an employment assessment for public assistance
recipients;
      (2)   "BTW" shall mean the New York city department of social services/
human resources administration program, known as back to work, where a single
vendor works with individuals to assist them in employment preparation
including education and training, as applicable, and finding employment;
      (3)   "Head of household" shall mean the member of the applicant
household designated by the household to represent the household in all matters
pertaining to its eligibility for and receipt of various forms of public
assistance;
      (4)   "Household" shall mean a single individual or family, including
couples without dependent children who, or which, are eligible to receive
public assistance;
      (5)   "Public assistance" shall mean safety net assistance and family
assistance provided by the New York city department of social services/human
resources administration; and
      (6)   "WEP" shall mean the New York city department of social services/
human resources administration program, known as the work experience program,
which is designed to provide a simulated work experience to individuals
receiving public assistance.
   b.   Written Report: The commissioner shall designate an individual
responsible for agency oversight of how youth and young adults aged 16 through
24 receiving public assistance are engaged and served. The department shall
submit a report to the council, in writing, no later than six months from the
effective date of this local law, describing the process put in place to serve
such youth and young adults. At a minimum, such report shall include, but not
be limited to, a description of:
      (1)   department policies as they relate to federal and state mandated
education requirements for youth and young adults aged 16 through 24;
      (2)   the department's process for determining whether a 16 or 17 year-
old is interested in educational activities;
      (3)   the department's process for referring a 16 or 17 year-old without
a high school diploma or its equivalent to the department of education or other
educational opportunities;
      (4)   criteria and/or assessment tools used in determining that a 16 or
17 year-old without a high school diploma or its equivalent cannot make
satisfactory progress in obtaining such a diploma or its equivalent and
therefore should be referred to BTW, WEP, or other program;
      (5)   the department's process for determining whether heads of household
between and including the ages of eighteen and twenty, who do not have a high
school diploma or its equivalent, are interested in participating in
appropriate educational activities designed to help them obtain a high school
diploma or its equivalent;
      (6)   the department's process for encouraging heads of household between
and including the ages of eighteen and twenty, who do not have a high school
diploma or its equivalent, to participate in appropriate educational activities
designed to help them obtain a high school diploma or its equivalent;
      (7)   the department's process for connecting heads of household between
and including the ages of eighteen and twenty, who have a high school diploma
or its equivalent, to educational activities;
      (8)   criteria used in determining that participation in educational
activities by heads of household between and including the ages of eighteen and
twenty, who do not have a high school diploma or its equivalent, is not
appropriate based on an employment plan;
      (9)   the department's process for determining whether heads of household
between and including the ages of twenty-one and twenty-four, who do not have a
high school diploma or its equivalent, are interested in participating in
educational activities designed to help them obtain a high school diploma or
its equivalent;
      (10)   the department's process for connecting heads of households
between and including the ages of twenty-one and twenty-four, who have a high
school diploma or its equivalent, to educational activities;
      (11)   the department's process for determining that educational
activities are not appropriate for heads of household between and including the
ages of twenty-one and twenty-four without a high school diploma or its
equivalent;
      (12)   the department's process for making educational activities
available to individuals aged 18 through 24 who have not attained a basic
literacy level and are interested in attaining such as part of their work
activity requirement;
      (13)   the department's plan to improve coordination between the
department and other city agencies and programs that specialize in employment
services for 16 and 17 year-olds;
      (14)   criteria used in determining that a referral to the administration
for children's services is warranted for minors who apply for public assistance
and do not live with a parent or legal guardian; and
      (15)   the department's strategy to convey to department staff the
process for assisting young people aged 16 through 24 receiving public
assistance.
§ 21-136 Semiannual reports regarding referrals to adult protective services.
   a.   For the purposes of this section "adult protective services" means the
New York city department of social services/human resources administration case
management program that arranges for services and support for physically and/or
mentally impaired adults who are at risk of harm.
   b.   The commissioner shall prepare semiannual reports regarding referrals
to adult protective services. Each such report shall include, but not be
limited to, the total number of referrals received by adult protective services
during each six month period and the number of referred individuals who were
determined ineligible during such six month period, disaggregated by the
reasons individuals were determined ineligible, a general description of the
source of the referrals, and the council district, community board, and zip
code of the referred individuals. For purposes of this subdivision, the first
such report shall cover the period from July 1, 2015 to December 31, 2015, and
each six month period shall be deemed to end on June 30 and December 31,
respectively, of each calendar year. Each report shall be submitted to the
speaker and posted on the department's website within 60 days of the end of
such period. Nothing herein shall require the department to share information
that identifies the subject of, or the individuals who made, such referrals.
(L.L. 2015/070, 8/10/2015, eff. 8/10/2015)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2015/070.
§ 21-137 Adult protective services training.
The department shall conduct biannual trainings, in accordance with article 9-
b of the social services law and any applicable rules and regulations
thereunder, on best practices in identifying persons who may be eligible for
adult protective services and how to refer such persons to adult protective
services. Such training shall be made available to appropriate employees of the
following agencies, as determined by such agencies: the department for the
aging, the police department, the department of parks and recreation, the
department of housing preservation and development, the department of homeless
services, the department of health and mental hygiene, and such other agencies
as the mayor may assign, and shall also be made available to the civil and
criminal courts of the city of New York and the New York city housing
authority.
(L.L. 2015/074, 8/10/2015, eff. 8/10/2015)
§ 21-138 Information regarding unlawful evictions.
   a.   For the purposes of this section, the term "rental subsidy" means
financial assistance provided by the department for the purpose of paying a
recipient's rent on an ongoing basis. The term "rental subsidy" includes but is
not limited to the public assistance shelter allowance provided by the
department as established by section 131-a of the social services law and
defined in paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) of section 352.3 of title 18 of the
New York codes, rules and regulations, as well as subsidies provided through
the living in communities rental assistance program, the city family eviction
prevention supplement program and the city family exit plan supplement, the
city special exit and prevention supplement, the home tenant-based rental
assistance program, and any successor program to the foregoing programs.
   b.   The department shall provide a written notice to each individual who
applies for a rental subsidy for housing that is subject to section
26-521 of the code. The notice shall be provided upon the initial application
or approval for such rental subsidy and at any time the department determines
to be appropriate for such subsidy, except such notice may be provided in
electronic form to any individual who registers electronic contact information
with the department and elects to receive such notices in electronic form. Such
notice shall inform individuals of the protections of section
26-521 of the code regarding eviction, and may include additional information
as determined by the department.
   c.   Receipt of such notice shall not be construed to confer the protections
set forth in section
26-521 of the code.
(L.L. 2017/012, 2/15/2017, eff. 5/16/2017)
§ 21-139 Requirements for job centers.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Appointment receipt. The term "appointment receipt" means a document
given to all checked-in visitors at a job center who complete an appointment
and that reflects the date of the visit, the reason for the visit, and the name
and telephone number of the center that was visited.
      Checked-in. The term "checked-in" means that a visitor has made initial
contact with the department at a job center, either through a self-service
kiosk or with a staff member responsible for keeping track of visitors, and has
made such contact so that the department has a record, either written or
electronic, of such visitor's time of arrival at such job center and the reason
for their visit.
      Job center. The term "job center" means any location designated by the
department as a job center where individuals can complete an application for
cash assistance in person.
      Visitor. The term "visitor" means any individual who, by prior
appointment or walk-in, enters a job center to apply for public assistance, to
receive assistance for an open public assistance case, or to receive assistance
for a closed public assistance case.
      Wait time. The term "wait time" means the amount of time a visitor spends
waiting to be called for assistance after such visitor has checked-in to a job
center. Wait time begins at the start of the visitor's checked-in time, and
ends when a visitor is called to begin an appointment.
   b.   The department shall issue an appointment receipt to all visitors who
have checked-in at a job center and completed an appointment.
   c.   The department shall make available, through an online portal, to each
person applying for cash assistance or supplemental nutrition assistance
program benefits: (i) such person's scheduled appointments relating to cash
assistance and eligibility for supplemental nutrition assistance program
benefits; (ii) documents indexed to such person's case within the past 60 days;
and (iii) such person's application and case status.
   d.   Not later than January 31, 2018, and within 45 days after the end of
every month thereafter, the department shall post on its website a report of
the average wait time during the preceding month for a visitor at each job
center.
   e.   The department shall post a sign, in a form and manner as prescribed by
the rules of the commissioner, in one or more visible locations inside every
job center. Such sign shall include information regarding a visitor's right to
make a complaint and instructions on how to make a complaint by phone or
online.
   f.   The department shall provide a tracking number to any visitor who
initiates a complaint relating to a visit to a job center. Such tracking number
shall track the status of a complaint from initiation to disposition.
(L.L. 2018/020, 12/31/2017, eff. 12/31/2017)
§ 21-140 Client service trainings.
   a.   Pursuant to subdivision c of this section, the department shall conduct
two trainings per year on best practices for improving interactions between
department employees and clients of the department.
   b.   Such trainings shall include techniques to improve professionalism,
increase cultural sensitivity, de-escalate conflict and use trauma-informed
theory.
   c.   The department shall provide such trainings to all appropriate
employees identified by the department whose primary responsibilities include
interacting with members of the public in a client service role at any location
designated by the department either as a job center where individuals can
complete an application for cash assistance in person or as a SNAP center where
individuals can complete an application for the supplemental nutrition
assistance program in person.
   d.   A contractor providing security services under a city contract at any
location designated by the department either as a job center where individuals
can complete an application for cash assistance in person or as a SNAP center
where individuals can complete an application for the supplemental nutrition
assistance program in person shall provide the training described in
subdivision b of this section to its employees having regular contact with the
public at such centers. All new or renewed city contracts for security services
at such centers shall contain a provision requiring employees of any security
contractor having regular contact with the public at such centers be provided
with the training described in subdivision b of this section.
   e.   On or before January 31, 2020, and annually thereafter, the department
shall report to the mayor and the speaker of the council the number of
individuals who have received the trainings pursuant to subdivision c of this
section, disaggregated by the positions held by such individuals. The first
such report shall be preliminary and limited to the data reasonably available
to the department for the preceding calendar year.
   f.   Nothing in this section shall preclude the department from providing
such training to employees other than those identified by the department
pursuant to subdivision c of this section.
(L.L. 2018/015, 12/31/2017, eff. 4/30/2018; Am. L.L. 2019/163, 9/14/2019, eff.
1/12/2020)
§ 21-141 Exits from domestic violence shelters.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have
the following meanings:
      Domestic violence emergency shelter. The term "domestic violence
emergency shelter" means time-limited housing for domestic violence survivors
managed by or under a contract or similar agreement with the department and
subject to section 459-b of the social services law.
      Domestic violence tier II shelter. The term "domestic violence tier II
shelter" means housing for domestic violence survivors managed by or under a
contract or similar agreement with the department and subject to the provisions
of part 900 of title 18 of the New York codes, rules, and regulations.
      Exits from domestic violence shelters. The term "exits from domestic
violence shelters" means a household or individual leaves a domestic violence
emergency shelter.
      Made own arrangements. The term "made own arrangements" means a household
or individual informed the department of a planned exit from domestic violence
shelter.
      Rental subsidy. The term "rental subsidy" means financial assistance
provided by the department for the purpose of paying a recipient's rent on an
ongoing basis and includes but is not limited to the public assistance shelter
allowance provided by the department as established by section 131-a of the New
York social services law, section 159 of the New York social services law,
section 349 of the New York social services law, or any codes, rules and
regulations, as well as subsidies provided through the living in communities
rental assistance program, the city family eviction prevention supplement
program and the city family exit plan supplement, the city special exit and
prevention supplement, the home tenant-based rental assistance program, and any
successor program to the foregoing programs. The term "rental subsidy" also
includes federal rental assistance pursuant to the section 8 project based
rental assistance program, or any successor program, or any programs under the
United States Housing Act of 1937, as amended, providing rental assistance for
the purpose of paying a recipient's rent.
      Supportive housing. The term "supportive housing" means affordable,
permanent housing with support services for residents.
      Unknown or unable to verify. The term "unknown or unable to verify" means
a household or individual voluntarily exits from a domestic violence shelter
and does not provide verifiable details about their subsequent living
arrangements.
   b.   Not later than March 1, 2025, and on or before March 1 annually
thereafter, the department shall submit to the speaker of the council and post
on its website annual reports regarding exits from domestic violence emergency
shelters and domestic violence tier II shelters for the preceding calendar
year. Such reports shall include, but not be limited to, the total number of
individuals and the total number of families who exited either a domestic
violence emergency shelter or a domestic violence tier II shelter during the
preceding calendar year, disaggregated by the type of housing such individuals
and families residing in upon their exit. Such housing types shall include, but
not be limited to, the following: (i) a New York city housing authority
apartment; (ii) an apartment with a rental subsidy, disaggregated by the type
of such subsidy; (iii) a private apartment with no rental subsidy; (iv)
supportive housing; (v) shelter operated by or under contract or similar
agreement with the department of homeless services; (vi) shelter operated by or
under contract or similar agreement with the department, disaggregated by type,
where practicable; (vii) made own arrangements or (viii) unknown or unable to
validate.
(L.L. 2018/083, 1/19/2018, eff. 1/19/2018; Am. L.L. 2024/135, 12/21/2024, eff.
12/21/2024)
§ 21-141.1 Information regarding lawful source of income discrimination.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      CityFHEPS. The term "CityFHEPS" means the city fighting homelessness and
eviction prevention supplement program established pursuant to chapter 10 of
title 68 of the rules of the city of New York or any successor program.
      Covered entity. The term "covered entity" means the owner, lessor,
lessee, sublessee, assignee, or managing agent of, or other person having the
right to sell, rent or lease or approve the sale, rental or lease of a housing
accommodation, constructed or to be constructed, or an interest therein, or any
agent or employee thereof, who is subject to the prohibition on discrimination
based on lawful source of discrimination pursuant to subdivision 5 of section
8-107.
      Lawful source of income. The term "lawful source of income" has the
meaning as set forth in section
8-102.
      Shopping letter. The term "shopping letter" means a letter issued by the
department to assist a household in its housing search that identifies the
household as potentially eligible for CityFHEPS and lists the maximum rent.
   b.   The department shall provide written notice regarding the protections
of section
8-107 related to lawful source of income at the time that a CityFHEPS applicant
receives a shopping letter. Such notice shall be developed by the New York city
commission on human rights pursuant to paragraph p of subdivision 5 of section
8-107 in consultation with the department.
(L.L. 2020/115, 11/17/2020, eff. 5/16/2021)
§ 21-142 Reporting on the termination and denial of public assistance.
   a.   For the purposes of this section the following terms have the following
meanings:
      Case head. The term "case head" means the head of household who is the
member of the applicant household designated by the household to represent the
household in all matters pertaining to its eligibility for and receipt of
public assistance, as defined in Title 18 of New York Codes Rules and
Regulations Part 387.1(u)(1), and as indicated in the welfare management
system.
      Reopened case. The term "reopened case" means a case of ongoing cash or
supplemental nutrition assistance that was terminated and subsequently reopened
within three months of termination.
      Welfare management system. The term "welfare management system" means the
system defined in section 21 of New York social services law.
   b.   Termination report. The department shall post on its website and submit
to the speaker of the council and the public advocate a report on instances in
which ongoing cash or supplemental nutrition assistance was terminated during
the relevant reporting period. The first such report shall be due on November
15, 2019, and shall cover the quarter that began on July 1, 2019. Subsequent
reports shall be posted and submitted no later than 45 days after the end of
each quarter thereafter. Such reports shall include the following information
for the relevant reporting period:
      1.   The total number of ongoing cash and supplemental nutrition
assistance cases terminated;
      2.   The total number of cases terminated, disaggregated by type of
ongoing cash or supplemental nutrition assistance;
      3.   The total number of cases terminated, disaggregated by reason(s) why
the ongoing cash or supplemental nutrition assistance was terminated, using the
welfare management system closing codes;
      4.   The data required by paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this subdivision shall
be further disaggregated by:
         (a)   The council district the case head lives in;
         (b)   The reported race, ethnicity, gender and age category of the
case head;
         (c)   Whether the case head has limited English proficiency; and
         (d)   Whether the case head has received a reasonable accommodation
for a disability from the department.
   c.   Denial report. The department shall post on its website and submit to
the speaker of the council and the public advocate a report on instances in
which applications for ongoing cash or supplemental nutrition assistance were
denied during the relevant reporting period. The first such report shall be due
on November 15, 2019, and shall cover the quarter that began on July 1, 2019.
Subsequent reports shall be posted and submitted no later than 45 days after
the end of each quarter thereafter. Such reports shall include the following
information for the relevant reporting period:
      1.   The total number of ongoing cash and supplemental nutrition
assistance applications denied;
      2.   The total number of applications denied, disaggregated by type of
ongoing cash or supplemental nutrition assistance;
      3.   The total number of each type of ongoing cash or supplemental
nutrition assistance applications denied, disaggregated by the reason(s) why
such applications were denied, using the welfare management system denial
codes;
      4.   The data required by paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this subdivision shall
be further disaggregated by:
         (a)   The council district the case head lives in;
         (b)   The reported race, ethnicity, gender and age category of the
case head;
         (c)   Whether the case head has limited English proficiency; and
         (d)   Whether the case head has received a reasonable accommodation
for a disability from the department.
   d.   Re-open after termination. The department shall post on its website and
submit to the speaker of the council and the public advocate a report on
reopened cases for the relevant reporting period. The first such report shall
be due on November 15, 2019, and shall cover the quarter that began on July 1,
2019. Subsequent reports shall be posted and submitted no later than 45 days
after the end of each quarter thereafter. Such report shall include the
following information for the relevant reporting period:
      1.   The total number of reopened cases;
      2.   The total number of reopened cases, disaggregated by the type of
ongoing cash or supplemental nutrition assistance;
      3.   The total number of instances in which a case was reopened within
three months of ongoing cash or supplemental nutrition assistance termination
and was reopened for the same type of ongoing cash or supplemental nutrition
assistance, disaggregated using the welfare management system reopen codes;
      4.   The total number of instances in which a public assistance case was
terminated and at least one disbursement date passed before such case was
reopened for the same type of ongoing cash or supplemental nutrition
assistance;
      5.   The data required by paragraphs 1, 2, 3 and 4 of this subdivision
shall be further disaggregated by:
         (a)   The council district the case head lives in;
         (b)   The reported race, ethnicity, gender and age category of the
case head;
         (c)   Whether the case head has limited English proficiency; and
         (d)   Whether the case head has received a reasonable accommodation
for a disability from the department.
   e.   The reports produced pursuant to subdivisions b, c and d of this
section shall be stored permanently and shall be accessible on the department's
website. Reports required pursuant to this section shall not contain personally
identifiable information.
(L.L. 2019/170, 9/14/2019, eff. 9/14/2019; Am. L.L. 2019/168, 9/14/2019, eff.
9/14/2019)
§ 21-142.1 Arrests, summonses, removals, escorts and use of force incidents in
a job center or SNAP center.
   a.   As used in this section, the following terms have the following
meanings:
      Basis for encounter. The term "basis for encounter" means the conduct,
offense or reason that formed the basis for the initial approach by a peace
officer or security guard that led to an arrest, summons, removal, escort or
use of force incident.
      Escort. The term "escort" means the accompaniment of an individual by a
peace officer or security guard out of a job center or SNAP center following a
request that such individual exit the job center or SNAP center.
      Injury. The term "injury" means any physical harm an individual sustains
as a result of a use of force incident, and consists of the following
categories: (i) physical injury, such as minor swelling, a contusion,
laceration, abrasion or complaint of substantial contracted pain; (ii)
substantial physical injury, such as a significant contusion or laceration that
requires sutures or any injury that appears to require treatment at a hospital
emergency room; and (iii) serious physical injury, such as a broken or
fractured bone, heart attack, stroke or any injury that appears to require
hospital admission.
      Job center. The term "job center" means any location designated by the
department as a job center where individuals can complete an application for
cash assistance in person.
      Peace officer. The term "peace officer" means an individual who is
designated as a peace officer pursuant to section 2.10 of the criminal
procedure law and works for the department and is charged with promoting
security within a job center or SNAP center.
      Removal. The term "removal" means the taking into custody of an
individual in a job center or SNAP center by a peace officer pursuant to
section 9.41 of the mental hygiene law.
      Security guard. The term "security guard" means an unarmed individual
with a current and valid registration card issued in accordance with article 7-
A of the general business law authorizing such individual to perform security
services in New York, who is employed by an entity with which the department
contracts to promote security within job centers and SNAP centers.
      SNAP center. The term "SNAP center" means any location designated by the
department as a SNAP center where individuals can complete an application for
the supplemental nutrition assistance program in person.
      Use of force incident. The term "use of force incident" means any
instance where a peace officer or security guard responds to an incident or
condition at a job center or SNAP center and takes action in a manner intended
to have an immediate effect on the body of another person, and consists of the
following categories: (i) the use of hand strikes, foot strikes, forcible take-
downs or the wrestling of the subject to the ground; (ii) the discharge of
oleoresin capsicum spray; (iii) the deployment of a conducted electrical
weapon; (iv) the use of a mesh restraining blanket to secure an individual; (v)
the intentional striking of a person with any object, including a baton or
other equipment; (vi) a police canine bite; and (vii) the use of physical force
that is readily capable of causing death or serious physical injury, including
the discharge of a firearm.
   b.   No later than January 31, 2020, and no later than 30 days after the end
of each calendar quarter thereafter, the department shall post on its website
and submit to the speaker of the council an aggregate report on arrests,
summonses, removals, escorts and use of force incidents in job centers and SNAP
centers for the preceding quarter. Reports required pursuant to this section
shall not contain personally identifiable information. Such reports shall
include:
      1.   The total number of arrests by a peace officer, disaggregated by:
         (a)   The job center or SNAP center where the arrest occurred;
         (b)   The offense charged; and
         (c)   Whether the arrestee was issued a desk appearance ticket or was
the subject of a live arrest;
      2.   The following information for each summons issued by a peace
officer:
         (a)   The date the summons was issued;
         (b)   The job center or SNAP center where the summons was issued;
         (c)   The offense; and
         (d)   Whether the summons was civil or criminal;
      3.   The following information for each removal:
         (a)   The date the removal occurred;
         (b)   The job center or SNAP center where the removal occurred; and
         (c)   The basis for the encounter;
      4.   The following information for each use of force incident:
         (a)   The date the use of force incident occurred;
         (b)   The job center or SNAP center where the use of force incident
occurred;
         (c)   The category of the use of force incident;
         (d)   The number and category of injuries to a peace officer or
security guard;
         (e)   The number and category of injuries to any other individual;
         (f)   The basis for the encounter; and
         (g)   Whether or not an arrest was made;
      5.   The total number of times the department called the police
department for assistance at a job center or SNAP center, disaggregated by:
         (a)   Whether a department employee witnessed an arrest being made;
and
         (b)   Whether a department employee witnessed a police officer
displaying a firearm, oleoresin capsicum spray, conducted electrical weapon,
baton, or any other weapon; and
      6.   The total number of escorts, disaggregated by:
         (a)   The job center or SNAP center where the escort occurred; and
         (b)   The basis for the encounter.
   c.   The reports produced pursuant to subdivision b of this section shall be
stored permanently and shall be accessible on the department's website.
(L.L. 2019/161, 9/14/2019, eff. 9/14/2019)
§ 21-142.2 Office of constituent services.
   a.   There shall be an office of constituent services within the department.
The duties of such office shall include, but not be limited to:
      1.   Establishing a system to receive and respond to comments, questions
and complaints from clients;
      2.   Conducting a review of all inquiries from clients about cases where
any public benefits administered by the department have been or will be
terminated including, but not limited to, the reason for such termination,
whether the recipient was notified that such public benefits have been or will
be terminated and whether the department has complied with the applicable
statutes, rules and regulations with respect to such cases;
      3.   Establishing and maintaining policies regarding communication with
clients in a timely manner in response to inquiries;
      4.   Developing strategies and recommendations for the commissioner
regarding client communication; and
      5.   Performing such other duties and functions as may be appropriate.
   b.   The department shall post on its website the phone number for the
office of constituent services and a statement indicating that any person may
contact such office if such person has a comment, question or complaint
regarding any public benefit administered by the department.
   c.   Beginning on January 31, 2020, the office of constituent services shall
submit monthly reports to the commissioner indicating:
      1.   The number of comments, questions and complaints received;
      2.   The number of comments, questions and complaints received in which
information was provided and the matter resolved;
      3.   The number of comments, questions and complaints received in which
the matter was escalated for resolution, disaggregated by the 20 most frequent
categories of inquiries; and
      4.   Recommendations made pursuant to paragraph 4 of subdivision a of
this section.
   d.   No later than January 31, 2021 and annually thereafter, the
commissioner shall post on the department's website and submit to the mayor and
the speaker of the council a report that shall include a compilation of the
monthly reports submitted pursuant to subdivision c of this section during the
preceding calendar year.
(L.L. 2019/160, 9/14/2019, eff. 1/12/2020; Am. L.L. 2019/171, 9/14/2019, eff.
1/12/2020)
§ 21-142.3 Social work services in job centers.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have
the following meanings:
      Job center. "Job center" has the same meaning as set forth in section
21-142.1.
      Social work services. "Social work services" means the coordination of
client services to expedite and assist clients with obtaining such services,
where such coordination is provided primarily by a social worker.
   b.   The department shall establish a pilot program for the design,
development, staffing, implementation and provision of social work services at
one job center in each borough. No later than July 15, 2020, the commissioner
shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council a report outlining the
findings of such pilot program.
   c.   No later than January 1, 2021, the department shall ensure that social
work services are expanded to all job centers and available during regular
hours of operation of such centers.
(L.L. 2019/162, 9/14/2019, eff. 1/12/2020)
§ 21-142.4 Space for children in job centers and SNAP centers.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have
the following meanings:
      Child. The term "child" means a natural person under the age of 13 years.
      Client. The term "client" means a visitor who has made initial contact
with the department at a job center or SNAP center, either through a self-
service kiosk or with a staff member responsible for keeping track of visitors.
      Job center. The term "Job center" has the same meaning as set forth in
section
21-142.1.
      SNAP center. "SNAP center" has the same meaning as set forth in section
21-142.1.
   b.   The department shall designate a sanitary space in every job center and
SNAP center for any client with a child in such center where providing such
space is practicable and does not compromise the space needs of the department
or safety of clients. Such designated space shall include comfortable seating
and age-appropriate and educational materials for any child who utilizes such
space.
   c.   The department shall create a poster containing information on
availability of space for children pursuant to this section and any additional
accommodations for children. Such poster shall be displayed in a clear and
conspicuous manner in all job centers and SNAP centers. Information about space
for children in job centers and SNAP centers shall be made available on the
department's website. Within 30 days after the effective date of the local law
adding this subdivision, the department shall create a list of all locations
with spaces for children available pursuant to this section. The department
shall submit such list to the speaker of the council and make such list
available on the department's website.
(L.L. 2019/164, 9/14/2019, eff. 1/12/2020)
§ 21-142.5 Job center and SNAP center appointments.
   a.   For purposes of this section, the following terms have the following
meanings:
      Job center. The term "job center" has the same meaning as set forth in
section
21-142.1.
      SNAP center. The term "SNAP center" has the same meaning as set forth in
section
21-142.1.
   b.   The department shall maintain systems in which in-person appointments
for services at job centers and SNAP centers can be rescheduled over the phone.
The availability of such systems shall be communicated to clients in the
written notice clients receive communicating the date, time and location of
their appointments.
(L.L. 2019/165, 9/14/2019, eff. 1/12/2020)
§ 21-143 Information on local emergency feeding programs.
The department shall distribute by mail or email information regarding all
city-funded emergency feeding programs as defined in section
21-131 to all individuals who have received supplemental nutrition assistance
program benefits whose case closed on or after January 1, 2016. The department
shall also distribute such information to individuals currently in receipt of
such benefits at the time such an individual receives a recertification notice
for such benefits. Such information shall also be made readily accessible
through such department's online portal and any related mobile applications.
(L.L. 2019/179, 10/13/2019, eff. 10/15/2019)
§ 21-144 Online access to rental assistance application status.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings.
      Provider. The term "provider" means a community-based organization under
contract or similar agreement with the department or the department of homeless
services for assisting an individual with their rental assistance application
or renewal request.
      Rental assistance. The term "rental assistance" means financial
assistance provided by the department for the purpose of paying a recipient's
rent on an ongoing basis and includes but is not limited to the public
assistance shelter allowance provided by the department as established by
section 131-a of the social services law, section 159 of the social services
law, section 349 of the social services law, or any codes, rules and
regulations, as well as subsidies provided through the rental assistance
program established in chapters 9 and 10 of title 68 of the rules of the city
of New York, and any successor program to the foregoing programs.
   b.   Online access. No later than June 30, 2021, the commissioner or his or
her designee shall execute a contract that will provide for the status of a
rental assistance application or renewal request to be made available online to
the applicant or provider. Such status shall include specific information on
where in the process of the rental assistance request an application is, and
whether and when any rental assistance payments have been issued.
(L.L. 2020/118, 11/17/2020, eff. 11/17/2020)
§ 21-145 Use of rental assistance vouchers.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Applicant. The term “applicant” means an individual or family applying
for a rental assistance voucher.
      Drop-in center. The term “drop-in center” means a facility operated by
the department of homeless services or a provider under contract or similar
agreement with such department that provides single adults with hot meals,
showers, laundry facilities, clothing, medical care, recreational space,
employment referrals, or housing placement services, but not overnight housing.
      Experiencing homelessness. The term “experiencing homelessness” means:
(i) residing in a city-administered shelter; (ii) working with a department of
homeless services or department of youth and community development outreach
team while receiving services in a safe haven, stabilization bed, drop-in
center, or runaway and homeless youth services; or (iii) receiving case
management services from a provider under contract with the department of
homeless services.
      FHEPS. The term “FHEPS” means the family homelessness and eviction
prevention supplement program described in section 131-bb of the social
services law.
      Gross income. The term “gross income” has the same meaning as provided in
subdivision (t) of section 10-01 of title 68 of the rules of the city of New
York.
      Homeless young adult. The term “homeless young adult” has the same
meaning as provided in section 532-a of the executive law.
      Homeless youth. The term “homeless youth” has the same meaning as
provided in section 532-a of the executive law and includes homeless young
adults.
      Household. The term "household" means an individual or family in receipt
of a rental assistance voucher.
      Household at risk of eviction. The term “household at risk of eviction”
means an individual or family that has received: (i) a written demand for rent
payment or a predicate holdover notice pursuant to sections 711 or 713 of the
real property actions and proceedings law; or (ii) a notice of non-renewal of
residential tenancy pursuant to section 226-c of the real property law.
      Household rent contribution. The term “household rent contribution” means
the percent of income that a household in receipt of a rental assistance
voucher contributes toward the rent of an apartment or a single room occupancy.
      Income eligible. The term “income eligible” means an applicant: (i) whose
total gross income does not exceed 50 percent of the area median income, as
defined by the federal department of housing and urban development; (ii) who,
if eligible, has applied for public assistance and, if approved for such
assistance, is in receipt of such assistance; (iii) who is in compliance with
public assistance requirements, if applicable; (iv) who has applied for and
accepted any federal or state housing benefits for which such applicant is
eligible, including section 8 or the rental assistance program described in
chapter 9 of title 68 of the rules of the city of New York, regarding the human
resources administration home tenant-based rental assistance program, or a
successor provision; (v) who is ineligible for FHEPS; and (vi) who has not
previously received a rental assistance voucher, except an applicant who meets
the requirements of subdivision (d) of section 10-08 of title 68 of the rules
of the city of New York, regarding restoration of rental assistance vouchers
for certain households, or a successor provision.
      Maximum rental allowances. The term "maximum rental allowances" means the
maximum rent toward which rental assistance vouchers may be applied.
      Public assistance. The term “public assistance” means benefits,
including, but not limited to, monthly grants and shelter allowances issued
under the family assistance program pursuant to section 349 of the social
services law or the safety net assistance program pursuant to section 159 of
the social services law.
      Rental assistance voucher. The term "rental assistance voucher" means
rent payments made pursuant to chapter 10 of title 68 of the rules of the city
of New York or any other city-initiated rental housing subsidy for households
at risk of eviction or families and individuals residing in shelter.
      Runaway youth. The term “runaway youth” has the same meaning as provided
in section 532-a of the executive law.
      Runaway and homeless youth services. The term “runaway and homeless youth
services” has the same meaning as provided in section
21-401.
      Safe haven. The term “safe haven” means a facility operated by the
department of homeless services or a provider under contract or similar
agreement with such department that provides low-threshold, harm-reduction
housing to chronic street homeless individuals, who are referred to such
facilities through a department of homeless services outreach program, without
the obligation of entering into other supportive and rehabilitative services in
order to reduce barrier to temporary housing.
      Section 8. The term “section 8” means the housing choice voucher program
administered pursuant to section 982.1 of title 24 of the code of federal
regulations.
      Shelter. The term “shelter” means temporary emergency housing provided to
homeless adults, adult families, families with children, and runaway and
homeless youth by the city or a provider under contract or similar agreement
with the city.
      Shelter allowance. The term “shelter allowance” means financial
assistance provided by the department for the purposes of paying rent on an
ongoing basis in accordance with section 131-a of the social services law.
      Stabilization beds. The term “stabilization bed” means city-administered
facilities that provide a short-term housing option for an individual
experiencing homelessness while such individual works with a department of
homeless services outreach team to locate a more permanent housing option.
      Utility allowance. The term “utility allowance” means a monthly allowance
for utility services, excluding cable, internet, and telephone services, paid
by a subsidized housing tenant.
   b.   Eligibility. 
      1.   Subject to appropriation, a household will continue to receive
additional annual renewals of their vouchers after their fifth year in the
CityFHEPS rental assistance program established pursuant to chapter 10 of title
68 of the rules of the city of New York, or a successor program, if they
continue to meet the requirements set forth in section 10-08 of title 68 the
rules of the city of New York, regarding renewals and restorations of
CityFHEPS, or a successor provision.
      2.   The department shall not base eligibility for a rental assistance
voucher on the applicant’s employment status or source of income, and shall not
require an applicant to have resided or reside in a shelter of any type.
      3.   The department shall deem eligible for a rental assistance voucher
any applicant who is income eligible and is a household at risk of eviction or
experiencing homelessness.
   c.   Maximum rental allowances. Subject to appropriation, maximum rental
allowances shall be set in accordance with section 982.503 of title 24 of the
code of federal regulations, regarding voucher payment standard amounts, or a
successor provision.
   d.   Amount of monthly rental assistance. The department shall provide
monthly rental assistance to an owner or a landlord on behalf of a household in
receipt of a rental assistance voucher in the amount equal to the actual
monthly rent of the leased apartment or single room occupancy, up to the
maximum rental allowance, minus the household rent contribution. The department
shall not deduct a utility allowance from such amount.
   e.   Utility allowance deduction. 
      1.   The department shall provide that when a household rents an
apartment or single room occupancy for less than the maximum rental allowance,
the household rent contribution shall be reduced by the difference between the
maximum rental allowance and the actual rent, up to the amount of the utility
allowance.
      2.   If the amount by which the household rent contribution is reduced
pursuant to paragraph 1 of this subdivision is greater than the household’s
rent contribution, the department shall issue a check to the household in the
amount of such excess within the month in which such excess is accrued.
      3.   If the household receives a shelter allowance that is reduced by the
amount allowed by paragraph 1 of this subdivision, the department shall issue a
check to the household in the amount of such reduction within the month in
which such reduction is accrued.
   f.   Within 15 days of the effective date of the local law that added
subdivision d, e, and f of this section, and continuing thereafter, the
commissioner, in consultation with the commissioner of housing preservation and
development, shall conduct culturally appropriate outreach on this section to
relevant agencies, stakeholders, landlords, and families and individuals
experiencing homelessness in the designated citywide languages, as defined in
section
23-1101.
   g.   Household rent contribution amount. Household rent contribution shall
not exceed 30 percent of the household’s total monthly gross income at the time
of approval or renewal, regardless of whether such household receives public
assistance.
(L.L. 2021/071, 6/27/2021, eff. 12/24/2021; Am. L.L. 2023/099, 7/13/2023, eff.
1/9/2024; Am. L.L. 2023/100, 7/13/2023, eff. 1/9/2024; Am. L.L. 2023/101, 7/13/
2023, eff. 1/9/2024; Am. L.L. 2023/102, 7/13/2023, eff. 1/9/2024; Am. L.L.
2025/176, 12/4/2025, eff. 3/4/2026)
§ 21-145.1 Rental assistance for youth in foster care. [Repealed]
(L.L. 2021/157, 12/24/2021, eff. 4/23/2022; Repealed L.L. 2023/100, 7/13/2023,
eff. 1/9/2024)
§ 21-145.2 Rental assistance for runaway and homeless youth. [Repealed]
(L.L. 2021/170, 12/24/2021, eff. 4/23/2022; Repealed L.L. 2023/100, 7/13/2023,
eff. 1/9/2024)
§ 21-145.3 Rental assistance payments.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the term "rental
assistance payments" means recurring payments made by the department to
landlords on behalf of tenants pursuant to programs administered by the
department, excluding state funded shelter allowance payments made pursuant to
section 352.3 of title 18 of the New York codes, rules and regulations.
   b.   The department shall provide landlords the option to accept rental
assistance payments via an electronic transfer into a bank account.
(L.L. 2023/063, 5/29/2023, eff. 5/29/2024)
§ 21-145.4 Reporting on CityFHEPS rental assistance payments.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have
the following meanings:
      CityFHEPS rental assistance payments. The term “CityFHEPS rental
assistance payments” means recurring payments made by the department to
landlords on behalf of tenants pursuant to chapter 10 of title 68 of the rules
of the city of New York.
      Scheduled payment date. The term “scheduled payment date” means the date
when payments are to be made in accordance with section 10-14(b) of chapter 10
of title 68 of the rules of the city of New York.
   b.   CityFHEPS rental assistance payments report. Beginning on March 1, 2024
and quarterly thereafter, the department shall submit to the speaker of the
council and post on its website a report on the timeliness of CityFHEPS rental
assistance payments for the prior completed quarter. The report shall include a
table in which each row represents a unique rental voucher and shall include,
but not be limited to, the following information:
      1.   Rental assistance payment amount;
      2.   Rental assistance payment month;
      3.   Zip code of rental assistance recipient;
      4.   Whether rental assistance payment was timely or sent after the
scheduled payment date, and reason for late payment; and
      5.   Where the late payment is caused by the agency, a description of the
actions the department will take to ensure rental assistance payments are
consistently made on or before the scheduled payment date for each late payment
recipient.
   c.   No information that is otherwise required to be reported pursuant to
this section shall be reported in a manner that would violate any applicable
law relating to the privacy of individual information.
(L.L. 2023/145, 11/5/2023, eff. 11/5/2023)
§ 21-146 Resources for client service providers and responses to complaints of
gender-based harassment and sexual assault.
   a.   Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Complaint. The term "complaint" means a complaint made by:
         1.   A client of a contracted client service provider regarding an
incident that occurred while receiving services; or
         2.   Staff of a contracted client service provider regarding an
incident that occurred during the course of their employment.
      Contracted client service provider. The term "contracted client service
provider" means a person that has entered into a contract with the department
or, for the purposes of subdivision e of this section, the department or the
department of homeless services, to provide client services.
      Survivor. The term "survivor" means a person who has experienced or
reported gender-based harassment or sexual assault.
      Survivor assistance organizations. The term "survivor assistance
organizations" means a community-based organization that provides trauma-
informed assistance to survivors who are experiencing homelessness.
   b.   Access to information and resources. 
      1.   The New York city commission on human rights and the office to end
domestic and gender-based violence shall make available survivor-centered,
culturally relevant, and trauma-informed gender-based harassment and sexual
assault information and resources to the department. In addition to other such
relevant information and resources, the office to end domestic and gender based
violence shall make available to the department a survivor resource guide. This
survivor resource guide shall be updated at least annually by the office to end
domestic and gender-based violence, in consultation with relevant survivor
assistance organizations. The department shall compile such information and
resources and make such information and resources accessible through the
department's website. In addition to the online survivor resource guide, the
information and resources accessible through the department's website shall
include but not be limited to:
         (a)   Survivor hotlines;
         (b)   Information regarding community-based and agency programs,
including family justice centers, social services, benefits assistance, housing
assistance, legal services and healthcare services; and
         (c)   Any other information deemed relevant by the commissioner.
      2.   The department shall provide the information and resources compiled
pursuant to paragraph 1 of this subdivision, including the online survivor
resource guide, to contracted client service providers to support a survivor-
centered, culturally relevant, and trauma-informed response to complaints of
gender-based harassment or sexual assault.
   c.   Training. No later than 30 days after the effective date of the local
law that added this section, the department shall make available through its
website links to online training resources related to gender-based harassment
and sexual assault that are survivor-centered, culturally relevant, and trauma-
informed for contracted client service providers. Such training resources shall
include the online anti-sexual harassment training offered by the New York city
commission on human rights pursuant to subdivision 30 of section
8-107 and any other training resources that the department obtains and deems
appropriate to include on its website.
   d.   Outreach. No later than 30 days after the effective date of the local
law that added this section, the department shall make available to contracted
client service providers outreach materials, including informational flyers and
signage. The department shall advise such contracted client service providers
to distribute such materials to staff and clients, and to post such materials
in conspicuous locations that are visible to staff and clients.
   e.   Complaints. 
      1.   Any complaints related to gender-based harassment or sexual assault
made to the department or the department of homeless services shall be reviewed
by designated and trained staff of the department, in consultation with the
office to end domestic and gender-based violence, as appropriate. The
department shall, no later than 24 hours after receiving a complaint, connect
such survivor to information and resources that may include information about
how to file a complaint of discrimination with the New York city commission on
human rights. The department shall provide, or direct survivors to, additional
follow up and resources as the department deems appropriate.
      2.   The department and the department of homeless services shall take
steps to protect the privacy of a survivor, including, but not limited to,
anonymizing, where appropriate, any interagency communication.
      3.   On or before July 31, 2022 and every six months thereafter, the
department shall review, to the extent that such information is available to
the department or the department of homeless services, all complaints of
gender-based harassment or sexual assault made to the department or the
department of homeless services against contracted client service providers and
any settlements entered into or outcomes reached by such contracted client
service providers in response to such complaints of gender-based harassment or
sexual assault, if any, including whether any referrals were made to the police
department or to survivor assistance organizations.
      4.   On or before January 31, 2022 and annually thereafter, the
department shall submit a report to the speaker of the council summarizing any
steps it has taken to establish procedures pursuant to the requirements of this
section.
(L.L. 2021/102, 9/26/2021, eff. 1/24/2022)
§ 21-147 Domestic violence emergency shelter services for lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender, queer, questioning, intersex, gender non-conforming and
non-binary residents.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have
the following meanings:
      Domestic violence emergency shelter. The term "domestic violence
emergency shelter" has the same meaning as provided in section
21-141.
      LGBTQI+. The term "LGBTQI+" means lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender,
queer, questioning, intersex, gender non-conforming or non-binary.
   b.   No later than August 1, 2023 and annually by August 1 thereafter, the
department shall complete a review of the services and resources provided to
LGBTQI+ individuals entering domestic violence emergency shelters including,
but not limited to, efforts aimed at data collection about LGBTQI+ individuals
utilizing domestic violence emergency shelter, and shall submit to the mayor
and the speaker of the council, and post on its website, a written report
including the following information:
      1.   The total number of survey forms distributed by the department
pursuant to paragraph 4 of subdivision k of section 15 of chapter 1 of the
charter;
      2.   The total number of individuals who self-identified as LGBTQI+ on
the survey forms distributed pursuant to paragraph 4 of subdivision k of
section 15 of chapter 1 of the charter;
      3.   A description of the department's efforts to collect data
specifically about LGBTQI+ individuals utilizing domestic violence emergency
shelters;
      4.   A description of what the department has determined are the specific
service needs of domestic violence emergency shelter residents who identify as
LGBTQI+;
      5.   A description of the types of services and resources provided at
domestic violence emergency shelters specific to residents who identify as
LGBTQI+;
      6.   A description of the department's outreach efforts to reach LGBTQI+
individuals who may be eligible for domestic violence emergency shelter
services;
      7.   To the extent practicable, the total number of complaints the
department received regarding domestic violence emergency shelter services
provided to residents who identify as LGBTQI+, disaggregated by complaint type;
      8.   Recommendations for enhancing outreach efforts and services offered
by the department specifically for domestic violence emergency shelter
residents who identify as LGBTQI+; and
      9.   The total number of unduplicated department and contracted provider
staff who have completed the training regarding LGBTQI+ individuals to be
provided pursuant to subdivision c of this section during the preceding fiscal
year.
   c.   Beginning no later than six months after the effective date of this
local law, and at least once every two years thereafter, the department shall,
in consultation with a community based organization with culturally specific
expertise in challenges faced by LGBTQI+ individuals who have experienced
domestic violence, provide training to all appropriate employees identified by
the department who work directly with clients at domestic violence emergency
shelters.
(L.L. 2021/130, 11/21/2021, eff. 5/20/2022)
§ 21-148 Annual reporting on supportive housing.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Coordinated assessment and placement system (CAPS). The term coordinated
assessment and placement system (CAPS) means the continuum of care (CoC) system
developed and required by the United States department of housing and urban
development that relies on the existing network of nonprofit homeless
assistance providers, victim service providers, faith-based organizations,
governments, businesses, advocates, public housing agencies, school districts,
social service providers, mental health agencies, hospitals, universities,
affordable housing developers, law enforcement, and organizations that serve
veterans and homeless and formerly homeless individuals to streamline the way
people move from homelessness into permanent housing.
      Interview. The term "interview" means a meeting between an individual
applying for supportive housing and the housing provider for the purpose of
placement.
      Supportive housing. The term "supportive housing" means affordable,
permanent housing with support services.
      Unsheltered homeless person. The term "unsheltered homeless person" means
an individual with a primary nighttime residence that is a public or private
place not designed for or ordinarily used as a regular sleeping accommodation
for human beings.
   b.   Not later than September 1, 2022 and annually thereafter, the
commissioner of social services shall post on the department's website and
submit to the speaker of the council information on supportive housing
contained within the coordinated assessment and placement system (CAPS) for the
preceding fiscal year. Such reports shall include, but not be limited to the
following information about applicants for supportive housing during the
reporting period:
      1.   The total number of unique individuals or families determined
eligible for supportive housing by the department, disaggregated by the
following information: (i) age group; (ii) gender; (iii) data collected
pursuant to subdivisions i, j and k of section 15 of the charter; (iv)
population category; (v) length of time the client has been homeless; and (vi)
the client's current shelter placement or if the client is an unsheltered
homeless person at the time of eligibility determination.
      2.   The total number of unique individuals or families determined
eligible by the department and referred for an interview for supportive
housing, disaggregated by the following information: (i) age; (ii) gender;
(iii) data collected pursuant to subdivisions i, j and k of section 15 of the
charter; (iv) population category; (v) length of time the client has been
homeless at the time of eligibility determination; (vi) the client's current
shelter placement or whether the client is an unsheltered homeless person; and
(vii) the referring agency or program at the time of eligibility determination.
      3.   The total number of unique individuals or families determined
eligible by the department and not referred for an interview for supportive
housing at any point during the reporting period, disaggregated by the
following information: (i) age; (ii) gender; (iii) data collected pursuant to
subdivisions i, j and k of section 15 of the charter; (iv) population category;
(v) length of time the client has been homeless at the time of eligibility
determination; (vi) the client's current shelter placement or if the client is
an unsheltered homeless person; (vii) the agency or program choosing not to
refer the client; and (viii) the reason the agency or program at the time of
eligibility determination, did not make a referral, including but not limited
to the client not having an income.
      4.   The total number of unique individuals or families who received an
interview for supportive housing, disaggregated by the following information:
(i) age; (ii) gender; (iii) data collected pursuant to subdivisions i, j and k
of section 15 of the charter; (iv) population category; (v) average length of
time the client has been homeless at time of eligibility determination; (vi)
the client's current shelter placement or if the individual is an unsheltered
homeless person; (vii) the referring agency or program at the time of
eligibility determination; (viii) which supportive housing initiative or plan
the unit for which the client interviewed is a part of; and (ix) whether the
unit for which the client interviewed is an individual or family unit.
      5.   The total number of unique individuals or families who were
referred, but did not receive an interview for supportive housing,
disaggregated by the following information: (i) age; (ii) gender; (iii) data
collected pursuant to subdivisions i, j and k of section 15 of the charter;
(iv) population category; (v) average length of time the client has been
homeless at the time of eligibility determination; (vi) the client's current
shelter placement or if the client is an unsheltered homeless person; (vii) the
referring agency or program at the time of eligibility determination; and
(viii) the reason the client was referred, but did not receive an interview.
      6.   The total number of unique clients or families accepted to
supportive housing disaggregated by the following information: (i) age; (ii)
gender; (iii) data collected pursuant to subdivisions i, j and k of section 15
of the charter; (iv) population category; (v) average length of time the client
has been homeless at the time of eligibility determination; (vi) the client's
current shelter placement or if the individual is an unsheltered homeless
person; (vii) the referring agency or program at the time of eligibility
determination; (viii) the average number of interviews the client attended;
(ix) which supportive housing initiative or plan the unit for which the client
was accepted is part of; and (x) whether the unit for which the client was
accepted is an individual or family unit.
      7.   The total number of unique individuals or families rejected for
supportive housing after an interview disaggregated by the following
information: (i) age; (ii) gender; (iii) data collected pursuant to
subdivisions i, j and k of section 15 of the charter; (iv) population category;
(v) length of time the client has been homeless at the time of eligibility
determination; (vi) the client's current shelter placement or if the individual
is an unsheltered homeless person; (vii) the average number of interviews the
client attended; (viii) which supportive housing initiative or plan the unit
for which the client interviewed is part of; (ix) whether the unit for which
the client interviewed is an individual or family unit; and (x) reasons the
individual or family was rejected including, but not limited to, that the
housing provider did not accept the client, and any reason indicated for such
rejection, including, but not limited to: (i) client did not show for
interview, and, if known, the reason such client did not show; (ii) client did
not complete interview and, if known, the reason such client did not complete
the interview; (iii) available unit filled by another candidate who was
referred; (iv) client not eligible due to funding requirements, and, if known,
the funding requirements that resulted in such client not being eligible,
disaggregated by eligibility criteria including client is unable to evacuate
New York State office of mental health licensed housing within the timeline
established under section 595.7 of title 14 of the New York codes, rules, and
regulations; criminal convictions; or sex offender status; (v) medical needs
beyond the scope of the facility; (vi) client needs treatment and/or medication
monitoring beyond scope of this facility; (vii) client needs more support for
personal care needs beyond scope of this facility and, if known, a description
of such personal care needs; (viii) program does not provide the level of
service the client needs and the level of service that the interviewing
provider reports to be necessary; (ix) reasons related to physical appearance;
(x) client was unable to evacuate within an established timeline; (xi) behavior
in interview; (xii) client is currently suicidal or has a history of
suicidality; (xiii) drug/alcohol related; (xiv) household composition
inconsistent with unit; (xv) issue related to child welfare case; (xvi) issue
related to family court; (xvii) lacked insight into mental illness; (xviii)
language related; (xix) medication related; (xx) reasonable accommodation
request not granted; (xxi) unit not physically accessible to client; (xxii)
interview canceled by provider, and if known, the reason such interview was
canceled; (xxiii) client needs less support than the program provides and, if
known, what support the provider determined was not needed by the client;
(xxiv) emotional support animal related; (xxv) service, guide or hearing dog
related; (xxvi) issue related to client having been in supportive housing in
the past; and (xxvii) any other reason indicated in the record of such client's
interview.
      8.   The number of referred unique individuals still awaiting placement
in supportive housing at the end of the reporting period disaggregated by the
following information: (i) age; (ii) gender; (iii) data collected pursuant to
subdivisions i, j and k of section 15 of the charter; (iv) population category;
(v) average length of time the individual has been homeless at the time of
eligibility determination; (vi) the individual's current shelter placement or
if the individual is an unsheltered homeless person; and (vii) the average
number of interviews the individual attended.
   c.   For any information required pursuant to subdivision b that is not
tracked by the coordinated assessment and placement system (CAPS), the
department shall, after reviewing relevant records, no later than September 1,
2023, incorporate into the coordinated assessment and placement system (CAPS)
and include such information in the reports required pursuant to this section.
(L.L. 2022/003, 1/9/2022, eff. 1/9/2022)
§ 21-148.1 Supportive housing occupancy reporting.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      HASA. The term “HASA” means the HIV/AIDS services administration within
the human resources administration.
      Offline unit. The term “offline unit” means a vacant unit to which a
client has not yet been referred due to staffing capacity, unit turnover,
maintenance needs, the sealing of such unit by the police department or a
public administrator, or other reasons.
      Online vacant unit. The term “online vacant unit” means a supportive
housing unit to which a client may be referred.
      Supportive housing. The term “supportive housing” means affordable,
permanent housing with support services.
      Vacant unit. The term “vacant unit” means a supportive housing unit that
is not occupied for permanent residence purposes, and includes online vacant
units, offline units, and vacant units with referral in process.
      Vacant unit with referral in process. The term “vacant unit with referral
in process” means a vacant unit with one or more pending referral requests or
referrals.
   b.   No later than January 1, 2026, the commissioner shall post on the
department’s website information on vacant units contained within the
coordinated assessment and placement system as such term is defined in section
21-148. No later than June 1, 2026, the commissioner shall also post on the
department’s website information on vacant units contained within the HASA web
system. Such information shall be disaggregated by (i) whether a supportive
housing unit is a new supportive housing unit or is already in use as a
supportive housing unit, (ii) the agency that holds the contract for supportive
housing that governs such unit, and (iii) whether a unit is located in
congregate or scatter site housing, including whether such unit is a single
room occupancy unit. Such information shall include, at a minimum:
      1.   The total number of online vacant units;
      2.   The percentage of all supportive housing units in the city that are
online vacant units;
      3.   The total number of vacant units with referral in process;
      4.   The total number of online vacant units for which an agency has not
referred a client for an interview or that are not in process for referral;
      5.   The total number of offline units;
      6.   The total number of vacant units;
      7.   The average and median number of days between the date a vacant unit
became available and the date such unit was occupied, for all vacant units in
each quarter;
      8.   The average and median number of days between the date an agency
received a client’s application for supportive housing and the date such client
was referred to a unit, in each quarter; and
      9.   The average and median number of days between the date an agency
referred a client to a unit and the date the unit was occupied, in each
quarter.
   c.   The information required to be posted pursuant to subdivision b of this
section shall be posted on a monthly basis, except that the information
described in paragraphs 7, 8, and 9 of such subdivision shall be posted on a
quarterly basis.
(L.L. 2025/135, 10/10/2025, eff. 10/10/2025)
§ 21-149 Supportive housing bill of rights.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Dwelling unit. The term "dwelling unit" means a dwelling unit as defined
in paragraph 13 of subdivision a of section
27-2004.
      Provider. The term "provider" means a provider under contract or similar
agreement with an agency to provide supportive housing.
      Supportive housing. The term "supportive housing" means affordable,
permanent or short term/transitional housing with supportive services for
tenants.
      Tenant. The term "tenant" means a person occupying, or intending to
occupy, the dwelling unit for 30 consecutive days or more.
      Tenancy agreement. The term "tenancy agreement" means an agreement signed
by the tenant upon placement in a supportive housing unit, listing the address,
rent contribution and tenant responsibilities and describing the unit assigned
to such tenant.
   b.   Notice of supportive housing tenant's rights. Every provider shall be
required to provide a notice of rights using plain and simple language to every
tenant under the following circumstances, as applicable: at the time of the
interview, at the time of initial occupancy of a unit, at each lease or program
agreement renewal, and upon request. If the tenant is known to have difficulty
reading, the provider shall also read the required documents to them at the
same intervals. A template of such notice shall also be posted on the website
of each agency that administers a supportive housing program. The notice, which
shall be provided and maintained by each agency that administers a supportive
housing program and customizable for each tenant, shall be in English and the
designated citywide languages as defined in section
23-1101. The notice shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
      1.   Whether, to a provider's knowledge, the dwelling unit is subject to
the rent stabilization law of 1969 or the emergency tenant protection act of
1974. For dwelling units subject to rent stabilization pursuant to such laws,
the notice shall also provide information on how to obtain a rent history from
the state division of housing and community renewal and a notification that the
provider will provide assistance in obtaining such rent history.
      2.   Whether the dwelling unit is in a building that is in receipt of a
tax exemption or abatement, including but not limited to abatements or
exemptions pursuant to sections 421-a or 421-g of the real property tax law or
section
11-243. If the building is in receipt of an exemption or abatement, the notice
will include the abatement or exemption start and end dates.
      3.   The tenant's right to reside in a unit that is fit for human
habitation and is free of any conditions that are dangerous, hazardous or
detrimental to their life, health or safety.
      4.   The tenant's right, if any, to bring special proceedings pursuant to
article 7 of the real property actions and proceedings law and that a tenant's
eviction must be sought through a court proceeding when required by section 711
or section 713 of the real property actions and proceedings law.
      5.   The tenant's right to file a petition in court to enforce the
housing maintenance code pursuant to section
27-2001 et seq., information about how to report violations of such code via
311 and appropriate agencies, and contact information for the supportive
housing program staff responsible for maintaining housing maintenance code
standards and responding to emergencies.
      6.   The tenant's right to reasonable accommodations and the right to use
and occupy housing accommodations without discrimination pursuant to the human
rights law, article 15 of the executive law; and the New York city human rights
law, section
8-107 et seq.
      7.   The tenant's right to receipts for rent paid pursuant to section
235-e of the real property law, where applicable.
      8.   The right of tenants to permit occupancy by family or additional
tenants pursuant to section 235-f of the real property law, based on the
supportive housing tenant's supportive housing arrangement, with notice
regarding how such additional tenants may impact the rental payment
responsibilities of the tenant.
      9.   The tenant's right to form, join or participate in a tenants'
association or other group advocating for the rights and protections of
tenants, without fear of harassment, retaliation or punishment for their
participation. This right shall include the right to convene a tenants'
association or organize meetings in certain locations in the building,
including common areas, without paying any fee.
      10.   The following information about the dwelling unit and the legal
rights applicable to the tenant:
         (a)   The name of the supportive housing program pursuant to which the
tenant is occupying the dwelling unit, and all funding streams used by the
program to provide social services or subsidize rents;
         (b)   The name of the state, federal or city agency administering the
supportive housing program and contact information for the agency office that
handles complaints and grievances at such administering agency;
         (c)   A list of the principal regulations applicable to all funding
streams for such agencies, including but not limited to whether the dwelling
unit is subject to section 595 et seq. of title 14 of the New York codes, rules
and regulations or any regulatory agreements with any federal, state or city
agency;
         (d)   The applicable grievance or equivalent policy or procedure used
by the provider to register and hear tenant complaints, including the processes
and timelines for the provider to respond to complaints;
         (e)   How to file a complaint with the agency administering the
supportive housing program;
         (f)   Available supportive services, and how the tenant may obtain a
copy of the policies and procedures for requesting or changing services;
         (g)   The total monthly rent, the portion of that rent to be paid by
the tenant, and the portion of the rent to be paid by another entity; and
         (h)   How the tenant may obtain a copy of the policies and procedures
governing the eviction from such tenant's dwelling unit or termination of such
tenant from the supportive housing program, including:
            (1)   Procedures for eviction prevention, including accommodations
of mental or physical disabilities;
            (2)   Pre-eviction or pre-termination requirements;
            (3)   Information about assistance with obtaining rental arrears or
provision of financial management assistance to ensure future rent payments;
            (4)   The tenant's right to request the current accounting of rent
payments and rental arrears to date from the account's last zero balance, as
well as income recertifications, leases or tenancy agreements.
      11.   The tenant's right to be free from harassment pursuant to section
27-2004.
      12.   The right of all tenants who are subject to section 711 or section
713 of the real property actions and proceedings law to remain in the dwelling
unit unless evicted from the dwelling unit by a marshal or sheriff pursuant to
a court order and the right that a tenant's eviction must be sought through a
court proceeding.
      13.   Relevant phone numbers that a tenant may call for legal advice and
possible legal representation including services provided under section
26-1302 if the provider initiates eviction proceedings in housing court,
including but not limited to 311.
      14.   The provider's obligations pursuant to section 741 of the real
property actions and proceedings law.
      15.   Whether a tenant's unit of supportive housing is subsidized by a
portable subsidy and the process for pursuing a transfer.
      16.   Any additional information related to rights of tenants provided
orally or in writing to a supportive housing applicant during an interview with
a provider.
   c.   Enforcement. Every provider shall provide to the commissioner of the
agency administering the supportive housing program an annual certification
executed under penalty of perjury that it has provided tenants with a notice of
rights in accordance with subdivision b of this section. Such certification
shall be made by the chief executive or chief financial officer of the provider
or the designee of any such person.
   d.   Penalties. Any provider that the agency administering the supportive
housing program finds does not provide the notice required under the provisions
of subdivision b of this section shall be liable for a civil penalty of $250
for each violation with the option to cure the violation within 14 days' notice
of the violation. For purposes of this section, each dwelling unit for which a
provider fails to provide the notice required pursuant to this section shall be
deemed a separate violation.
   e.   The agency administering the supportive housing program shall receive,
investigate and respond to complaints concerning violations of this section at
any supportive housing program that is financed with city funds and
administered by such agency. All substantiated complaints, responses and
violations issued by the agency administering the supportive housing program
will be posted on such agency's website and will include the identity of the
supportive housing provider, the date the complaint was submitted, any results
of the complaint, the date of the conclusion of any investigation resulting
from the complaint and the number and amount of penalties assessed.
(L.L. 2022/015, 1/9/2022, eff. 5/9/2022)
§ 21-150 Emergency assistance grants program.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have
the following meanings:
      ACCESS HRA. The term "ACCESS HRA" means the website and mobile
application in which individuals obtain information on and apply for some HRA
benefits, and HRA clients obtain certain HRA benefits case information.
      COVID-19. The term "COVID-19" means the disease caused by the severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2).
      Emergency assistance grants. The term "emergency assistance grants" means
a grant of financial assistance that HRA provides to households to pay expenses
such as rent or utility arrears in which HRA determines eligibility based on
New York state laws and regulations.
      HRA. The term "HRA" means the human resources administration.
      Job center. The term "job center" has the meaning ascribed to such term
in section
21-139.
   b.   No more than 30 days after the effective date of the local law that
added this section, the commissioner shall post in the rental assistance
section of the HRA website and on ACCESS HRA, and update, as appropriate,
information on emergency assistance grants. Such information shall include, but
need not be limited to, the application process and required documentation.
   c.   Until such time that a client is able to conduct their interview on
demand utilizing updated agency technology, department staff shall conduct two
phone calls to an applicant who filed an emergency assistance grant
application, during which the staff provides the phone number established
pursuant to section
21-142.2 where the client can be provided information about their application
status by a live customer service agent and self-service model, or leaves a
voicemail message if an applicant does not answer the phone call with the phone
number established pursuant to section
21-142.2 where the client can be provided information about their application
status by a live customer service agent and self-service model.
   d.   No more than 150 days after the effective date of the local law that
added this section, the commissioner shall include with application materials
for emergency assistance grants, cash assistance and SNAP an information sheet
written in plain language to inform prospective applicants which application
forms and other materials the applicant must complete to apply for such
benefits and whether such applicant may be required to pay back any such
benefits if received.
   e.   Outreach on emergency assistance grants. Beginning no more than 30 days
after the effective date of the local law that added this section, the
commissioner, in collaboration with relevant agencies, shall conduct culturally
appropriate outreach about emergency assistance grants in the designated
citywide languages, as defined in section
23-1101, which shall include changes in administration as a result of COVID-19.
Such outreach shall include, but need not be limited to, posting information in
public spaces and on relevant government websites, including, but not limited
to, the rental assistance section on the department website required by
subdivision b of this section.
   f.   HRA shall enhance opportunities for seniors, individuals with
disabilities, individuals who lack technology and individuals who lack
familiarity with technology, to apply for emergency assistance grants including
partnerships with elected officials, community-based organizations and non-
profit service providers. This shall also include having sufficient HRA staff
to (i) help such individuals apply by telephone if such method of application
is authorized or (ii) assist such individuals with the completion of paper
applications, including mailing a paper application to such individuals with a
self-addressed stamped envelope.
   g.   Reporting on emergency assistance grants. No later than June 30, 2022,
and quarterly thereafter, the commissioner shall submit a report to the mayor
and the speaker of the council that shall cover the quarter that began on April
1, 2022 on the administration and utilization of emergency assistance grants
for the previous four months, which the commissioner shall post on the HRA
website. Subsequent reports shall be posted and submitted no later than 45 days
after the end of each quarter thereafter. The report shall include the number
and percentage of:
      1.   New applications submitted solely for an emergency assistance grant;
      2.   Applications for emergency assistance grants that were accepted; and
      3.   Applications for emergency assistance grants that were not accepted.
   The information reported pursuant to paragraphs 1 through 3 of this
subdivision shall be disaggregated by the type of emergency assistance grant,
which shall include but need not be limited to, rental arrears and utilities.
   h.   Notification of emergency assistance grant application determination. 
      1.   The department shall make available, as a part of the application
for emergency assistance grants for rental assistance, a process by which any
applicant may authorize the department to send an automated email or text
message to the applicant upon a determination of an emergency assistance grant
application for rental assistance. Such email or text message shall be sent to
the email address or phone number of the applicant, provided that such
applicant submitted such contact information with the application on ACCESS
HRA, and such applicant has authorized such notice. Such email or text message
shall inform such applicant that a determination on their application has been
reached and how to access the determination using ACCESS HRA.
      2.   (a)   The department shall make available, as a part of the
application for emergency assistance grants for rental assistance, a process by
which any applicant may authorize the department to send an automated email or
text message to the applicant’s building owner or to a managing agent
designated by the building owner to collect the rental payments of the
applicant. The department shall send such email or text message upon the
approval of the applicant’s emergency assistance application, provided that the
applicant submitted such contact information with the application on ACCESS
HRA, and provided that the applicant has authorized such notice.
         (b)   Such email or text message shall inform such recipient only that
a rental assistance determination has been made concerning one of their tenants
and shall not contain any identifiable information regarding such tenant. Such
email or text message shall inform such recipient how to access the specifics
of the determination via a secure web portal maintained by the department. The
information accessible to such recipient via such secure web portal shall
include only the name of the tenant, the rental assistance amount, an estimated
issuance date for the rental assistance, and the delivery method of the rental
assistance.
(L.L. 2022/038, 1/15/2022, eff. 1/15/2022; Am. L.L. 2025/155, 11/8/2025, eff.
5/7/2026)
§ 21-151 Training and supervision of housing specialists.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Domestic violence emergency shelter. The term "domestic violence
emergency shelter" means time-limited housing for domestic violence survivors
managed by the department or a provider under a contract or similar agreement
with the department and subject to section 459-b of the social services law.
      Domestic violence tier II shelter. The term "domestic violence tier II
shelter" means housing for domestic violence survivors managed by the
department or a provider under a contract or similar agreement with the
department and subject to the provisions of part 453 of title 18 of the New
York codes, rules, and regulations.
      HIV/AIDS Services Administration ("HASA") shelter. The term "HASA
shelter" means single room occupancy hotels or congregate facilities that are
managed by the department or a provider under contract or similar agreement
with the department and assist individuals living with AIDS or HIV illness.
      Housing specialist. The term "housing specialist" means a case manager or
other staff of the department, or of a provider under contract or similar
agreement with the department, assigned to work in domestic violence emergency
shelters, domestic violence tier II shelters, or HASA shelters to help clients
in such shelters secure appropriate housing.
      Temporary shelter. The term "temporary shelter" means domestic violence
emergency shelters, domestic violence tier II shelters, and HASA shelters
managed by the department or a provider under contract or similar agreement
with the department.
   b.   Training and supervision of housing specialists. The department shall
designate housing specialists to serve in temporary shelters. The commissioner
shall establish a training program for housing specialists employed by
providers under contract or similar agreement with the department that shall
include, but not be limited to, establishing expertise in the various housing
programs to which eligible homeless clients may be referred and proper case
management techniques. The commissioner shall develop specific criteria to
assess the performance of housing specialists in matching, as expeditiously as
possible, eligible homeless persons with available housing resources. To the
extent such criteria relate to timetables for clients moving out of a shelter
system, such criteria shall take into account the special needs of the relevant
population with respect to living independently.
   c.   Reporting on housing specialists. No later than January 15, 2024, and
no later than January 15 annually thereafter, the department shall submit to
the speaker of the council and post on its website an annual report regarding
information on housing specialists. Such report shall include, but not be
limited to: (i) the number of temporary shelters, disaggregated by district and
type of shelter; (ii) the number of housing specialists within temporary
shelters, disaggregated by district and type of shelter; (iii) the average
caseload of housing specialists within each temporary shelter; and (iv) the
criteria by which the commissioner shall assess the performance of housing
specialists. No information that is required to be reported pursuant to this
section shall be reported if doing so would violate any applicable provision of
federal, state, or local law relating to the privacy, confidentiality, use, or
disclosure of that information, or if there are fewer than 5 data points in the
reporting cohorts. If there are fewer than 5 data points, the report shall
designate this with an asterisk in place of the data point.
(L.L. 2023/045, 4/16/2023, eff. 8/14/2023)
§ 21-152 Reports on removals involving individuals experiencing homelessness.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Affected individual. The term “affected individual” means any individual
perceived as experiencing homelessness who is temporarily or permanently
removed from a location or whose personal property has been cleared at a
location.
      Agency removal. The term “agency removal” means a removal by or on behalf
of any agency or agencies or a removal where an agency representative was
present, except that such term does not include a police-directed removal.
      Police-directed removal. The term “police-directed removal” means a
removal by an employee of the police department without coordination with
another agency or entity.
      Removal. The term “removal” means an action or directive by or on behalf
of any agency, that results in an individual perceived as experiencing
homelessness temporarily or permanently leaving a location or the clearing by
or on behalf of any agency of personal property, which may include a sleeping
bag, shelter, tarp, tent, bed, cardboard, metal sheeting, furniture, or other
objects at a location.
      Robot. The term “robot” means an artificial object or system that senses,
processes, and acts, to at least some degree, and is operated either
autonomously by computers or by an individual remotely. The term does not
include unmanned aerial vehicles.
      Shelter. The term “shelter” means a building or individual units within a
building, used by the department or by a person under contract or similar
agreement with the department to provide temporary emergency housing.
      Transitional housing. The term “transitional housing” means placement in
a shelter, stabilization bed, or safe haven.
   b.   No later than 1 month after the effective date of the local law that
added this section, and quarterly thereafter, the commissioner, in consultation
with the police commissioner, the commissioner of sanitation, and the
commissioner of parks and recreation, shall submit to the speaker of the
council, the public advocate, and the mayor, and publish on the department’s
website, in a machine readable format, a report on removals conducted during
the prior quarter. The report shall include a table in which each row
references a unique occurrence of a removal. Each such row shall include the
following information and any additional information the commissioner deems
appropriate, set forth in separate columns:
      1.   A unique identification number for each removal;
      2.   Whether the removal was an agency removal or a police-directed
removal;
      3.   The council district where the removal occurred;
      4.   Whether or not at removal has previously been conducted at that
location;
      5.   The source of initiation for the removal, including but not limited
to requests by an agency, office, organization, or 311 report;
      6.   The date and time of the start of the removal;
      7.   The agencies and divisions within agencies with personnel present
for the removal;
      8.   The non-government entities present for the removal;
      9.   The number of agency personnel present and total hours spent on the
removal by personnel, disaggregated by agency;
      10.   The number of affected individuals involved in the removal; and
      11.   The cost of removals, including, but not limited to, the costs
associated with the following information:
         (a)   The number of agency staff present during and before a removal,
disaggregated by the agency and relevant job title;
         (b)   The total time an agency was present before and during a
removal;
         (c)   Any overtime hours used to conduct a removal, including a
methodology on how overtime hours were calculated; and
         (d)   Any additional costs such as the use of any specialized
equipment during a removal, including unmanned aerial vehicles and robots.
   c.   No later than 1 month after the effective date of the local law that
added this section, and quarterly thereafter, the commissioner shall submit to
the speaker of the council, the public advocate, and the mayor and publish on
the department’s website, in a machine readable format, a report on the same-
day outcomes for individuals experiencing homelessness involved in a removal
during the prior quarter. Such report shall include a table in which each row
references a unique occurrence of a removal. Each such row shall include the
following information, as well as any additional information the commissioner
deems appropriate, set forth in separate columns:
      1.   A reference to the unique removal identification number as reported
in subdivision b of this section;
      2.   The council district where the removal occurred;
      3.   The number of affected individuals on the date of the removal;
      4.   The number of affected individuals who were offered housing vouchers
on the date of the removal;
      5.   The number of affected individuals who were offered housing voucher
applications on the date of the removal;
      6.   The number of affected individuals who were offered direct permanent
housing placements on the date of the removal;
      7.   The number of affected individuals who were offered supportive
housing on the date of the removal;
      8.   The number of affected individuals who were offered placement in
transitional housing on the date of the removal;
      9.   Any services not listed in paragraphs 4 to 8 of this subdivision
offered to an affected individual on the date of the removal;
      10.   The number of affected individuals who were detained involuntarily
and brought to a hospital for a mental health evaluation pursuant to section
9.41 or 9.58 of the mental hygiene law;
      11.   The number of affected individuals who entered transitional housing
on the date of the removal; and
      12.   The number of affected individuals who were arrested on the date of
the removal.
   d.   The reports required by subdivisions b and c of this section shall
include a data dictionary.
   e.   Except as otherwise expressly provided in this section, no report
required by subdivision b or c of this section shall contain personally
identifiable information.
   f.   No information that is otherwise required to be reported pursuant to
this section shall be reported in a manner that would violate any applicable
provision of federal, state, or local law relating to the privacy of
information.
(L.L. 2024/034, 1/20/2024, eff. 4/29/2024; Am. L.L. 2024/059, 4/18/2024, eff.
4/18/2024)
§ 21-153 Benefits application notice and document receipts.
   a.   Application confirmation notice. No later than 48 hours after
submission of a written or oral application to the department for cash
assistance, including, but not limited to, emergency assistance as such term is
defined in subdivision a of section
21-150, or supplemental nutrition assistance program benefits, the department
shall provide the applicant with an application confirmation notice that shall
include, at a minimum:
      1.   The date of the application submission;
      2.   A description of the information received; and
      3.   A statement indicating whether the application is complete or
incomplete, and if incomplete, a list of all information and documents needed
for the application to be deemed complete by the department.
   b.   Document receipts. Within 5 days of submission of a document related to
an application for cash assistance, including, but not limited to, emergency
assistance as such term is defined in subdivision a of section
21-150, or supplemental nutrition assistance program benefits, the department
shall provide a receipt that shall include, at a minimum:
      1.   The date such document was received;
      2.   The type of document that was received; and
      3.   The names of the individuals whose information is contained in such
documents.
   c.   Illegible documents. If the department determines that a document
submitted as part of an application for cash assistance, including, but not
limited to, emergency assistance as such term is defined in subdivision a of
section
21-150, or supplemental nutrition assistance program benefits is illegible, the
department shall notify the applicant that such document is illegible, and
inform such applicant that such document must be resubmitted.
   d.   Electronic copy. For applications requiring an application confirmation
notice pursuant to subdivision a of this section, the department shall permit
the applicant to view an electronic copy of each document submitted by the
applicant.
(L.L. 2025/088, 6/27/2025, eff. 12/24/2025 and 6/27/2027)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2025/088.
§ 21-154 Supportive housing eligibility for involuntarily confined persons.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Covered supportive housing program. The term “covered supportive housing
program” means a program to provide supportive housing that is wholly financed
using city funds and that includes, as eligibility requirements for such
program, that an individual: (i) has received a diagnosis of serious mental
illness or substance use disorder, or both; and (ii) is or has been homeless
for a minimum period of time.
      Involuntary confinement. The term “involuntary confinement” means being
detained or incarcerated in a city jail or state prison, or confined to a
residential mental health facility pursuant to a mandatory court order.
      Supportive housing. The term “supportive housing” means affordable
permanent housing with support services for residents.
   b.   For purposes of determining eligibility of an individual for a covered
supportive housing program, the commissioner shall count any period of
involuntary confinement of such individual in calculating the length of time
such individual has been homeless, provided that such individual had been
homeless immediately preceding such involuntary confinement, and, as determined
by the department, is likely to be homeless upon the conclusion of such
involuntary confinement.
   c.   Notwithstanding any provision of local law or rule to the contrary, any
period of involuntary confinement of 1 year or longer of an individual who, as
determined by the department, is likely to be homeless at the conclusion of
such involuntary confinement shall satisfy any requirement for a minimum period
of time that an individual is or has been homeless for eligibility for any
covered supportive housing program.
(L.L. 2025/132, 9/13/2025, eff. 3/12/2026)
§ 21-155 Biannual reporting on air conditioning in shelters.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the term “shelter” means
temporary emergency housing provided by the department of homeless services,
the department of social services, the department of housing preservation and
development, or by a provider under contract or similar agreement with such
agency, provided that such term shall not include units provided by such agency
on a per diem basis.
   b.   Report and notification. 
      1.   No later than 1 year after the effective date of the local law that
added this section, and no later than every April 1 and November 1 thereafter,
the commissioner of homeless services, in coordination with the commissioner of
social services and commissioner of housing preservation and development, shall
submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council a report regarding the
availability and functionality of air conditioning in shelters. Such report
shall include the following information for each borough:
         (a)   the percentage of shelters that have air conditioning in
congregate areas, sleeping areas, or both;
         (b)   the percentage of shelters that have air conditioning provided
through a central air system, an installed unit, or both; and
         (c)   the percentage of shelters with a central air system or
installed units that did not function for a total period of 72 hours or more
during the time period covered by such report.
      2.   The commissioner shall post each such report as required under
paragraph 1 of this subdivision conspicuously on the department of social
service’s website.
      3.   Within 30 days of air conditioning that is not functioning for a
total of 72 hours or more, the commissioner and the commissioner of housing
preservation and development shall notify the council member within whose
district such shelter is located of the outage and what the plan is to restore
the functioning of the air conditioning.
(L.L. 2025/154, 11/8/2025, eff. 11/8/2025)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2025/154.
§ 21-156 Benefits and services applications web forms.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Application. The term “application” means a form that a person is
required to complete to apply to the department for any benefit or service for
such person or a member of such person’s household.
      Web form. The term “web form” means an interactive document on a website
that allows a person to input data, such as text or numbers, to a server for
processing.
   b.   Except where prohibited by state or federal law or regulation, the
department shall:
      1.   Provide a web form for any application that allows a person to sign
and submit such application electronically; and
      2.   Provide an option for a person to conduct by telephone any interview
required for purposes of completion of any application, except where the
department determines an in-person interview is necessary to prevent fraud or
address any safety concern.
   c.   Notwithstanding subdivision b of this section, the department shall
receive and process any application that a person mails or delivers in person.
(L.L. 2026/039, 1/17/2026, eff. 5/17/2026)
§ 21-1Subchapter 1: Equal Access to Human Services
Editor's note: This chapter was formerly designated as Chapter 10 of
Title 8. For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2003/073.
§ 21-189 Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Equal Access to Human
Services Law of 2003".
(Am. L.L. 2018/063, 1/19/2018, eff. 10/16/2018)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2003/073.
§ 21-190 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
   Agency. The term "agency" means the human resources administration/
department of social services, including any part, subdivision, field office or
satellite facility thereof.
   Agency contractor. The term "agency contractor" means any contractor that
enters into a covered contract with the agency.
   Agency office. The term "agency office" means a job center, food stamp
office, medical assistance program office or other part, subdivision, field
office or satellite facility of the agency or agency contractor office that
performs a covered function.
   Agency personnel. The term "agency personnel" means bilingual personnel or
interpreter personnel who are employees of the agency.
   Bilingual personnel. The term "bilingual personnel" means agency, agency
contractor, or other contractor employees, not including work experience
program participants, who provide language assistance services in addition to
other duties.
   Contract. The term "contract" means any written agreement, purchase order or
instrument whereby the city is committed to expend or does expend funds in
return for work, labor or services.
   Contractor. The term "contractor" means any individual, sole proprietorship,
partnership, joint venture or corporation or other form of doing business that
enters into a contract.
   Covered contract. The term "covered contract" means a contract between the
agency and a contractor to perform a covered function.
   Covered function. The term "covered function" means any of the following
functions:
      1.   Benefits or services offered or provided at agency offices;
      2.   Benefits or services provided by agency contractors to provide
employment services in connection with participation of individuals engaged in
activities required by sections 335 through 336-c of the social services law;
      3.   Home care services; and
      4.   Determinations regarding eligibility for subsidized child care.
   Covered language. The term "covered language" means Arabic, Chinese, Haitian
Creole, Korean, Russian or Spanish.
   Document. The term "document" means the following forms and notices
developed by the agency:
      1.   Application forms and corresponding instructional materials;
      2.   Notices that require a response from the participant;
      3.   Notices that concern the denial, termination, reduction, increase or
issuance of a benefit or service;
      4.   Notices regarding the rights of participants to a conference and
fair hearing; and
      5.   Notices describing regulation changes that affect benefits.
   Interpretation services. The term interpretation services" means oral,
contemporaneous interpretation of oral communications.
   Interpreter personnel. The term "interpreter personnel" means agency, agency
contractor, or other contractor employees, not including work experience
program participants, whose sole responsibility is to provide language
assistance services.
   Language assistance services. The term "language assistance services" means
interpretation services or translation services provided by bilingual personnel
or interpreter personnel to a limited English proficient individual in such
individual's primary language to ensure such individual's ability to
communicate effectively with agency or agency contractor personnel.
   Limited English proficient individual. The term "limited English proficient
individual" means an individual who identifies as being, or is evidently,
unable to communicate meaningfully with agency or agency contractor personnel
because English is not such individual's primary language.
   Other covered agency. The term "other covered agency" means the
administration for children's services, the department of homeless services,
the department of health and mental hygiene, and all functions served by the
agency that are not covered functions, including any part, subdivision, field
office or satellite facility thereof.
   Primary language. The term "primary language" means the language in which a
limited English proficient individual chooses to communicate with others.
   Translation services. The term "translation services" means oral explanation
or written translation of documents.
(Am. L.L. 2018/063, 1/19/2018, eff. 10/16/2018)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2003/073.
§ 21-191 Language assistance services.
   a.   The agency and all agency contractors shall provide free language
assistance services as required by this chapter to limited English proficient
individuals.
   b.   When a limited English proficient individual seeks or receives benefits
or services from an agency office or agency contractor, the agency office or
agency contractor shall provide prompt language assistance services in all
interactions with that individual, whether the interaction is by telephone or
in person. The agency office or agency contractor shall meet its obligation to
provide prompt language assistance services for purposes of this subdivision by
ensuring that limited English proficient individuals do not have to wait
unreasonably longer to receive assistance than individuals who do not require
language assistance services.
   c.   Where an application or form requires completion in English by a
limited English proficient individual for submission to a state or federal
authority, the agency or agency contractor shall provide oral translation of
such application or form as well as certification by the limited English
proficient individual that the form was translated and completed by an
interpreter.
   d.   The agency shall make all reasonable efforts to provide language
assistance services in person by bilingual personnel.
(Am. L.L. 2018/063, 1/19/2018, eff. 10/16/2018)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2003/073.
§ 21-192 Translation of Documents.
The agency shall translate all documents into every covered language as of
February 1, 2008.
(Am. L.L. 2018/063, 1/19/2018, eff. 10/16/2018)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2003/073.
§ 21-193 Notices.
   a.   Upon initial contact, whether by telephone or in person, with an
individual seeking benefits or services offered by the agency or an agency
contractor, the agency or agency contractor shall determine the primary
language of such individual. If it is determined that such individual's primary
language is not English, the agency or agency contractor shall inform the
individual in such individual's primary language of the right to free language
assistance services.
   b.   The agency shall provide in all application and recertification
packages an eight and one-half inch by 11 inch or larger notice advising
participants that free language assistance services are available at its
offices and where to go if they would like an interpreter. This notice shall
appear in all covered languages.
   c.   The agency and each agency contractor shall post conspicuous signs in
every covered language at all agency offices and agency contractor offices
informing limited English proficient individuals of the availability of free
language assistance services.
   d.   Other covered agencies. Upon initial contact, whether by telephone or
in person, with an individual seeking benefits or services offered by another
covered agency, the other covered agency shall determine the primary language
of such individual. If it is determined that such individual's primary language
is not English, the other covered agency shall inform the individual in such
individual's primary language of available language assistance services.
(Am. L.L. 2018/063, 1/19/2018, eff. 10/16/2018)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2003/073.
§ 21-194 Screening and training.
The agency and each agency contractor shall screen bilingual personnel and
interpreter personnel for their ability to provide language assistance
services. The agency and each agency contractor shall provide annual training
for bilingual personnel and interpreter personnel and ensure that they are
providing appropriate language assistance services.
(Am. L.L. 2018/063, 1/19/2018, eff. 10/16/2018)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2003/073.
§ 21-195 Recordkeeping.
   a.   Agency and agency contractors. No later than February 1, 2008, the
agency and each agency contractor shall maintain records of the primary
language of every individual who seeks or receives benefits or services from
the agency or agency contractor. At a minimum, the agency and each agency
contractor shall maintain specific records of the following:
      1.   The number of limited English proficient individuals served,
disaggregated by agency, agency contractor or contractor, agency office, type
of language assistance required and primary language;
      2.   The number of bilingual personnel and the number of interpreter
personnel employed by the agency, disaggregated by language translated or
interpreted by such personnel;
      3.   Whether primary language determinations are recorded properly; and
      4.   Whether documents are translated accurately and disseminated
properly.
   b.   Other covered agencies. No later than February 1, 2008, every other
covered agency shall maintain records of the primary language of every
individual who seeks or receives ongoing benefits or services. At a minimum,
the other covered agency shall maintain specific records of the following:
      1.   The number of limited English proficient individuals served,
disaggregated by type of language assistance required and primary language;
      2.   The number of bilingual personnel and the number of interpreter
personnel employed by the other covered agency, disaggregated by language
translated by such personnel;
      3.   Whether primary language determinations are recorded properly; and
      4.   Whether documents are translated accurately and disseminated
properly.
(Am. L.L. 2018/063, 1/19/2018, eff. 10/16/2018)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2003/073.
§ 21-196 Implementation.
   a.   Agency. The agency shall phase in language assistance services for
covered functions as follows:
      1.   As of February 1, 2005, no less than 20 percent of covered functions
provided by agency offices;
      2.   As of February 1, 2007, no less than 40 percent of covered functions
provided by agency offices; and
      3.   As of February 1, 2008, 100 percent of covered functions provided by
agency offices.
   b.   Agency contractors. 
      1.   In all covered contracts entered into or renewed after January 1,
2005, the contractor shall certify that it shall make available language
assistance services and maintain and provide access to records as required by
this chapter.
      2.   Every covered contract must contain a provision in which the
contractor acknowledges that the following responsibilities constitute material
terms of the contract:
         (a)   To provide language assistance services as required by this
chapter;
         (b)   To comply with the recordkeeping requirements set forth in this
chapter;
         (c)   To provide the city access to its records for the purpose of
audits or investigations to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this
section, to the extent permitted by law; and
         (d)   To provide evidence to the city that the contractor is in
compliance with the provisions of this section, upon request.
      3.   If an agency contractor enters into a subcontract agreement to
provide any benefits or services under a covered contract, that subcontract
will be considered a covered contract for purposes of this section and the
provisions of this section will bind the subcontractor. Each contractor is
required to include the contract provision set forth in paragraph 2 of this
subdivision in any such subcontract agreement.
   c.   Implementation plans. On or before October 1, 2003, the agency and each
other covered agency shall develop an implementation plan that describes how
and when the agency or other covered agency will meet the requirements imposed
by this chapter. The agency and each other covered agency shall publish a copy
of its implementation plan.
   d.   Implementation updates and annual reports. No later than 90 days after
the end of each calendar year after the publication of the implementation plan
and before implementation is complete, the agency and each other covered agency
shall publish an implementation update. The implementation update shall
describe steps taken over the prior year to implement the requirements of this
chapter and shall describe any changes in the agency or other covered agency's
plan for implementing the remaining requirements of the local law that added
this chapter before the date set forth in subdivision a of this section. The
implementation update for every year after 2004 shall include a report on the
number of limited English proficient people served, disaggregated by language
and by agency office or other covered agency office. Not later than 90 days
after the end of each calendar year beginning with 2008, the agency and each
other covered agency shall publish an annual report on language assistance
services. At a minimum, this annual report of the agency, each agency
contractor and each other covered agency shall set forth the information
required to be maintained by this chapter.
(Am. L.L. 2018/063, 1/19/2018, eff. 10/16/2018)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2003/073.
§ 21-197 Rules.
The agency and each other covered agency shall promulgate such rules as are
necessary for the purposes of implementing and carrying out the provisions of
this chapter.
(Am. L.L. 2018/063, 1/19/2018, eff. 10/16/2018)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2003/073.
§ 21-198 Miscellaneous.
   a.   Nothing in this chapter precludes the agency or an agency contractor
from providing language assistance services beyond those required by this
chapter.
   b.   Nothing in this chapter precludes a limited English proficient
individual from having an adult volunteer, relative, spouse or domestic partner
accompany such limited English proficient individual to provide language
assistance services with the agency office or agency contractor, provided that
the agency office or agency contractor informs a limited English proficient
individual of the availability of free language assistance services and the
agency remains responsible for ensuring effective communication.
   c.   This chapter does not apply to any contract with an agency contractor
entered into or renewed before January 1, 2005.
(Am. L.L. 2018/063, 1/19/2018, eff. 10/16/2018)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2003/073.
§ 21-199 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion of this
chapter is, for any reason, declared unconstitutional or invalid, in whole or
in part, by any court of competent jurisdiction such portion shall be deemed
severable, and such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this chapter, which shall continue in
full force and effect.
(Am. L.L. 2018/063, 1/19/2018, eff. 10/16/2018)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2003/073.
