Chapter 4: Department of Youth and Community Development
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1996/081.
§ 21-401 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter the following terms have the following
meanings:
   Commissioner. The term "commissioner" means the commissioner of the
department of youth and community development.
   Department. The term "department" means the department of youth and
community development.
   Homeless young adult. The term "homeless young adult" has the same meaning
as provided in section 532-a of the executive law.
   Homeless youth. The term "homeless youth" has the same meaning as provided
in section 532-a of the executive law. For the purposes of this chapter, the
term homeless youth shall also include homeless young adults.
   Runaway and homeless youth crisis services program. The term "runaway and
homeless youth crisis services program" has the same meaning as provided in
section 532-a of the executive law.
   Runaway and homeless youth services. The term "runaway and homeless youth
services" means department-funded street outreach and referral services, drop-
in centers, runaway and homeless youth crisis services programs, and
transitional independent living support programs.
   Runaway youth. The term "runaway youth" has the same meaning as provided in
section 532-a of the executive law.
   Sexually exploited child. The term "sexually exploited child" has the same
meaning as provided in subdivision one of section 447-a of the social services
law.
   Shelter services. The term "shelter services" means residential programs
within runaway and homeless youth crisis services programs and transitional
independent living support programs.
   Transitional independent living support program. The term "transitional
independent living support program" has the same meaning as provided in section
532-a of the executive law.
   Youth. The term "youth" means any person under 24 years of age.
(Am. L.L. 2018/079, 1/19/2018, eff. 1/19/2018; Am. L.L. 2018/081, 1/19/2018,
eff. 1/19/2018)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1996/081.
§ 21-402 Reporting requirements to the city council.
   a.   The department shall submit to the city council two reports annually
concerning the department's youth services programs, reported separately for
community service block grants and other federal, state and city funding
sources, respectively, providing indicators on the department's performance
goals, actual performance and delivery of youth services within community
districts and boroughs, to assist the city council in its oversight of the
department's administration of funds and coordination of youth programs. The
department shall present actual data for such indicators for the preceding
fiscal year and for the current fiscal year, and shall project data for the
following fiscal year. Information in the reports shall be presented in
accordance with the following categories of indicators: financial indicators;
department personnel indicators; performance goals and actual performance with
respect to contract categories; and performance goals and actual performance
with respect to individual programs. Provided, however, that such reports
issued during the first calendar year following the effective date of this
provision shall not be required to identify such information separately for
each community district for those contracts previously awarded by the
department for youth services.
      A.   Financial indicators. The department shall submit to the city
council the following information on contracted services:
         1.   the number and dollar value of contracts with providers of youth
services by community district and borough;
         2.   the number and dollar value of contracts with providers of youth
services for contracts terminated prior to the expiration of the contract and
for contracts withdrawn prior to the starting date of such contract by
community district and borough; and
         3.   for contracts with providers of youth services having a dollar
value of more than twenty-five thousand dollars for which programmatic and/or
fiscal reviews were conducted, the number and dollar value of such contract by
community district and borough.
      B.   Personnel indicators. The department shall submit to the city
council the following information on department personnel:
         1.   the number of employees funded by city, state, community service
block grants and other federal funds, respectively, and for each funding source
the number of employees who are in each compensation category, such as, full-
time, part-time, salaried, hourly or other, and the criteria utilized by the
department to establish each category;
         2.   the number of personnel in administrative positions and the
proportion of time spent on administrative functions.
      C.   Contract categories. The department shall assign to each contract a
category from one of the following:
         1.   BEACON programs;
         2.   youth development programs;
         3.   services for runaway and homeless youth; and
         4.   any additional category deemed necessary by the commissioner.
      D.   Performance goals and actual performance reporting requirements with
respect to contract categories. The department shall submit to the city council
the following indicators on the performance goals and actual performance of
services for each of the contract categories established pursuant to paragraph
C of this subdivision:
         1.   the number and dollar value of contracts with providers of youth
services; and
         2.   the allocation of funds by community services block grants and
other federal, city, state and private funding sources, respectively.
      E.   Performance goals and actual performance reporting requirements with
respect to individual programs. For every program it coordinates the department
shall submit to the city council the following indicators:
         1.   the program sites for each contract with a provider of youth
services by community district and borough;
         2.   the number of youth served pursuant to each such contract;
         3.   any outcomes required under the terms of each such contract and
the final evaluation with respect to such outcomes; and
         4.   any other indicator required under the terms of each such
contract deemed necessary by the commissioner to measure a program's
performance.
      F.   One of the two annual reports containing the information described
in paragraph A through E of this subdivision shall be submitted to the city
council concurrent with the issuance of the mayor's management report, and the
other annual report containing such information shall be submitted concurrent
with the issuance of the preliminary mayor's management report. The period of
reporting for the report issued concurrent with the issuance of the mayor's
management report shall be the most recent fiscal year ended, and the period of
reporting for the report issued concurrent with the issuance of the preliminary
mayor's management report shall be the first four months of the fiscal year in
which such report is issued.
   b.   The commissioner shall submit to the city council copies of the
following reports, and any revisions, updates or modifications to such reports,
at the same time that each is submitted to the appropriate New York state
agency or officer, or any successor thereto, elected official or other
governmental body pursuant to any applicable statute, law, regulation or rule:
      i.   the community services block grant management plan required to be
submitted to the department of state; and
      ii.   the comprehensive planning report required to be submitted to the
New York state division for youth within the executive department.
   c.   Commencing on April 30, 2016 and annually thereafter, no later than
every April 1, the commissioner, in consultation with the commissioner of the
administration for children's services ("ACS") shall submit a yearly report to
the speaker of the city council, and posted on the department's and ACS'
websites, documenting the number of youth in contact with the department's
runaway and homeless youth services or ACS who are referred as, self-report as,
or who the department or ACS later determine to be sexually exploited children,
disaggregated by age utilizing the following ranges under 12 years old, 12-15
years old, 16-18 years old and over 18 years old, by gender and by whether such
children had contact with the department or ACS. The department and ACS shall
also determine and document in such report the number of such children
identified as having received services from both the department and ACS. Such
report shall also include a description of the services provided by the
department and ACS to meet the needs of youth who are or have been sexually
exploited children including, but not limited to the number of beds designated
for such children and the types of mental health and health services provided
to such children. Such report shall also include the department's and ACS's
methods for collecting data regarding the number of sexually exploited
children. Nothing herein shall require the department or ACS to share
information that identifies such children. No information that is required to
be reported pursuant to this section shall be reported in a manner that would
violate any applicable provision of federal, state or local law relating to the
privacy of such children's information.
(Am. L.L. 2016/041, 4/6/2016, eff. 4/6/2016; Am. L.L. 2022/060, 5/15/2022, eff.
5/15/2022)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1996/081.
§ 21-403 Web-based information for youth and young adults aged sixteen through
twenty applying for or receiving public assistance.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section the following terms shall
have the following meanings:
      1.   "Public assistance" shall mean safety net assistance and family
assistance provided by the New York city department of social services/human
resources administration;
      2.   "Young adult" shall mean any person between and including the ages
of eighteen and twenty; and
      3.   "Youth" shall mean any person between and including the ages of
sixteen and seventeen.
   b.   Web-based Information. No later than sixty days from the effective date
of the local law that added this section, the department shall publish, through
an easily identifiable link on its website, answers to frequently asked
questions relating to the rights of and options available to youth and young
adults who apply for or are receiving public assistance as head of household,
including but not limited to a description of how to apply for public
assistance, the types of public assistance that are available, and how
recipients may satisfy work requirements through educational activities. Such
information shall be updated as often as necessary and at a minimum on an
annual basis.
§ 21-404 Homeless and runaway youth shelter access report.
   a.   Beginning July 31, 2018, and by each January 31 and July 31 thereafter,
the department shall submit to the speaker and post on its website a report
relating to the number of runaway and homeless youth who contacted or presented
themselves to a runaway and homeless youth services program to request shelter
and were not able to access shelter services during the six month periods
ending on June 30 and December 31, respectively. Such report shall include, but
not be limited to, the total number of youth eligible for a department-funded
program on the date such program's services were sought who could not access
shelter services, disaggregated by:
      1.   The type of shelter services the youth was attempting to obtain,
including, but not limited to, a runaway and homeless youth crisis services
program or a transitional independent living support program;
      2.   The name of the runaway and homeless youth crisis services program
or transitional independent living support program at which the youth did not
access shelter services;
      3.   The bed capacity at such runaway and homeless youth crisis services
program or transitional independent living support program;
      4.   The number of beds available at such runaway and homeless youth
crisis services program or transitional independent living support program at
the time the youth did not access shelter services;
      5.   The ages of youth who did not access shelter services;
      6.   Whether the youth who did not access shelter services identified as
a member of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer or intersex
community, if such information was volunteered by the youth; and
      7.   The reason why the youth did not access shelter services including,
but not limited to, bed capacity, bed availability, insufficient beds in a
specific type of program, or whether such youth chose not to accept a bed that
was offered. Such information shall be further disaggregated by the reason such
youth did not accept the bed, if such information is available.
   b.   Beginning January 1, 2019, all providers under contract or similar
agreement with the department to provide runaway and homeless youth crisis
services or transitional independent living support programs shall submit the
information required pursuant to this section to the department through an
electronic database designated by the department and shall include the
following information in the reports required pursuant to subdivision a of this
section:
      1.   Whether the provider referred the youth to another department-funded
runaway and homeless youth crisis services program or transitional independent
living support program;
      2.   The name of the runaway and homeless youth services program or
transitional independent living support program to which the provider referred
the youth, if applicable; and
      3.   Whether that runaway and homeless youth services program or
transitional independent living support program admitted the youth to receive
shelter services.
(L.L. 2018/079, 1/19/2018, eff. 1/19/2018)
§ 21-405 Intake and assessment of runaway and homeless youth.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have
the following meanings:
      Assessment shelter. The term "assessment shelter" means a facility
operated by the department of homeless services or a provider under contract or
similar agreement with such department where individuals undergo assessments
required to reside in such department's shelter system.
      Homeless youth. The term "homeless youth" has the same meaning as
provided in section 532-a of the executive law. For the purposes of this
section, the term "homeless youth" shall also include homeless young adults to
the extent that services to homeless young adults are included in department-
funded runaway and homeless youth shelter services contracts.
      Intake and assessment. The term "intake and assessment" means the process
for entry into a shelter operated by the department of homeless services or a
provider under contract or similar agreement with such department.
      Intake center. The term "intake centers" means a facility operated by the
department of homeless services or a provider under contract or similar
agreement with such department where individuals or families apply to enter
such department's homeless services shelter system.
   b.   The department of homeless services and the department shall create and
maintain an intake and assessment process for runaway youth and homeless youth
who have reached the age or time limitations applicable to department-funded
shelter services or, as designated by the department, other runaway or homeless
youth receiving shelter services, and who seek to transition from runaway and
homeless youth shelter services to a department of homeless services shelter.
Such process shall permit eligible runaway youth or homeless youth to bypass
entry into an intake center or assessment shelter operated by the department of
homeless services when the department, or an organization that receives funding
from the department to provide shelter services, provides demographic and
social services information for any such youth, as agreed upon between the
department and the department of homeless services, in advance of such youth's
presentation to the department of homeless services shelter system. Such
process shall originate at a transitional independent living support program, a
runaway and homeless youth crisis services program, or a drop-in center funded
by the department. The intake and assessment bypass permitted pursuant to this
section and any necessary information sharing between the department of
homeless services and the department-funded program or the department shall
only occur with the consent of such youth.
   c.   On or before July 31, 2018, and every six months thereafter, the
department shall submit a report to the mayor and the speaker of the council
which includes, but need not be limited to, the following information: a
description of the intake and assessment process required by subdivision b of
this section; the number of runaway and homeless youth referred through such
process; where such youth were referred from; whether such youth accessed
services through the process; and any recommendations for changes to the
process.
(L.L. 2018/081, 1/19/2018, eff. 1/19/2018; Am. L.L. 2023/096, 7/9/2023, eff. 7/
9/2023)
§ 21-406 Services for homeless young adults.
The department shall include shelter services for homeless young adults as part
of runaway and homeless youth services, but need not serve all such young
adults.
(L.L. 2018/088, 4/7/2018, eff. 1/1/2019)
§ 21-407 Time frames for runaway and homeless youth shelter services.
The department shall require that runaway youth and homeless youth are provided
with shelter services pursuant to the following time frames:
   a.   Consistent with section 532-b of the executive law, a runaway youth
aged 14 or older receiving shelter services in a residential runaway and
homeless youth crisis services program shall be provided with shelter services
in such program on a voluntary basis for up to 60 days, or up to 120 days if
the runaway youth and such youth's parent, guardian or custodian agree in
writing that such youth may remain in such program, or consistent with section
420 of the executive law, beyond such time limits if the office of children and
family services is notified in writing within 60 days.
   b.   Consistent with section 532-d of the executive law, a homeless youth
receiving shelter services in a transitional independent living support program
shall be provided with shelter services in such program for up to 24 months, or
consistent with section 420 of the executive law, beyond 24 months limit if the
homeless youth entered the transitional independent living support program
under the age of 21 and the office of children and family services is notified
in writing within 60 days.
(L.L. 2018/087, 4/7/2018, eff. 4/7/2018)
§ 21-408 Runaway and homeless youth reporting.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the term "test assessing
secondary completion (TASC)" means the New York state high school equivalency
test which replaced the General Education Development (GED) as the primary
pathway to a New York state high school equivalency diploma.
   b.   Not later than October 1, 2018, and on or before October 1 annually
thereafter, the department shall submit to the speaker of the council and post
on its website annual reports on the prior fiscal year ending June 30th
regarding runaway and homeless youth. Such reports shall include, but not be
limited to, the following information:
      1.   A description of the size and characteristics of the current
population of runaway and homeless youth, to the extent known, including but
not limited to gender identity, sexual orientation, race, ethnicity, pregnancy
and parenting status, and disabilities.
      2.   A description of the service needs of the current population of
runaway and homeless youth, to the extent known, including but not limited to
educational assistance, TASC preparation, medical services, mental health
services, services for sexually exploited children, and temporary shelter.
      3.   A breakdown of the dispositions of runaway and homeless youth who
exited the temporary shelter system in the previous calendar year disaggregated
by categories including but not limited to transitioned from a runaway and
homeless youth crisis services program to a transitional independent living
support program, reconnected with family, transitioned to a department of
homeless services shelter, transitioned to a New York city housing authority
apartment, transitioned to a private apartment, and exited to an unknown
location.
      4.   A description of the public resources available to serve runaway and
homeless youth including any new services established since the submission of
the previous report required pursuant to this section and any existing services
that will be expanded.
(L.L. 2018/086, 4/7/2018, eff. 4/7/2018)
§ 21-409 Capacity plan.
No later than October 1, 2018, the department shall develop and submit to the
speaker of the council and post on its website a plan to provide shelter
services to all runaway youth and homeless youth who request such shelter from
the department, consistent with regulations of the office of children and
family services. Such plan shall be informed by the report required pursuant to
section
21-404.
(L.L. 2018/086, 4/7/2018, eff. 4/7/2018)
§ 21-410 Distribution of educational materials on drugs and opiates to youth
services programs.
   a.   The department shall make available the educational materials on drugs
and opiates awareness and prevention developed by the department of health and
mental hygiene pursuant to section
17-199.9 to youth attending afterschool programs funded by the department for
students in grades six to twelve.
   b.   The department shall ensure that such educational materials are
available on the department's website in English and in each of the designated
citywide languages as defined in section
23-1101.
(L.L. 2018/125, 6/26/2018, eff. 9/24/2018)
§ 21-411 Posting and reporting requirements relating to information and
referral services for runaway and homeless youth.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Youth hotline. The term "youth hotline" means any hotline operated by the
department for the purpose of providing information, resources, and referrals
to youth.
      311 customer service center. The term "311 customer service center" means
the existing 311 citizen service center, which generally provides callers with
information and referrals to appropriate resources and services, including
referral to emergency services as necessary.
   b.   Posting information about youth hotline and 311 customer service
center. All runaway and homeless youth services shall post in a conspicuous on-
site location a sign indicating the phone numbers of the youth hotline and the
311 customer service center and including a statement indicating that any youth
may dial either number if such youth has a question, comment, or complaint
regarding any runaway and homeless youth service. The postings shall also
include, but not be limited to:
      1.   Information regarding where youth may find a complete summary of the
rules governing the runaway and homeless youth service as well as the conduct
and responsibilities expected of runaway and homeless youth service
participants;
      2.   A statement indicating that the runaway and homeless youth service
receives funding from the department and is subject to its oversight;
      3.   Notice that the youth hotline or 311 customer service center may be
called 24 hours a day to anonymously or confidentially communicate a question,
comment, or complaint about the runaway and homeless youth service's conduct
and responsibilities, including the specific telephone numbers to dial and the
hours during which each number is open to receive calls; and
      4.   A statement that any comprehensive hotline providing mental health
resources established within any agency or agencies as determined by the mayor
may, if such hotline exists, be contacted 24 hours a day for information,
referrals, or counseling relating to an individual's mental health and well-
being, including the specific telephone number to dial.
   c.   Reporting. 
      1.   No later than October 1, 2019, and on or before October 1 annually
thereafter, the department shall submit a report to the mayor and the speaker
of the city council which shall include the number of calls and general nature
of any questions, comments, and complaints regarding runaway and homeless youth
service that are received by the youth hotline and 311 customer service center,
and the status of the department's response to any such questions, comments, or
complaints. The report shall include data disaggregated by calls made to the
youth hotline and 311 customer service center, respectively. The annual report
shall also include a summary of any changes made to runaway and homeless youth
services as a result of any questions, comments, or complaints made to the
youth hotline and 311 customer service center.
      2.   The general nature of any questions, comments and complaints
reported pursuant to paragraph 1 of this subdivision shall include the
categories of such questions, comments and complaints including, but not
limited to:
         (a)   Facility conditions;
         (b)   Treatment by staff;
         (c)   Treatment by other youth;
         (d)   Lack of resources, such as medical care or sleeping
accommodating, or any other reported resources; and
         (e)   Failure of a runaway and homeless youth service to provide
information required by law.
   d.   Confidentiality. Any identifying information collected by the youth
hotline, 311 customer service center, and department in relation to this
section shall only be used, disclosed, and retained for the purposes set forth
in this section, in accordance with applicable federal, state, and local laws,
regulations, and city and agency policies relating to the privacy and
confidentiality of such information. "Identifying information" has the same
meaning as set forth in section
23-1201 of the code. Information received by the youth hotline and 311 customer
service center may be submitted anonymously, and such information shall be
maintained as anonymous to the extent permitted or required by law.
   e.   Educational outreach. The department shall engage in educational
outreach about the availability of the youth hotline and 311 customer service
center for questions, comments, and complaints regarding runaway and homeless
youth services and conduct such outreach in a manner designed to reach as many
youth as practicable. Such outreach shall include, but not be limited to,
posting information about the youth hotline and 311 customer service center on
the department's website and on the websites of any other agency as determined
by the mayor, as well as dissemination of informational materials targeted
specifically to runaway and homeless youth by the department and through
runaway and homeless youth services.
(L.L. 2018/174, 10/27/2018, eff. 4/25/2019)
§ 21-412 Educational outreach on bullying awareness and prevention resources.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Youth hotline. The term "youth hotline" means any hotline operated by the
department for the purpose of providing information, resources and referrals to
youth.
      311 customer service center. The term "311 customer service center" means
the existing 311 citizen service center, which generally provides callers with
information and referrals to appropriate resources and services, including
referral to emergency services as necessary.
   b.   Educational outreach. The department shall engage in educational
outreach regarding the availability of bullying awareness and prevention
resources and conduct such outreach in a manner designed to reach as many youth
as practicable. Such outreach shall include, but need not be limited to,
posting bullying awareness and prevention resource information on the
department's website and on the websites of any other agency as determined by
the mayor, as well as the dissemination of bullying awareness and prevention
resource materials through existing departmental youth programs.
   c.   Bullying awareness and prevention resources. The bullying awareness and
prevention resources referenced in subdivision b of this section shall include,
but need not be limited to:
      1.   Resources that provide confidential or anonymous counseling to youth
via phone, text messaging, or internet-based chat functionality, including any
comprehensive service providing mental health resources established within any
agency or agencies as determined by the mayor, if such service exists, and any
portal relating to the reporting of bullying, harassment, intimidation or
discrimination operated by the department of education, if such resource
exists; and
      2.   The numbers to text or to call, the operating hours applicable to
each number or text function, and the website address for bullying awareness
and prevention resources operated by the city, including but not limited to the
311 customer service center and, for materials directed at youth in a program
funded by the department, the youth hotline.
(L.L. 2018/213, 12/15/2018, eff. 6/13/2019)
§ 21-413 Runaway and homeless youth immigration information plan.
   a.   Plan establishment, content, and goals. 
      1.   Establishment. The department shall establish a plan to provide
information about resources and services relating to immigration relief and
benefits through runaway and homeless youth services. Such information shall
include a statement that immigration relief may be available to runaway and
homeless youth who have been subjected to factors including, but not limited
to, the following, and subject to applicable law:
         (a)   Domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, and
stalking;
         (b)   Trafficking or certain other crimes;
         (c)   Hostile conditions in one's country of origin, such as war,
political unrest, or natural disaster;
         (d)   Persecution or a fear of persecution in one's country of origin
as a result of race, religion, nationality, political opinion, or membership in
a particular social group including, but not limited to, identification based
on sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, or sex;
         (e)   Abandonment, abuse, or neglect by one or both parents of a
youth; and
         (f)   Any other similar factor that, under applicable law, may provide
the basis for immigration relief for runaway and homeless youth.
      2.   Plan contents. The plan established pursuant to paragraph 1 of this
subdivision shall include the following:
         (a)   Descriptions of how the department, in coordination with other
agencies as designated by the mayor, shall make available through runaway and
homeless youth services information and referral resources for legal assistance
related to immigration relief or immigration-related benefits, including
information about applicable age limits or deadlines associated with such
relief or benefits;
         (b)   Schedules of training sessions for staff of runaway and homeless
youth services, as required by subparagraph (c) of paragraph 3 of this
subdivision; and
         (c)   Identification of informational materials to be made available
to runaway and homeless youth through runaway and homeless youth services.
      3.   Goals. The plan established pursuant to paragraph 1 of this
subdivision shall describe strategies for how the department and runaway and
homeless youth services will achieve the following goals:
         (a)   Informing as many runaway and homeless youth as practicable
about the availability of immigration services and resources, including
immigration-related legal services, in the covered languages identified in
section
23-1101;
         (b)   Ensuring that the information provided to runaway and homeless
youth about available resources for immigration relief or immigration-related
benefits is current and accurate, including information about age limits or
deadlines applicable to obtaining such relief or benefits, if any;
         (c)   Establishing mandatory trainings for staff of runaway and
homeless youth services about providing information and referral resources to
organizations that provide assistance related to immigration relief or
immigration-related benefits, including how to confidentially respond to
requests for such referral resources; and
         (d)   Assisting in a culturally appropriate manner runaway and
homeless youth who identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, or
questioning, who are in need of information about immigration relief or
immigration-related benefits.
   b.   Plan due date. The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker
of the city council, and post on its website, the plan required by subdivision
a of this section on or before June 1, 2019.
   c.   Reporting. No later than June 1, 2020, and annually thereafter, the
department shall post on its website and submit to the mayor and the speaker of
the city council a report containing indicators of the department's activities
in connection with the goals of the plan required by subdivision a of this
section, including but not limited to:
      1.   A summary of programs, procedures, memoranda, or training materials
relating to the implementation and goals of the plan required by subdivision a
of this section;
      2.   The number of mandatory trainings conducted for staff of runaway and
homeless youth services in accordance with subparagraph (c) of paragraph 3 of
subdivision a of this section; and
      3.   The total number of runaway and homeless youth informed of available
legal resources for immigration relief or immigration-related benefits.
   d.   Confidentiality. For purposes of this subdivision, any identifying
information collected by runaway and homeless youth services and the department
shall only be used, disclosed, and retained for the purposes set forth in this
section, in accordance with applicable federal, state, and local laws,
regulations, and city and agency policies relating to the privacy and
confidentiality of such information. "Identifying information" has the same
meaning as set forth in section
23-1201. Information received by runaway and homeless youth services and the
department shall be submitted anonymously, and such information shall be
maintained on an anonymous basis to the extent permitted or required by law.
(L.L. 2019/004, 12/29/2018, eff. 3/29/2019)
§ 21-414 Summer youth employment program.
   a.   Definition. For the purposes of this section the following term has the
following meaning:
      Summer youth employment program. The term “summer youth employment
program” means the program operated by the department of youth and community
development to provide youth with opportunities for summer employment.
   b.   The department shall operate a summer youth employment program. In
operating the program, the department shall:
      1.   Coordinate with other agencies to develop summer youth employment
opportunities within such agencies; each agency shall have a goal of accepting
summer youth employment program participants equal to at least .5 percent of
its total full-time headcount; and
      2.   Coordinate with the department of small business services to promote
the summer youth employment program to businesses with which such department
has contact.
   c.   On or before January 31, 2024, and annually thereafter, the
commissioner shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council a report
regarding the summer youth employment program. Such report shall include the
number of youth employed pursuant to the summer youth employment program during
the previous summer, disaggregated by placement in each of the government,
private, and nonprofit sectors. For the government sector, the report shall
disaggregate the number of youth employed by each agency. For any agency that
does not meet the goal of employing at least .5 percent of its total full-time
headcount, the report shall include an explanation of why the goal was not met.
(L.L. 2023/083, 6/25/2023, eff. 10/23/2023)
§ 21-415 Financial empowerment education in department programs.
   a.   As used in this section, the following terms have the following
meanings:
      Financial empowerment education. The term “financial empowerment
education” means training that includes instruction on personal finances,
including banking, budgeting, credit, debt, saving, investment, and taxes.
      Youth employment program. The term “youth employment program” means a
department-funded program in which program participants are provided with
employment or internships.
   b.   The department shall ensure that its youth employment programs include
at least 2 hours of financial empowerment education for all program
participants.
   c.   The department shall ensure that any entity that the department
contracts with to provide a transitional independent living support program or
a runaway and homeless youth crisis services program shall offer at least 2
hours of financial empowerment education to all program participants, and
continue to offer financial empowerment services education to youth
participating in programs for 6 months or longer.
   d.   No later than January 31, 2024, and no later than 30 days after the end
of each calendar year thereafter, the department shall post on its website and
submit to the speaker of the council a report on how many program participants
participated in financial empowerment education and a description of the
relevant financial empowerment education curriculum provided to program
participants.
(L.L. 2023/098, 7/11/2023, eff. 10/9/2023)
