Title 15: Department of Environmental Protection
Chapter 1: Asbestos Control Program
**** Subchapter A: Purpose, Scope, Application, Definitions and Variances ****
§ 1-00 Purpose.
The purpose of these rules is to protect public health and the environment by
minimizing the emission of asbestos fibers into the air of the City when
buildings or structures with asbestos-containing material are renovated,
altered, repaired, or demolished by ensuring that asbestos-containing material
is handled appropriately and by individuals qualified to do so.
(Added City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019)
§ 1-01 Scope and Application.
   (a)   The following asbestos control program rules, 15 RCNY §§
1-01 et seq., shall apply to all asbestos abatement activities occurring within
the City of New York.
   (b)   Every owner of a building where asbestos abatement activity occurs
shall be responsible for the performance of the asbestos abatement activities
by his/her agent, contractor, employee, or other representative.
   (c)   Every contractor and worker engaged in asbestos abatement activities
shall comply with the provisions of this chapter except as otherwise specified.
   (d)   Every investigator engaged to identify the presence and evaluate the
condition of asbestos in a building or structure shall comply with the
provisions of this chapter except as otherwise specified.
   (e)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement or submit or provide
a false document to any city agency or any individual as to any matter related
to an asbestos project, asbestos survey, or any document required to be filed
under these rules.
   (f)   The department may inspect at a reasonable time and in a reasonable
manner anything which affects or may affect the emission or release of asbestos
fibers or the disturbance of asbestos-containing material, including but not
limited to the premises where an asbestos project is being conducted, or the
premises for which a notification has been filed under 15 RCNY §
1-21 - 15 RCNY §
1-26 of these Rules, or the premises where an application has been filed with
the Department of Buildings for a plan or permit approval.
   (g)   No person shall interfere with or obstruct any employee of the
Department in the performance of their official duties, including but not
limited to the performance of inspections.
   (h)   No person who holds a certificate issued pursuant to these rules shall
engage in unprofessional conduct. Unprofessional conduct shall include but is
not limited to:
      (1)   Failure to comply with provisions of Federal, State or local laws,
rules, or regulations.
      (2)   Conduct in asbestos inspections, assessment, abatement activities,
air sampling, etc. which evidences moral unfitness.
      (3)   Making or filing a false report, or failing to file a report
required by these rules or impeding or obstructing such filing, or inducing
another person to do so.
   (i)   The size (amount of material to be disturbed or, in the case of
cleanups, the dimensions of the area to be cleaned) and scope of the overall
project shall control the notification to be filed and work procedures to be
followed. The requirements set forth in these rules may not be avoided or
lessened through the performance of work in increments or piecemeal fashion.
   (j)   (1)   Any person, including but not limited to contractors, building
owners, and air monitoring companies, who is in violation of or fails to comply
with any provision of these rules or the terms and conditions of any variance
issued pursuant to these rules shall be subject to the issuance of notice(s) of
violation and other civil and criminal enforcement actions pursuant to Title
24, Chapter 1, Subchapter 9 of the Administrative Code of the City of New York.
      (2)   The maximum civil penalty for any violation of a lettered
subsection of these rules, pursuant to a notice of violation returnable before
the Environmental Control Board of the Office of Administrative Trials and
Hearings, shall be $10,000, except that a violation of 15 RCNY §
1-26 shall carry a maximum penalty of $15,000.
      (3)   DEP may block an asbestos investigator from filing an Asbestos
Assessment Report (Form ACP5) or deny any application for an asbestos abatement
permit pursuant to 15 RCNY §
1-26, or a variance application pursuant to 15 RCNY §
1-03, where any party to the asbestos project, including but not limited to the
abatement contractor, building owner, or air monitoring company, has docketed,
unpaid civil penalties imposed by the Environmental Control Board of the Office
of Administrative Trials and Hearings for violations of these rules, §§ 24-136
and 24-138 of the Administrative Code, or NYSDOLICR 56.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 4/28/2022,
eff. 5/28/2022)
§ 1-02 Definitions.
Abatement. "Abatement" shall mean any and all procedures physically taken to
control fiber release from asbestos-containing materials. This includes
removal, encapsulation, enclosure, cleanup and repair.
Abatement activities. "Abatement activities" shall mean all activities from the
initiation of work area preparation through successful clearance air monitoring
performed at the conclusion of an asbestos project or minor project.
Adequately wet. "Adequately wet" shall mean the complete penetration of a
material with amended water to prevent the release of particulates. If visible
emissions are observed coming from asbestos-containing material, then the
material has not been adequately wetted. However, the absence of visible
emissions is not evidence of being adequately wet. ACM must be fully penetrated
with the wetting agent in order to be considered adequately wet. If the ACM
being abated is resistant to amended water penetration, wetting agent shall be
applied to the material prior to and during removal as necessary to minimize
fiber release.
Aggressive sampling. "Aggressive sampling" shall mean a method of sampling in
which the individual collecting the air sample creates activity by the use of
mechanical equipment during the sampling period to stir up settled dust and
simulate activity in that area of the building.
AHERA. "AHERA" shall mean the Asbestos Hazard Emergency Response Act of 1986.
AIHA. "AIHA" shall mean the American Industrial Hygiene Association.
Airlock. "Airlock" shall mean a system for permitting entrance and exit while
restricting air movement between a contaminated area and an uncontaminated
area. It consists of two curtained doorways separated by a distance of at least
three feet such that one passes through one doorway into the airlock, allowing
the doorway sheeting to overlap and close off the opening before proceeding
through the second doorway, thereby preventing flow-through contamination.
Air sampling. "Air sampling" shall mean the process of measuring the fiber
content of a known volume of air collected during a specific period of time.
The procedure utilized for asbestos follows the NIOSH Standard Analytical
Method 7400 or the provisional transmission electron microscopy methods
developed by the USEPA and/or National Institute of Science and Technology
which are utilized for lower detectability and specific fiber identification.
Airtight. "Airtight" shall mean secured and sealed utilizing 6 mil plastic
sheeting and tape to make a barrier through which no air, dust or debris can be
transferred.
Ambient air monitoring. "Ambient air monitoring" shall mean measurement or
determination of airborne asbestos fiber concentrations outside but in the
general vicinity of the worksite.
Amended water. "Amended water" shall mean water to which a surfactant has been
added.
Amendment. "Amendment" shall mean the Form ACP-8 submitted to modify the
asbestos project notification (Form ACP7) by changing information that was
provided when the ACP7 was originally filed.
ANSI. "ANSI" shall mean the American National Standards Institute.
Area air sampling. "Area air sampling" shall mean any form of air sampling or
monitoring where the sampling device is placed at some stationary location.
ARTS E-File. "ARTS E-File" shall mean the web-based filing system applicants
utilize to submit, process, amend and close out asbestos project notifications;
asbestos project variances; asbestos work permits; project monitor reports; and
related documents to the DEP.
Asbestos. "Asbestos" shall mean any hydrated mineral silicate separable into
commercially usable fibers, including but not limited to chrysotile
(serpentine), amosite (cumingtonite-grunerite), crocidolite (riebeckite),
tremolite, anthrophyllite and actinolite.
Asbestos-containing material. "Asbestos-containing material" (ACM) shall mean
asbestos or any material containing more than one percent asbestos.
Asbestos-containing waste material. "Asbestos-containing waste material" shall
mean asbestos-containing material or asbestos-contaminated objects requiring
disposal.
Asbestos-contaminated objects. "Asbestos-contaminated objects" shall mean any
objects which have been contaminated by asbestos or asbestos-containing
material.
Asbestos assessment report. "Asbestos assessment report" shall mean the "Form
ACP-5" form, as approved by DEP, by which a DEP-certified asbestos investigator
certifies that a building or structure (or portion thereof) is free of ACM or
the amount of ACM to be abated constitutes a minor project, or that ACM is
present and will not be disturbed during construction activity.
Asbestos handler. "Asbestos handler" shall mean an individual certified by the
Department who disturbs, removes, encapsulates, repairs, or encloses asbestos
material.
Asbestos handler supervisor. "Asbestos handler supervisor" shall mean an
individual certified by the Department who supervises the handlers during an
asbestos project and ensures that proper asbestos abatement procedures as well
as individual safety procedures are being adhered to.
Asbestos project notification. "Asbestos project notification" shall mean the
"Form ACP-7" asbestos project notification form as approved by DEP.
Asbestos Project Air Sampling Technician. "Asbestos Project Air Sampling
Technician" shall mean an individual who is certified by the NYS Department of
Labor in accordance with 12 NYCRR 56.
Asbestos investigator. "Asbestos investigator" shall mean an individual
certified by the Commissioner as having satisfactorily demonstrated his or her
ability to identify the presence and evaluate the condition of asbestos in a
building or structure.
Asbestos project. "Asbestos project" shall mean any form of work performed in a
building or structure or in connection with the replacement or repair of
equipment, pipes, or electrical equipment not located in a building or
structure which will disturb (e.g., remove, enclose, encapsulate) more than 25
linear feet or more than 10 square feet of asbestos-containing material.
ASTM. "ASTM" shall mean the American Society For Testing and Materials.
Authorized visitor. "Authorized visitor" shall mean the building owner and his/
her representative, and any representative of a regulatory or other agency
having jurisdiction over the project.
Building owner. "Building owner" shall mean the person in whom legal title to
the premises is vested unless the premises are held in land trust, in which
instance building owner means the person in whom beneficial title is vested.
Building materials. "Building materials" shall mean any and all materials
listed as Presumed Asbestos Containing Materials (PACM) and Suspect
Miscellaneous ACM in NYSDOL ICR 56, including but not limited to interior and
exterior finishes, equipment, plaster, roofing, flooring, caulking, sealants,
tiles, insulation, and mortar and refractory bricks used in the construction of
boilers.
Certified industrial hygienist. "Certified industrial hygienist" (CIH) shall
mean an individual who is currently certified by the American Board of
Industrial Hygiene.
Certified safety professional (CSP). "Certified safety professional" (CSP)
shall mean an individual having a bachelor's degree from an accredited college
or university and a minimum of four years experience as a safety professional
and who has successfully completed both levels of the examination administered
by the Board of Certified Safety Professionals and who is currently certified
by that Board.
Chain of custody. "Chain of custody" shall mean the form or set of forms that
document the collection and transfer of a sample, which must reflect the time
and date of all transfers of that sample and identify each person that handles
that sample by such person's printed full name and signature.
Clean room. "Clean room" shall mean an uncontaminated area or room which is
part of the worker decontamination enclosure system with provisions for storage
of workers' street clothes and protective equipment.
Clearance air monitoring. "Clearance air monitoring" shall mean the employment
of aggressive sampling techniques with a volume of air collected to determine
the airborne concentration of residual fibers, and shall be performed as the
final abatement activity.
Commissioner. "Commissioner" shall mean the Commissioner of the New York City
Department of Environmental Protection.
Containerize. "Containerize" shall mean the placing of asbestos-containing
material in an acceptable container for disposal, as specified by these rules.
Contractor. "Contractor" shall mean a public authority or any other
governmental agency or instrumentality thereof, self-employed person, company,
unincorporated association, firm, partnership or corporation and any owner or
operator thereof, which engages in an asbestos project or employs persons
engaged in an asbestos project.
Curtained doorway. "Curtained doorway" shall mean a device which consists of at
least three overlapping sheets of fire retardant plastic over an existing or
temporarily framed doorway. One sheet shall be secured at the top and left
side, the second sheet at the top and right side, and the third sheet at the
top and left side. All sheets shall have weights attached to the bottom to
ensure that the sheets hang straight and maintain a seal over the doorway when
not in use.
Decontamination enclosure system. "Decontamination enclosure system" shall mean
a series of connected rooms, separated from the work area and from each other
by air locks, for the decontamination of workers, materials, waste containers,
and equipment.
Demolition. "Demolition" shall mean the dismantling or razing of a building,
including all operations incidental thereto (except for asbestos abatement
activities), for which a demolition permit from the New York City Department of
Buildings is required.
Department or DEP. "Department" or "DEP" shall mean the New York City
Department of Environmental Protection.
Disturb. "Disturb" shall mean any activity that disrupts, impregnates, or
strips the matrix of ACM or PACM, or that generates debris, visible emissions,
or airborne asbestos fibers from ACM or PACM. This includes but is not limited
to the removal, encapsulation, enclosure, renovation, repair, or cleanup of ACM
or PACM.
DOB. "DOB" shall mean the New York City Department of Buildings.
ELAP. "ELAP" shall mean the Environmental Laboratory Approval Program
administered by the New York State Department of Health.
Electronic Recordkeeping System. "Electronic recordkeeping system" shall mean
an electronic system in which records are collected, organized, and categorized
to facilitate their preservation and use, by utilizing a format and a reliable
media that enables future retrieval of these records.
Encapsulant (sealant) or encapsulating agent. "Encapsulant (sealant) or
encapsulating agent" shall mean liquid material which can be applied to
asbestos-containing material which temporarily controls the possible release of
asbestos fibers from the material or surface either by creating a membrane over
the surface (bridging encapsulant) or by penetrating into the material and
binding its components together (penetrating encapsulant). A thin coat of
lockdown encapsulant shall be applied to all surfaces in the work area which
were not the subject of removal or abatement, including the cleaned layer of
the surface barriers and excluding sprinklers, standpipes, and other active
elements of the fire suppression system.
Encapsulation. "Encapsulation" shall mean the coating or spraying of asbestos-
containing material with an encapsulant. A thin coat of lockdown encapsulant
shall be applied to all surfaces in the work area which were not the subject of
removal or abatement, including the cleaned layer of the surface barriers and
excluding sprinklers, standpipes, and other active elements of the fire
suppression system.
Enclosure. "Enclosure" shall mean the construction of airtight walls and
ceilings between the ACM and the facility environment, or around surfaces
coated with ACM, or any other appropriate procedure as determined by the
Department which prevents the release of asbestos fibers.
EPA. "EPA" or "USEPA" shall mean the United States Environmental Protection
Agency.
Equipment room. "Equipment room" shall mean a contaminated area or room which
is part of the worker decontamination enclosure system with provisions for the
storage of contaminated clothing and equipment.
Exit. "Exit" shall mean that portion of a means of egress system which is
separated from other interior spaces of a building or structure by fire-
resistance-rated construction to provide a protected path of egress travel
between the exit access and the exit discharge.
Exit Passageway. "Exit passageway" shall mean a horizontal extension of a
vertical exit, or a passage leading from a yard or court to an open exterior
space.
FDNY. "FDNY" shall mean the Fire Department of the City of New York.
Fiber. "Fiber" shall mean an acicular single crystal or a similarity elongated
polycrystalline aggregate which displays some resemblance to organic fibers by
having such properties as flexibility, high aspect ratio, silky luster, axial
lineation, and others, and which has attained its shape primarily through
growth rather than cleavage.
Fixed object. "Fixed object" shall mean a unit of equipment, furniture, or
other item in the work area which cannot be removed from the work area. Fixed
objects shall include equipment, furniture, or other items that are attached,
in whole or in part, to a floor, ceiling, wall, or other building structure or
system or to another fixed object and cannot be reasonably removed from the
work area. Fixed objects shall also include pipes and other equipment inside
the work area which are not the subject of the asbestos project. Active fire
suppression system components shall not be considered fixed objects.
Glovebag technique. "Glovebag technique" shall mean a method for removing
asbestos-containing material from heating, ventilation and air conditioning
(HVAC) ducts, short piping runs, valves, joints, elbows, and other nonplanar
surfaces. The glovebag assembly is a manufactured device consisting of a large
bag (constructed of at least 6-mil transparent plastic), two inward-projecting
long sleeve gloves, one inward-projecting waterwand sleeve, an internal tool
pouch, and an attached, labeled receptacle for asbestos waste. The glovebag is
constructed and installed in such a manner that it surrounds the object or area
to be decontaminated and contains all asbestos fibers released during the
removal process.
HEPA filter. "HEPA filter" shall mean a high efficiency particulate air filter
capable of trapping and retaining 99.97 percent of particles (asbestos fibers)
greater than 0.3 micrometers mass median aerodynamic equivalent diameter.
HEPA vacuum equipment. "HEPA vacuum equipment" shall mean vacuuming equipment
with a HEPA filter.
Holding area. "Holding area" shall mean a chamber in the equipment
decontamination enclosure located between the washroom and an uncontaminated
area.
Homogeneous work area. "Homogeneous work area" shall mean a portion of the work
area which contains one type of asbestos-containing material and/or where one
type of abatement is used.
Industrial hygiene. "Industrial hygiene" shall mean that science and art
devoted to the recognition, evaluation and control of those environmental
factors or stresses, arising in or from the work place, which may cause
sickness, impaired health and well being, or significant discomfort and
inefficiency among workers or among the citizens of the community.
Industrial hygienist. "Industrial hygienist" shall mean an individual having a
college or university degree or degrees in engineering, chemistry, physics, or
medicine or related biological sciences who, by virtue of special studies and
training, has acquired competence in industrial hygiene.
Isolation barrier. "Isolation barrier" shall mean the construction of
partitions, the placement of solid materials, and the plasticizing of apertures
to seal off the work place from surrounding areas and to contain asbestos
fibers in the work area.
Large asbestos project. "Large asbestos project" shall mean an asbestos project
involving the disturbance (e.g., removal, enclosure, encapsulation) of 260
linear feet or more of asbestos-containing material or 160 square feet or more
of asbestos-containing material.
Log. "Log" shall mean a permanently bound official record of all activities
that occurred during the project. One log must be maintained by the abatement
contractor in accordance with 15 RCNY §
1-92, and one log must be maintained by the air monitoring company in
accordance with 15 RCNY §
1-37.
Means of egress. "Means of egress" shall mean a continuous and unobstructed
path of vertical and horizontal egress travel from any occupied portion of a
building or structure to a public way. A means of egress consists of three
separate and distinct parts: the exit access, the exit and the exit discharge.
Minor project. "Minor project" shall mean a project involving the disturbance
(e.g. removal, enclosure, encapsulation, repair) of 25 linear feet or less of
asbestos containing material or 10 square feet or less of asbestos containing
material.
Movable object. "Movable object" shall mean a unit of equipment or furniture in
the work area which can be removed from the work area.
Negative air pressure equipment. "Negative air pressure equipment" shall mean a
portable local exhaust system equipped with HEPA filtration. The system shall
be capable of creating a negative pressure differential between the outside and
inside of the work area.
NFPA. "NFPA" shall mean the National Fire Protection Association.
NIOSH. "NIOSH" shall mean the National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health.
NYSDOL. "NYSDOL" shall mean the New York State Department of Labor.
NYSDOL ICR 56. "NYSDOL ICR 56" shall mean Part 56 of the Official Compilation
of Codes, Rules and Regulations of the State of New York or 12 NYCRR Part 56.
NYSDOH. "NYSDOH" shall mean the New York State Department of Health.
Obstruction. "Obstruction" shall mean the blocking of a means of egress with
any temporary structure or barrier. A corridor shall not be considered
obstructed when there is a clear path measuring at least three (3) feet wide
permitting access to all required vertical exits and/or exit doors. Abatement
worker egress from the work area through Polyethylene sheeting covering an
egress used only by abatement workers, shall not be considered an obstruction
when it is prominently marked with exit signage or paint and cutting tools
(knife, razor) are attached to the work area side of the sheeting for use in
the event that the sheeting must be cut to permit egress.
Occupied Area. "Occupied area" shall mean an area of the worksite where
abatement is not taking place and where personnel or occupants normally
function or where workers are not required to use personal protective
equipment.
OSHA. "OSHA" shall mean the United States Occupational Safety and Health
Administration.
OSHA Construction Safety and Health card. "OSHA Construction Safety and Health
card" shall mean a card issued by an authorized OSHA Outreach Training
Institute (OTI) or OTI Education Center that certifies that the recipient has
successfully completed an approved OSHA 10-hour or 30-hour Construction Safety
and Health training class.
Outside air. "Outside air" shall mean the air outside the work place.
Permanently bound log. "Permanently bound log" shall mean a log consisting of
sequentially numbered sheets of paper, pre-printed or handwritten, that are
permanently secured to front and back covers by stitching, glue, and binding
that creates a strong and lasting bond and makes readily discernible the
removal or insertion of sheets after the log's first use.
Person. "Person" shall mean any individual, partnership, company, corporation,
association, firm, organization, governmental agency, administration or
department, or any other group of individuals, or any officer or employee
thereof.
Personal air monitoring. "Personal air monitoring" shall mean a method used to
determine employees' exposure to airborne fibers. The sample is collected
outside the respirator in the worker's breathing zone.
Personal protective equipment. "Personal protective equipment" (PPE) shall mean
appropriate protective clothing, gloves, eye protection, footwear, head gear.
Phase contrast microscopy. "Phase contrast microscopy" (PCM) shall mean the
measurement protocol for the assessment of the fiber content of air. (NIOSH
Method 7400).
Physically present. “Physically present” means that an individual is actually
in a building or location, and does not include being virtually or remotely
present.
Physician. "Physician" shall mean an individual licensed or otherwise
authorized under Article 131 § 65.22 of the New York State Education Law.
Plasticize. "Plasticize" shall mean to cover floors and walls with fire
retardant plastic sheeting as herein specified or by using spray plastics as
acceptable to the Department.
Polarized light microscopy. "Polarized light microscopy" (PLM) shall mean the
measurement protocol for the assessment of the asbestos content of bulk
materials. (Interim Method for the Determination of Asbestiform Materials in
Bulk Insulation Samples - 40 C.F.R. Part 763, Subpart F, Appendix A as amended
on September 1, 1982)
Pre-demolition Abatement Activities. "Pre-demolition abatement activities"
shall mean any and all asbestos abatement activities required to be performed
and completed prior to the partial or total structural demolition of a building
or structure, including successful clearance air monitoring.
Presumed Asbestos Containing Material (PACM). "Presumed Asbestos Containing
Material" shall mean all Thermal System Insulation and Surfacing Material as
described in 15 RCNY §
1-38. PACM is considered to be ACM unless proven otherwise by appropriate bulk
sampling and laboratory analyses.
Project designer. "Project designer" shall mean a person who holds a valid
Project Designer Certificate issued by the New York State Department of Labor.
Project monitor. "Project monitor" shall mean a person who holds a valid
Project Monitor Certificate issued by the New York State Department of Labor.
Project monitor's report. "Project monitor's report" shall mean the "Form ACP-
15" that the project monitor is required to submit for partial or complete
asbestos project closeout as approved by DEP.
Qualitative fit test. "Qualitative fit test" shall mean the individual test
subject's responding (either voluntarily or involuntarily) to a chemical
challenge outside the respirator face piece. Acceptable methods include
irritant smoke test, odorous vapor test, and taste test.
Quantitative fit test. "Quantitative fit test" shall mean exposing the
respirator wearer to a test atmosphere containing an easily detectable,
nontoxic aerosol, vapor or gas as the test agent. Instrumentation, which
samples the test atmosphere and the air inside the face piece of the
respirator, is used to measure quantitatively the leakage into the respirator.
There are a number of test atmospheres, test agents, and exercises to perform
during the tests.
Registered design professional. "Registered design professional" shall mean a
person licensed and registered to practice the professions of architecture or
engineering under the Education Law of the State of New York.
Removal. "Removal" shall mean the stripping of any asbestos-containing
materials from surfaces or components of a facility or taking out structural
components in accordance with 40 C.F.R. 61 Subparts A and M.
Renovation. "Renovation" shall mean an addition or alteration or change or
modification of a building or the service equipment thereof, that is not
classified as an ordinary repair as defined in § 27-125 of the Administrative
Code of the City of New York.
Repair. "Repair" shall mean corrective action using specified work practices
e.g. glovebag, plastic tent procedures, etc. to minimize the likelihood of
fiber release from minimally damaged areas of ACM.
Replacement material. "Replacement material" shall mean any material used to
replace ACM that contains less than .01 percent asbestos.
Shift. "Shift" shall mean a worker's, or simultaneous group of workers',
complete daily term of work.
Shower room. "Shower room" shall mean a room between the clean room and the
equipment room in the worker decontamination enclosure with hot and cold
running water controllable at the tap and arranged for complete showering
during decontamination.
Small asbestos project. "Small asbestos project" shall mean an asbestos project
involving the disturbance (e.g., removal, enclosure, encapsulation) of more
than 25 and less than 260 linear feet of asbestos-containing material or more
than 10 and less than 160 square feet of asbestos-containing material.
Staging area. "Staging area" shall mean the work area near the waste transfer
airlock where containerized asbestos waste has been placed prior to removal
from the work area.
Start date. "Start date" shall mean the date when a worker decontamination
enclosure system is installed and functional.
Strip. "Strip" shall mean to remove asbestos materials from any part of the
facility.
Structural member. "Structural member" shall mean any load-supporting member of
a facility, such as beams and load-supporting walls, or any nonload-supporting
member, such as ceiling and nonload-supporting walls.
Substrate. "Substrate" shall mean non-asbestos containing material which is
beneath and supports asbestos-containing material.
Surface barriers. "Surface barriers" shall mean the plasticizing of walls,
floors, and fixed objects within the work area to prevent contamination from
subsequent work.
Surfactant. "Surfactant" shall mean a chemical wetting agent added to water to
improve penetration.
Suspect Miscellaneous ACM. "Suspect Miscellaneous ACM" shall mean any building
material that is not PACM, such as floor tiles, ceiling tiles, mastics/
adhesives, sealants, roofing materials, cementitous materials, etc. All Suspect
Miscellaneous ACM must be assumed to be ACM, unless proven otherwise by
appropriate bulk sampling and laboratory analyses.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM). "Transmission electron microscopy
(TEM)" shall mean the measurement protocol for the assessment of the asbestos
fiber content of air. (Interim Transmission Electron Microscopy Analytical
Methods - 40 C.F.R. Part 763, Subpart E, Appendix A)
Variance. "Variance" shall mean relief from specific sections of the rule for a
specific project.
Visible emissions. "Visible emissions" shall mean any emissions containing
particulate material that are visually detectable without the aid of
instruments.
Warning line system. "Warning line system" shall mean a barrier erected on a
roof where there are no perimeter parapet walls or where perimeter parapet
walls are less than 39 inches in height, which is intended to warn employees
that they are approaching an unprotected roof side or edge.
Washroom. "Washroom" shall mean a room between the work area and the holding
area in the equipment decontamination enclosure system where equipment and
waste containers are wet cleaned and/or HEPA vacuumed prior to disposal.
Waste decontamination enclosure system. "Waste decontamination enclosure
system" shall mean the decontamination enclosure system designated for the
controlled transfer of materials and equipment, consisting of a washroom and a
holding area.
Wet cleaning. "Wet cleaning" shall mean the removal of asbestos fibers from
building surfaces and objects by using cloths, mops, or other cleaning tools
which have been dampened with water.
Wet methods. "Wet methods" shall mean the use of amended water or removal
encapsulants to minimize the generation of fibers during ACM disturbance.
Work area. "Work area" shall mean designated rooms, spaces, or areas of the
building or structure where asbestos abatement activities take place. For
glovebag procedures, the work area shall also include the areas contiguous to
where the glovebag procedure takes place. For the purpose of the survey of a
building for asbestos, the work area is the premises, or those portions of the
premises where the renovation or alteration work is to occur, as reflected in
the Form ACP 5.
Work place. "Work place" shall mean the work area and the decontamination
enclosure system(s).
Work place safety plan. "Work place safety plan" shall mean documents prepared
by a registered design professional and submitted for review by DEP in order to
obtain an asbestos abatement permit. Such plan shall include, but not be
limited to, plans, sections, and details of the work area clearly showing the
extent, sequence, and means and methods by which the work is to be performed.
Work site. "Work site" shall mean premises where asbestos abatement activity is
taking place, and may be composed of one or more work areas.
Worker. "Worker" shall mean asbestos handler and/or asbestos handler
supervisor.
Worker decontamination enclosure system. "Worker decontamination enclosure
system" shall mean that portion of a decontamination enclosure system designed
for controlled passage of workers, and other individuals and authorized
visitors, consisting of a clean room, a shower room, and an equipment room
separated from each other and from the work area by airlocks and curtained
doorways.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 4/28/2022,
eff. 5/28/2022; amended City Record 1/15/2025, eff. 2/14/2025)
§ 1-03 Variances.
   (a)   Application for any variance must be made directly to the Department
through the ARTS E-File System at least two weeks prior to the commencement of
work. Work involving a variance may not commence prior to the receipt of the
Department's approval of the application. Upon the Department’s approval of an
application other than an application for a variance from section 15 RCNY §
1-22(b), application the applicant must generate an approved variance (Form V2)
by entering a start date in the ARTS E-File System, and must print out and post
a copy of the approved variance at the work place. Upon the Department’s
approval of an application for a variance from 5 RCNY §
1-22(b), the Department will issue the variance approval (Form V5) in the ARTS
E-File System, and the applicant must then submit the Form V5 to DOB and post a
copy of the Form V5 at the work place. Any variance must be approved and issued
prior to the commencement of asbestos abatement activities, except that where a
project includes both work areas for which a variance application has been
filed and work areas for which no variance is being sought, work on the non-
variance portion of the project must begin on the start date indicated in the
ACP-7.
   (b)   The Department's "Asbestos Variance Application" (ACP-9) form shall be
prepared and submitted by a project designer and authorized by the building
owner or authorized agent, and shall include the following information:
      (1)   Identification of those portions of the rules for which a variance
is requested, providing each numbered section and subsection with a description
of the deviation;
      (2)   A description of the hardship preventing the required procedures
from being employed;
      (3)   A written proposal setting forth the alternative procedures the
applicant will employ to satisfy each requirement as modified; and
      (4)   A drawing illustrating the proposed modification.
   (c)   For each variance application where the combined amount (total of both
square and linear feet on the ACP-7) of ACM is less than 5,000 feet, payment of
the variance processing fee shall accompany the application and shall conform
with the payment schedule as follows:
      (1)   Request to modify no more than one lettered subsection in any
section category listed in subsection (e) below: $400 fee.
      (2)   For each additional subsection in any category listed in subsection
(e): $200 fee.
      (3)   The maximum fee: $1,200.
   (d)   For each variance application where the combined amount (total of both
square and linear feet on the ACP-7) of ACM is greater than or equal to 5,000
feet, payment of the variance processing fee shall accompany the application
and shall conform with the payment schedule as follows:
      (1)   Request to modify no more than one lettered subsection in any
section category listed in subsection (e): $600.
      (2)   For each additional subsection in any category listed in subsection
(e): $300.
      (3)   The maximum fee: $1,800.
   (e)   Section categories shall be as follows:
CATEGORY NYC Asbestos Control Program Section #s 12 NYCRR Part 56 Section #s
CATEGORY                   NYC Asbestos Control 12 NYCRR Part 56 Section #s
                           Program Section #s
Notifications Permitting & 21-29                 
Recordkeeping
Air Monitoring             31-45                56-4, 6
Materials and Equipment    61                   56-7
Work Place Preparation     81-84                56-7
Work Place Procedures      91-94                56-7
Abatement Procedures       101-110              56-8
Clean-up Procedures        111-112              56-9
Pre-Demolition Abatement   120-129              –
Activity Procedures
 
   (f)   Any variance from the prohibition on concurrent abatement and full
demolition or story removal set forth in 15 RCNY §
1-126 shall only be approved after notification and consultation with FDNY and
DOB.
   (g)   Any violation of the terms of any variance issued under this section
shall be considered a violation of the lettered subdivision modified by the
variance.
   (h)   An approved variance, except for a variance from subdivision b of 15
RCNY §
1-22, is valid for a period of six months from the start date. An application
to renew an existing variance must be submitted to DEP two weeks prior to the
expiration date of the variance.
   (i)   If the asbestos abatement contractor was the applicant for a variance,
or if the building owner changes the asbestos abatement contractors during the
project, the variance application, and any written approval of the variance,
are automatically canceled.
   (j)   Variances from 15 RCNY §
1-22(b). 
      (1)   A variance from 15 RCNY §
1-22(b) requires the submission of the following:
         (i)   The DOB plan application number submitted with the application
must be in approved status; and
         (ii)   An ACP-5 form must be submitted for those work areas listed on
the plan application that are not listed on the ACP-7 form.
      (2)   When the 15 RCNY §
1-22(b) variance is submitted after the ACP-7 has been submitted and abatement
work has commenced, the ACP-7 must be placed in postponed status in ARTS until
the variance application is approved.
      (3)   Upon approval of a variance from 15 RCNY §
1-22(b), concurrent abatement and demolition or other DOB-permitted work must
start at the same time. Compliance with this requirement is the responsibility
of the building owner.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 4/28/2022,
eff. 5/28/2022; amended City Record 1/15/2025, eff. 2/14/2025)
**** Subchapter B: Certification Provisions ****
** Part 1: Certification Procedures **
§ 1-11 Asbestos Handler Certificate.
   (a)   No individual shall engage in an asbestos project or in asbestos
abatement activities on a minor project, for compensation, unless that
individual is certified as an asbestos handler by the department and has an
"Asbestos Handler Certificate" issued by the department.
   (b)   The department shall issue an asbestos handler certificate in the form
of a photo identification card or digital or electronic equivalent as approved
by DEP which shall be valid for two years from the date of issuance to
applicants who meet the following conditions:
      (1)   Applicant must be at least eighteen (18) years of age at the date
of application; and
      (2)   Applicant must submit a completed application provided by the
department accompanied by a fee of one hundred dollars ($100); and
      (3)   Applicant must submit documentation of successful completion within
the prior 12 months of a NYSDOH-approved Asbestos Handler training course; and
      (4)   Applicant must achieve a passing grade on a departmental
examination.
   (c)   An applicant denied a certificate on any grounds other than failure to
complete a certificate application or failure to meet the minimum requirements
set forth in these rules may request a hearing before the commissioner or his/
her designee to contest said denial by submitting a written request for such
hearing within ten days of receipt of denial.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 1/15/2025,
eff. 2/14/2025)
§ 1-12 Renewal of Asbestos Handler Certificate.
   (a)   The handler shall apply for renewal of the certificate at least 60
days prior to the date of its expiration.
   (b)   Application for renewal shall be made on a form approved by the
department and shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred dollars ($100) and
proof of successful completion within the prior 12 months of a NYSDOH-approved
Asbestos Handler Refresher training course; and
   (c)   An applicant denied a certificate on any grounds other than failure to
complete a certificate application or failure to meet the minimum requirements
set forth in these rules may request a hearing before the commissioner or his/
her designee to contest said denial by submitting a written request for such
hearing within ten days of receipt of denial.
   (d)   If an asbestos handler certificate is lost or stolen, the certificate
holder must immediately notify the department. An application for a replacement
must be made in writing and must include a notarized statement that the
certificate was lost or stolen, a statement that the applicant understands that
submittal of a false statement will subject him or her to penalties and other
remedies under the law, and a fee of $50. A replacement certificate may only be
obtained twice in any two-year validity period.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019)
§ 1-13 Restricted Asbestos Handler Certificate.
   (a)   This section shall apply to individuals involved in the construction
of the containment barriers of a work area (e.g., carpenters), or who otherwise
enter the contained work area for a limited period of time to perform certain
specialized tasks in preparation for, or ancillary to, the actual abatement
(e.g., electricians); and for whom asbestos handler certification would
otherwise be required. This section shall not apply to individuals performing
abatement handling of ACM.
   (b)   The department shall issue a restricted asbestos handler certificate,
in the form of a photo identification card or digital or electronic equivalent
as approved by DEP which shall be valid for two years from the date of issuance
to applicants who comply with the requirements of 15 RCNY §
1-11(b)(1) - (4), except that the fee shall be $50.
   (c)   An individual certified as a restricted asbestos handler by the
department shall perform only those particular job functions specified by the
department in the application for certification.
(Amended City Record 1/15/2025, eff. 2/14/2025)
§ 1-14 Asbestos Handler Supervisor Certificate.
   (a)   No individual shall supervise asbestos handlers engaged in an asbestos
project, for compensation, unless that individual is certified as an asbestos
handler supervisor by the department.
   (b)   The department shall issue an asbestos handler supervisor certificate
in the form of a photo identification card or digital or electronic equivalent
as approved by DEP, which shall be valid for two years from the date of
issuance, to applicants who meet the following conditions:
      (1)   Applicant must be at least twenty-one (21) years of age at the time
of application; and
      (2)   Applicant must submit a completed application provided by the
department accompanied by a fee of one hundred dollars ($100); and
      (3)   Applicant must submit documentation of successful completion within
the prior 12 months of a NYSDOH-approved Asbestos Supervisor training course.
      (4)   Applicant must submit additional credentials as follows:
         (i)   A registered design professional, certified industrial
hygienist, or certified safety professional must submit a copy of the licensing
credentials or certification, and documentation of one month post-graduate
experience in asbestos abatement activities.
         (ii)   A graduate from an accredited college or university possessing
a bachelor's or advanced degree in engineering, architecture, environmental
health science, industrial hygiene, occupational health and safety or a related
science must submit a copy of the degree, and documentation of three months
post graduate experience in asbestos abatement activities.
         (iii)   A graduate from an accredited college of university possessing
an associate's degree in applied science and technology, environmental health
science, public health, industrial health or a related science must submit a
copy of the degree, and documentation of six months post- graduate experience
in asbestos abatement activities.
         (iv)   All other applicants must submit documentation of one year of
experience in asbestos abatement activities. All such experience must be on
small or large asbestos projects, and at least half the experience must be on
large projects, except employees of electric utilities, whose full year of
experience may be on minor or small projects. The applicant's experience in
asbestos abatement activities must be listed chronologically and must include
each contractor's name, address and phone number; the number of hours worked
per week on asbestos abatement activities; the applicant's job title and a
brief description of duties; and the size of each project; and
      (5)   Applicant must achieve a passing grade on a departmental
examination, which shall be given in English.
   (c)   The department may consider applicants who submit additional
credentials which are not identical to the categories specified in subdivision
(b)(4) above, but who present an equivalent combination of familiarity with
abatement activities and demonstrated competence.
   (d)   An applicant denied a certificate on any grounds other than failure to
complete a certificate application or failure to meet the minimum requirements
set forth in these rules may request a hearing before the commissioner or his/
her designee to contest said denial by submitting a written request for such
hearing within ten days of receipt of denial.
(Amended City Record 8/27/2015, eff. 8/27/2015; amended City Record 12/7/2018,
eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 1/15/2025, eff. 2/14/2025)
§ 1-15 Renewal of Asbestos Handler Supervisor Certificate.
   (a)   The supervisor shall apply for renewal of the certificate at least 60
days prior to the date of its expiration.
   (b)   The supervisor shall submit the following items for renewal:
      (1)   A completed application provided by the department accompanied by a
fee of $100; and
      (2)   Documentation of successful completion within the prior 12 months
of a NYSDOH-approved Asbestos Handler Supervisor Refresher training course.
   (c)   An applicant denied a certificate on any grounds other than failure to
complete a certificate application or failure to meet the minimum requirements
set forth in these rules may request a hearing before the commissioner or his/
her designee to contest said denial by submitting a written request for such
hearing within ten days of receipt of denial.
   (d)   If an asbestos handler supervisor certificate is lost or stolen, the
certificate holder must immediately notify the department. An application for a
replacement must be made in writing and must include a notarized statement that
the certificate was lost or stolen, a statement that the applicant understands
that submittal of a false statement will subject him or her to penalties and
other remedies under the law, and a fee of $50. A replacement certificate may
only be obtained twice in any two-year validity period.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019)
§ 1-16 Asbestos Investigator Certificate.
   (a)   (1)   No individual shall engage in a building survey for asbestos
unless that individual is certified as an asbestos investigator by the
department.
      (2)   An individual not certified by the department may assist in an
asbestos survey being conducted by a NYC certified asbestos investigator only
if both the uncertified individual and the certified asbestos investigator are
physically present at the site and the uncertified individual works under the
direct and continuing supervision of the certified asbestos investigator for
the duration of the survey.
   (b)   The department shall qualify applicants to be asbestos investigators.
The applicant must both submit documentation of successful completion of a 8
hour minimum introductory blueprint-reading course or any applicable building
design and construction training or certification as established by the
department and posted on the DEP website and satisfy one of the following five
sets of conditions:
      (1)   A registered design professional, a certified industrial hygienist
or a certified safety professional shall submit a copy of licensing or
certification and documentation of six months post-graduate experience in
building survey for asbestos.
      (2)   A graduate from an accredited college or university possessing a
doctorate or master's degree in architecture, engineering, occupational health
and safety, industrial hygiene or related science must submit a copy of the
degree and documentation of six months post-graduate experience in building
survey for asbestos indicating specific addresses at which the graduate
performed such building surveys.
      (3)   A graduate from an accredited college or university possessing a
bachelor's degree in architecture, engineering, occupational health and safety,
industrial hygiene or a related science must submit a copy of the degree and
documentation of one year post-graduate experience in building survey for
asbestos indicating specific addresses at which the graduate performed such
building surveys.
      (4)   A graduate from an accredited college or university possessing an
associate's degree in architecture, engineering, environmental health, public
health, industrial health, or a related science must submit a copy of the
degree and documentation of two years post-graduate experience in conducting
building surveys for asbestos, indicating specific addresses at which the
graduate performed such building surveys and an additional two years of
experience in any other type of building surveys of a technical nature
including structural, mechanical, or electrical, is required.
      (5)   An individual with extensive experience in asbestos investigation
on a professional level must submit documentation demonstrating three years of
experience conducting building surveys for asbestos indicating specific
addresses at which the individual performed such building surveys and an
additional three years of other experience in any other type of building
surveys of a technical nature including structural, mechanical, or electrical
is required. Additionally, such an individual must possess a four-year high
school diploma or its educational equivalent, approved by a State's Department
of Education.
   (c)   The department shall issue an asbestos investigator certificate in the
form of a photo identification card or digital or electronic equivalent as
approved by DEP which shall be valid for two years from the date of issuance to
qualified applicants who submit the following:
      (1)   A completed application provided by the Department accompanied by a
fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250); and
      (2)   Documentation of successful completion within the prior 12 months
of a NYSDOH-approved Asbestos Inspector Training course, and a passing grade on
the required investigator training course; and
      (3)   Documentation of a medical examination performed by a physician
within the prior 12 months, which must include at a minimum a pulmonary
function test, evaluation of a recent chest x-ray and a physician's
recommendation as to whether the applicant is able to wear a respirator in the
performance of his/her job; and
      (4)   Documentation of a qualitative or quantitative fit test performed
within the prior three months, which must include brand name and type of
respirator, date and location of test, and the signature of the industrial
hygienist administering the test.
         (i)   Qualitative fit test may be used only for fit testing of half-
mask negative pressure respirators.
         (ii)   Quantitative fit test must be performed on all full-face
negative pressure respirators.
   (d)   Applicant shall be allowed three attempts to achieve a passing grade
on a departmental examination. If an applicant receives a failing grade after
the third attempt, the applicant shall retake a New York State Inspector
Training course as set forth in paragraph 2 of subdivision (c) of this section
before being allowed to retake the departmental examination.
   (e)   Under special circumstances the department may consider applicants who
submit additional credentials which are not identical to the categories
specified in subdivision (b)(1) through (5) above.
   (f)   An applicant denied a certificate on any grounds other than failure to
complete a certificate application or failure to meet the minimum requirements
set forth in these rules may request a hearing before the commissioner or his/
her designee to contest said denial by submitting a written request for such
hearing within ten days of receipt of denial.
   (g)   A person who possesses an asbestos investigator certificate shall be
responsible for the proper execution of his or her duties. Unprofessional
conduct is prohibited. Unprofessional conduct shall include but is not limited
to:
      (1)   Failing to comply with the provisions of Federal, State, or local
laws, rules or regulations.
      (2)   Making or filing a false report, or failing to file a report
required by Federal, State, or local laws, rules, or regulations.
      (3)   Delegating professional responsibilities to a person who is not
qualified to perform them.
   (h)   Investigator's seal requirement.
      (1)   No NYC-certified asbestos investigator shall submit any plan or
report to any client or any city, state, or federal agency that does not have
the investigator's seal and signature affixed to it. Photocopies of the seal
and signature are not acceptable.
      (2)   Seals used by certified asbestos investigators shall be circular in
shape, approximately one and three quarter inches in diameter, with three
concentric circles. The inner circle shall contain an accurate representation
of the great seal of the City of New York. The legend at the top of the outer
band shall read "CITY OF NEW YORK" and at the bottom "CERTIFIED ASBESTOS
INVESTIGATOR". In the inner circle above the great seal of the City of New York
shall be shown the name of the certified asbestos investigator.
      (3)   Any plan or report submitted without the investigator's seal and
signature shall be considered invalid.
      (4)   [Repealed.]
   (i)   Employees of the department's Asbestos Control Program (ACP) are
prohibited from applying for an asbestos investigator certificate. Any ACP
employee who holds an asbestos investigator certificate is prohibited from
applying for renewal of the certificate.
   (j)   The department may deny any application submitted under this section
where it is determined that the applicant has failed to meet the standards
established by these rules, including:
      (1)   Failure to demonstrate the ability to comply fully with applicable
requirements, standards, and procedures set forth in these rules;
      (2)   Submission of false information on an application;
      (3)   Failure to submit all required information and documentation with
the application;
      (4)   Where the department has determined that the applicant's past
history of violation of federal or state asbestos regulations, or of any laws,
rules, or regulations relating to occupational or public safety or health,
indicates a direct relationship between that history and the license or that
issuance of the license would pose unreasonable risks to property or safety;
      (5)   Loss of a relevant professional accreditation or license; or
      (6)   Any other cause which the commissioner determines to be of such
serious and compelling nature as to warrant denial of the application.
   (k)   A certified asbestos investigator who is issued a notice of violation
under this section alleging that the investigator engaged in unprofessional
conduct that demonstrates a willful disregard for public health, safety or
welfare shall be subject to immediate suspension, provided that the
Commissioner serves the investigator with a notice of charges and an
opportunity to be heard within 15 calendar days, pursuant to Administrative
Code § 24-136(e)(4).
   (l)   When the commissioner has reasonable cause to believe that an asbestos
investigator's surveys have been performed improperly or fraudulently such that
work performed, pursuant to such a survey poses or may pose a threat to human
safety, he or she may invalidate any or all ACP-5s filed by that asbestos
investigator, and may order the building owner to stop all work, have a new
survey performed by a different asbestos investigator, and have a new ACP-
5 submitted to the department. The commissioner in his or her discretion may
waive the filing fee for such ACP 5.
   (m)   Applicants to become a certified asbestos investigator shall disclose
prior convictions as part of their application to the extent permitted under
Section 23-A of the correction law, Section 296(16) of the executive law and §
8-107 of the Administrative Code, and once certified, must notify DEP in
writing of any criminal conviction, to the extent permitted by such laws,
within ten days of occurrence.
(Amended City Record 8/27/2015, eff. 8/27/2015; amended City Record 12/7/2018,
eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 1/15/2025, eff. 2/14/2025)
§ 1-17 Renewal of Asbestos Investigator Certificate.
   (a)   The investigator shall apply for renewal of the certificate at least
60 days prior to the date of its expiration.
   (b)   The investigator shall submit the following items for renewal:
      (1)   A completed application provided by the Department accompanied by a
fee of $250 payable to the Department; and
      (2)   Documentation of successful completion within the prior 12 months
of a NYSDOH-approved Asbestos Inspector Refresher course; and
      (3)   Documentation of a medical examination performed by a physician
within the prior 12 months, which shall include at a minimum a pulmonary
function test, evaluation of a recent chest x-ray and a physician's
recommendation as to whether the applicant is able to wear a respirator in the
performance of his/her job; and
      (4)   Documentation of a qualitative or quantitative fit test performed
within the prior three months, which shall include brand name and type of
respirator, date and location of test, and the signature of the industrial
hygienist administering the test.
         (i)   Qualitative fit test may be used only for fit testing of half-
mask negative pressure respirators.
         (ii)   Quantitative fit test shall be performed on all full-face
negative pressure respirators.
   (c)   An applicant denied a certificate on any grounds other than failure to
complete a certificate application or failure to meet the minimum requirements
set forth in these rules may request a hearing before the commissioner or his/
her designee to contest said denial by submitting a written request for such
hearing within ten days of receipt of denial.
   (d)   If an asbestos investigator certificate is lost or stolen, the
certificate holder must immediately notify the department. An application for a
replacement must be made in writing and must include a notarized statement that
the certificate was lost or stolen, a statement that the applicant understands
that submittal of a false statement will subject him or her to penalties and
other remedies under the law, and a fee of $50. A replacement certificate may
only be obtained twice in any two-year validity period. 
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019)
§ 1-18 Renewal of Restricted Asbestos Handler Certificate.
   (a)   The restricted asbestos handler must apply for renewal of the
certificate at least 60 days prior to the date of its expiration.
   (b)   Application for renewal must be made on a form approved by the
department and must be accompanied by a fee of fifty dollars ($50).
   (c)   An applicant denied a certificate on any grounds other than failure to
complete a certificate application or failure to meet the minimum requirements
set forth in these rules may request a hearing before the commissioner or the
commissioner's designee to contest that denial by submitting a written request
for such hearing within ten days of receipt of the denial.
   (d)   If a restricted asbestos handler certificate is lost or stolen, the
certificate holder must immediately notify the department. An application for a
replacement must be made in writing and must include a notarized statement that
the certificate was lost or stolen, a statement that the applicant understands
that submittal of a false statement will subject him or her to penalties and
other remedies under the law, and a fee of $50. A replacement certificate can
only be obtained twice in any two-year validity period.
(Added City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019)
**** Subchapter C: Notifications, Permitting and Recordkeeping ****
§ 1-21 Size and Scope of Asbestos Project.
   (a)   For the purpose of determining whether there has been compliance with
any reporting or filing requirement established in 15 RCNY §§
1-22 through
1-27, the size and scope of the overall project shall control, with particular
reference to the total amount of asbestos-containing material which will be
disturbed. Such requirements may not lawfully be avoided or lessened through
the performance of work in incremental or piecemeal fashion.
   (b)   When alternative calculations (i.e., linear feet and square feet) of
the size and scope of an asbestos project result in that project coming within
the definition of more than one subclassification of asbestos project, the
calculation with the higher absolute number shall determine the
subclassification of asbestos project procedures to be followed.
   (c)   For the purpose of 15 RCNY §§
1-21 through
1-27, the term "work" shall be understood as in the common construction usage,
i.e. not specifically related to asbestos abatement activities.
§ 1-22 Projects Requiring Certification to the Department of Buildings.
   (a)   This section shall apply to applications for the following projects
requiring permits to be issued by the Department of Buildings:
      (1)   Full demolitions.
      (2)   Alterations, renovations, or modifications.
      (3)   Plumbing work, except for the direct replacement of plumbing
fixtures.
   (b)   In accordance with § 28-106.1 of the Administrative Code, the building
owner or such owner's authorized agent must submit one of the following
certifications to the Department of Buildings except as set forth below:
      (1)   Asbestos Assessment Report. If the building (or portions thereof)
affected by the work are free of asbestos-containing material, ACM will not be
disturbed by the work, or the amount of ACM to be abated constitutes a minor
project, an asbestos assessment report (Form ACP-5) completed, signed, and
sealed by a DEP-certified asbestos investigator, along with a fee of $47.00
must be submitted to DEP prior to construction document approval and to any
amendment of the construction document approval which increases the scope of
the project to include any surveyed area not previously covered.
      (2)   Asbestos Project Completion Form. If an asbestos project has been
performed and satisfactorily completed in accordance with these rules, a copy
of the asbestos project completion form (Form ACP21) issued to the building
owner or its authorized representative by DEP must be submitted to DOB prior to
the issuance of a DOB permit and to any amendment of the underlying
construction document approval which increases the scope of the project to
include any work area not previously covered.
      (3)   Asbestos Project Conditional Completion Form. If an asbestos
project has been performed but would be subject to the procedures of 15 RCNY §
1-26(c)(2)(ii), a copy of the asbestos project conditional completion form
(Form ACP20) issued to the building owner or its authorized representative by
DEP must be submitted to DOB prior to the issuance of a DOB permit and to any
amendment of the underlying construction document approval which increases the
scope of the project to include any work area not previously covered.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019)
§ 1-23 Alterations/Renovations/Modifications.
   (a)   As early as possible before an alteration, renovation, modification,
demolition, or plumbing work takes place, or changes in such work occur, the
building owner shall be responsible for having an asbestos survey performed by
a DEP-certified asbestos investigator to determine the absence or presence of
asbestos-containing material which may be disturbed during the course of the
work. The owner of the building or authorized agent shall comply with the
notification requirements of 15 RCNY §
1-25 regarding asbestos-containing material.
   (b)   Asbestos Exemption. Where the work to be performed requires a permit
to be issued by the DOB, an asbestos exemption may be claimed by checking the
appropriate boxes on the DOB permit application forms PW1 or LAA1, where the
applicant for construction document approval certifies that:
      (1)   the permit sought does not involve the performance of any physical
work, such as permits for zoning lot subdivisions, zoning lot reapportionment,
or changes in the certificate of occupancy; or
      (2)   no existing building materials, as the term "building materials" is
defined in these rules, are to be disturbed by the proposed work; or
      (3)   the activities being performed include work on one of the
following: Awnings Cranes not anchored to building or structure Emergency power
not involving hard wiring, e.g. battery packs Exterior concrete work (e.g.
sidewalks, curb cuts, traffic islands) except if waterproofing compound is
present Exterior scaffolding not anchored to building or structure Exterior
trenching and drainage Ground-mounted flagpoles New storefronts in existing
masonry openings (no disturbance of existing building) Radio antennas (free-
standing towers) Relocating free-standing parking lot sheds Replacing rooftop
air conditioning (no modification of ductwork or disturbance of building)
Roadway asphalt Sealing unsafe or abandoned buildings with cinderblock and
mortar Sidewalk sheds, bridges, fences, elevators, hoists and cafe signs (no
penetration of building materials) Street furniture, e.g. candy or newsstands,
bus shelters, kiosks Installation of new outdoor swimming pool Free-standing
tents Erection of temporary structures (e.g. trailers) with electric/water
lines only
   (c)   Asbestos Assessment Report (ACP-5 Form). If, after a survey performed
by a DEP-certified asbestos investigator, it is determined that the building
(or portion thereof) affected by the work is free of asbestos-containing
material, the ACM present will not be disturbed by the work, or the amount of
ACM to be abated constitutes a minor project, said asbestos investigator must
complete, sign, and affix his or her seal to the asbestos assessment report
(ACP-5 Form) which shall be submitted with a fee of $47.00 to DEP in accordance
with 15 RCNY §
1-22(b)(1).
   (d)   Asbestos Project Completion Form. Where the work to be performed
constitutes an asbestos project, an asbestos project notification (ACP-7 Form)
shall be submitted to DEP in accordance with the provisions of 15 RCNY §
1-25. Upon completion of the asbestos project and submission of all required
documentation to DEP, DEP shall issue an asbestos project completion form to
the building owner or its authorized representative.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019)
§ 1-24 [Reserved.]
§ 1-25 Asbestos Project Notifications.
   (a)   This section shall apply to the following categories:
      (1)   Removal, encapsulation, enclosure or replacement of asbestos-
containing materials (including insulation); and
      (2)   Work in or into plenum spaces of existing buildings (e.g.
electrical, ventilation, cable, sheet metal work, etc.); and
      (3)   Removal of asbestos-covered structures and equipment such as
boilers, pipes, etc.; and
      (4)   Other miscellaneous activities not previously exempted.
   (b)   [Reserved.]
   (c)   Asbestos Projects. If the cumulative total of all surfaces affected by
the work is an asbestos project, the department's asbestos project notification
(ACP-7 Form) completed by the building owner or authorized agent, and listing
each work area within the building separately, shall be submitted directly to
the department one week in advance of the start of the work along with a filing
fee in the following amounts:
      (1)   For work which will disturb more than 25 linear feet but less than
100 linear feet, or more than 10 square feet but less than 50 square feet, of
asbestos-containing material, the fee shall be $200.
      (2)   For work which will disturb at least 100 linear feet and less than
260 linear feet, or at least 50 square feet and less than 160 square feet, of
asbestos-containing material, the fee shall be $400.
      (3)   For work which will disturb at least 260 linear feet and less than
1,000 linear feet, or at least 160 square feet and less than 1,000 square feet,
of asbestos-containing material, the fee shall be $800.
      (4)   For work which will disturb 1,000 linear feet or more, or 1,000
square feet or more, of asbestos-containing materials, the fee shall be $1,200.
   (d)   Modification of or deviation from the information provided in any
notification submitted to the DEP under this section must immediately be
reported to DEP using the ARTS E-File system if the change refers to the
identity of the building owner or ACM removal contractor or the air monitoring
firm; or the amount of ACM to be removed; or the dates of the project; or the
specific project location. A notification may be modified no more than twice,
but a modification related to the extension or reinstatement of an asbestos
abatement permit shall not count towards this total. A modification is valid
only if it is received by the DEP prior to the previously filed date of
completion, except for start date changes which must be received by the
original start date. If the modification is received after that date, a new
notification submitted directly to the department will be required. Additional
work, identified after the completion of the work indicated on the asbestos
project notification and successful clearance air monitoring, shall require a
new notification. A notification to DEP shall be valid for one year from the
date of original filing.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019)
§ 1-26 Asbestos Abatement Permits.
   (a)   Permit required. An asbestos abatement permit authorizing the
performance of construction work shall be required for asbestos projects
involving one or more of the following activities:
      (1)   Obstruction of an exit door leading to an exit stair or the
exterior of the building;
      (2)   Obstruction of an exterior fire escape or access to that fire
escape;
      (3)   Obstruction of a fire-rated corridor leading to an exit door;
      (4)   Removal of handrails in an exit stair or ramp within the work area;
      (5)   Removal or dismantling of any fire alarm system component including
any fire alarm-initiating device (e.g., smoke detectors, manual pull station)
within the work area;
      (6)   Removal or dismantling of any exit sign, including directional
signs, or any component of the exit lighting system, including photoluminescent
exit path markings within the work area;
      (7)   Removal or dismantling of any part of a sprinkler system including
piping or sprinkler heads within the work area;
      (8)   Removal or dismantling of any part of a standpipe system including
fire pumps or valves within the work area;
      (9)   Any abatement activity to be performed within a building
concurrently with the full demolition of such building or concurrently with the
removal of one or more stories of such building.
      (10)   Removal of any non-load bearing/non-fire-resistance rated wall
(greater than 45 square feet or 50 per cent of a given wall) within the work
area;
      (11)   Any plumbing work other than the repair or replacement of plumbing
fixtures within the work area;
      (12)   Removal of any fire-resistance rated portions of a wall, ceiling,
floor, door, corridor, partition, or structural element enclosure including
spray-on fire-resistance rated materials within the work area;
      (13)   Removal of any fire damper, smoke damper, fire stopping material,
fire blocking, or draft stopping within fire-resistance rated assemblies or
within concealed spaces;
      (14)   Obstruction of an interior stairway leading to an exit or exit
passageway of a building;
      (15)   Any abatement activity to be performed within a work area located
in a confined space.
   (b)   Work Place Safety Plan.
      (1)   Plan required. For projects requiring an asbestos abatement permit
due to one or more of the activities listed in (a)(1) - (15), the building
owner or its authorized representative must submit, together with the asbestos
project notification, a work place safety plan (WPSP) and any other applicable
construction documents, which must be prepared by a registered design
professional, and a permit fee as specified in subsection (g). If the WPSP is
being submitted, pursuant to subsection (a)(9), it must also set forth the
sequencing of the proposed work. The WPSP may not be approved unless it
provides for a buffer of four floors or an adequate buffer as determined by the
commissioner between the abatement and the demolition or floor removal work.
      (2)   Work Place Safety Plan requirements. The WPSP must include, but not
be limited to, the following items, depending on the size and scope of the
asbestos project:
         (i)   Floor plans showing the locations of all asbestos project work
areas and decontamination enclosure systems required under subdivision (a) of
this section.
         (ii)   Floor plans indicating the locations of any components of the
fire alarm system which have been deactivated, and setting forth mitigation
measures to be implemented for the duration of the project.
         (iii)   Floor plans indicating the locations of obstructed or removed
exit signage and lighting and setting forth mitigation measures to be
implemented for the duration of the project.
         (iv)   Floor plans indicating the locations of any obstructed means of
egress or required exit and setting forth mitigation measures to be implemented
for the duration of the project.
         (v)   Floor plans or riser diagrams indicating the locations of any
disengaged or removed components of the fire protection system and setting
forth mitigation measures to be undertaken for the duration of the project.
         (vi)   A written description of all measures taken to mitigate
compromised fire protection systems or means of egress, including but not
limited to surveillance by a fire watch and an action plan setting forth
procedures to be taken for the safety of building occupants in the event of an
emergency.
         (vii)   If the asbestos project is being performed in a building where
any dwelling unit is to be occupied for the duration of the permit, the WPSP
shall include a tenant protection plan as required by Chapter 1 of Title 28 of
the Administrative Code. If the asbestos project is being performed in a
building where both asbestos abatement workers and non-asbestos abatement
workers are working at any time during the permitted project, the WPSP must
include an Occupant Protection Plan as specified in Chapter 1 of Title 28 of
the Administrative Code.
      (3)   Approval. The documents submitted pursuant to subsection (b) will
be reviewed by DEP's asbestos technical review unit (A-TRU) and by any other
relevant city agencies. Upon approval by A-TRU, DEP will issue an asbestos
abatement permit to the building owner or its authorized representative, who
must post a copy of the permit at the work place.
      (4)   Failure to comply with the approved WPSP is a violation of these
rules.
   (c)   Inspections required.
      (1)   All inspections required, pursuant to Title 28 of the
Administrative Code, including but not limited to special inspections required
by Chapter 17 of the Building Code, must be performed by a registered design
professional who is independent of the abatement contractor and hired by the
building owner or that owner's authorized representative.
      (2)   A final inspection shall be performed by a registered design
professional after all work authorized by the asbestos abatement permit is
completed. The person performing the inspection shall note all failures to
comply with the provisions of the Building Code or approved asbestos abatement
permit and shall promptly notify the owner in writing. All defects noted in
such inspection shall be corrected. The final inspection report shall either:
         (i)   confirm:
            (A)   that the construction work is complete, including the
reinstallation or reactivation of any building fire safety or life safety
component; and
            (B)   that any defects previously noted have been corrected; and
            (C)   that all required inspections were performed; and
            (D)   that the work is in substantial compliance with the approved
asbestos abatement permit construction documents, the Building Code, and other
applicable laws and rules; or
         (ii)   confirm:
            (A)   that the construction work does not return the building (or
portion thereof) affected by the abatement project to a condition compliant
with the Building Code and other applicable laws and rules, but that the
registered design professional has reviewed an application for asbestos
abatement permit construction documents approval that has been approved by the
department of buildings, and the subsequent scope of work as approved will,
upon completion, render all areas affected by the asbestos project in full
compliance with the Building Code and all applicable laws and rules; and
            (B)   that any defects previously noted that are not addressed by
the subsequent scope of work as approved by the department of buildings, have
been corrected; and
            (C)   that all required inspections that are not addressed by the
subsequent scope of work as approved by the department of buildings were
performed; and
            (D)   that all completed work pursuant to an asbestos abatement
permit is in substantial compliance with the approved asbestos abatement permit
construction documents.
      (3)   Final inspection reports shall be filed with the DEP on A-TR1 form.
Records of final inspections made by registered design professionals must be
maintained by such persons for a period of six years after final inspection, or
for such other period as the commissioner shall require, and shall be made
available within 72 hours. These records may be maintained in an electronic
recordkeeping system instead of in paper form. Records must be stored in a
manner that minimizes the possibility of water damage. The registered design
professional must immediately notify DEP if any records are lost, damaged or
destroyed.
   (d)   Duration of Permit. An asbestos abatement permit shall expire upon the
earlier of one year from the date of issuance or when terminated pursuant to
one of the following:
      (1)   The holder of an asbestos abatement permit submits a final
inspection report pursuant to (c)(2)(i).
      (2)   The holder of an asbestos abatement permit submits a final
inspection report pursuant to (c)(2)(ii) and obtains a Department of Buildings
permit for work which, when completed, will render all areas affected by the
project fully compliant with the Building Code and all other applicable rules
and laws.
      (3)   The expiration date of the asbestos project notification ACP-
7 form.
   (e)   Failure to terminate asbestos abatement permit within year.
      (1)   Failure to terminate an asbestos abatement permit pursuant to
subsection (d) within a year from the date of issuance of said permit shall be
a violation subject to fine. Each 60-day period during which such violation
continues to occur constitutes a separate offense that may be subject to a
separate fine.
      (2)   If the holder of an asbestos abatement permit fails to terminate an
asbestos abatement permit within a year from the date of issuance, the holder
shall maintain the work area in a safe manner including but not limited to any
mitigation measures set forth in the WPSP and shall not perform work.
   (f)   Insurance. Entities other than NYSDOL-licensed asbestos contractors
performing work pursuant to an asbestos abatement permit which does not involve
the disturbance of asbestos-containing materials shall maintain insurance of
the same type and amount as would be required if the entity were working
pursuant to a permit issued by the Department of Buildings.
   (g)   Permit fee. The WPSP, asbestos abatement permit construction
documents, as applicable, shall be accompanied by a filing fee, as follows:
 
 
Project Size                                                 Fee
Small projects up to 99 linear feet or 49 square feet of ACM $100
100 to 259 linear feet or 50 to 159 square feet of ACM       $300
Large projects up to 1,000 square/linear feet of ACM         $500
1,000 to 4,999 square/linear feet of ACM                     $700
5,000 to 9,999 square/linear feet of ACM                     $1,100
10,000 or more square/linear feet of ACM                     $1,300
 
   (h)   Work covered by the asbestos abatement permit shall not commence until
said permit is issued with a specified start date and posted with the approved
WPSP by the applicant at the work place.
   (i)   If additional ACM is added to a project that has an approved WPSP, a
registered design professional must submit a letter and a revised WPSP through
the ARTS-E-file system affirming that the professional has visited the work
place and that the additional asbestos abatement is consistent with the
approved WPSP and that proposed changes will not impact egress or fire
protection requirements. If additional ACM from a different floor with A-TRU
triggers is added to a notification that has an approved WPSP or if the
abatement phasing sequence is modified, the applicant must submit a new
notification through the ARTS E-File system along with a WPSP for review.
   (j)   DEP may, based on inspections conducted by DEP and other relevant
agencies, exempt emergency asbestos projects for which a notification has been
filed pursuant to 15 RCNY §
1-27 from all requirements of 15 RCNY §
1-26.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 4/28/2022,
eff. 5/28/2022; amended City Record 1/15/2025, eff. 2/14/2025)
§ 1-27 Emergency Asbestos Project Notification.
   (a)   An emergency asbestos project involves the removal, enclosure,
encapsulation or cleanup of asbestos-containing material that was not planned
but is undertaken when sudden unexpected event(s) result in a situation in
which any delay in abatement would pose an immediate danger to public safety
and health.
   (b)   When such an emergency asbestos project occurs, applicants with an
ARTS E-File account must submit an emergency notification, including a detailed
scope of work, on the asbestos contractor’s letterhead, and a cover letter from
the building owner or authorized agent including the items listed in (1) to (7)
through the ARTS E-File system. If the applicant does not have a valid ARTS E-
File account or is unable to access the ARTS E-File system, the applicant must
immediately call 311 and provide:
      (1)   Name, affiliation and telephone number of caller;
      (2)   Nature of the emergency;
      (3)   Scope of asbestos work to be performed and the quantity and
location of ACM to be abated;
      (4)   Exact location of the project including street address and borough;
      (5)   Name, address, and telephone number of the asbestos abatement
contractor and the air monitoring company;
      (6)   Starting and projected completion dates; and
      (7)   Such other factors as the department may determine are relevant for
that project.
   (c)   When such an emergency asbestos project occurs, an asbestos project
notification (ACP-7 Form) shall be submitted through the ARTS E-File system in
accordance with the provisions of 15 RCNY §
1-25 as soon as possible, but not later than 48 hours after the project begins.
In such cases, the ACP-7 Form shall be accompanied by a cover letter from the
building owner or their authorized agent including the following information:
      (1)   the nature of the emergency;
      (2)   a description of the scope of work. With respect to projects
commenced under this section, the department, based on inspection by the
department and other relevant agencies, may exempt the emergency project from
the requirements of 15 RCNY §
1-26.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 4/28/2022,
eff. 5/28/2022; amended City Record 1/15/2025, eff. 2/14/2025)
§ 1-28 Record Keeping Requirements for Investigators.
   (a)   The asbestos investigator must maintain a permanent record as required
under this section for every building survey for asbestos that is conducted,
pursuant to or submitted in accordance with 15 RCNY §§
1-22 through
1-27 and
1-38.
   (b)   For each building survey conducted prior to preparation of either the
asbestos project notification (ACP-7) or asbestos assessment report (ACP-5),
the investigator must compile a record. Each of the requirements listed below
must be satisfied independently. A requirement to maintain a particular record
may not be satisfied by inclusion of the information required to be set forth
in that record in another record (e.g., information that is required to be set
forth in the blueprint, diagram, or drawing must be in that record and the
requirement to provide certain information in the blueprint, diagram, or
drawing cannot be satisfied by its inclusion of the specified information in a
survey report). The record must include at a minimum:
      (1)   A survey report that includes, at a minimum, the building or
structure address and the name, address, and contact information of the
building or structure owner; a description of the scope of work, the location
(floor, section, room) of areas where bulk samples were collected or material
was assumed to contain asbestos; the material type, name dimensions and
condition of all suspect ACM, and the number of samples taken of each material;
and the name, address and contact information of any non-certified individual
who participated in the survey, along with a description of the activities
engaged in by said person; and
      (2)   A blueprint, diagram, or drawing of each building or portion
thereof inspected by the investigator that identifies clearly each exact
location and type of material where bulk samples were collected or assumed to
be ACM. The blueprint, diagram or drawing must include the approximate linear
or square footage of all areas affected by the proposed work where material was
sampled and/or assumed to be ACM and the date of collection; and
      (3)   The printed name and signature of any and all persons who collect
bulk samples for the purpose of determining the presence of ACM, a copy of the
current New York State asbestos inspector certificate of each such person, the
name of the firm performing the survey and a copy of its current NYSDOL
asbestos handling license, the name and address of the laboratory analyzing the
samples, the date of analysis, the results of the analysis, the method of
analysis and the name and signature of the person performing the analysis; and
      (4)   A chain of custody for all bulk samples collected as part of the
survey. The chain of custody must be prepared in accordance with EPA recording
requirements (QA Handbook Volume II Section 8.00).
      A record that lacks any of the foregoing components will be deemed
defective.
   (c)   Reserved.
   (d)   The investigator must maintain these records for thirty (30) years.
These records may be maintained in an electronic recordkeeping system instead
of in paper form. Upon the death of the investigator, records may be destroyed
and notification must be sent to the Asbestos Control Program.
   (e)   The investigator shall make these records available during normal
business hours, pursuant to an appointment without cost or restriction for
inspection by a representative of the Department.
   (f)   Records must be stored in a manner that minimizes the possibility of
damage from water. The investigator must immediately report if any records are
damaged, lost or destroyed.
   (g)   The investigator must respond to the Department's request for
inspection within fourteen (14) business days and provide a date, time and
location for an inspection which is within 21 days of the date of the request.
Failure of the investigator to either respond to the Department's request for
an appointment or provide a date, time, and address for an inspection will
result in suspension of the Certified Asbestos Investigator's (CAI) certificate
until such appointment is completed and these records are made available for
inspection.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 4/28/2022,
eff. 5/28/2022; amended City Record 1/15/2025, eff. 2/14/2025)
§ 1-29 Maintenance of Project Record and Project Summary.
   (a)   A project record shall be maintained for all small and large asbestos
projects. During the project, the project record shall be kept on site at all
times and may be maintained by the building owner or his authorized
representative, which may be the asbestos abatement contractor or the air
monitoring company. Upon completion of the project, the project record shall be
maintained by the building owner. The project record shall be produced upon
verbal or written request by any DEP inspector. Upon transfer of ownership of
the building, all project records for past asbestos projects shall be turned
over to the new owner. The project record shall consist of:
      (1)   Copies of licenses of all contractors involved in the project.
      (2)   Copies of DEP and NYSDOL supervisor and handler certificates for
all workers engaged in the project;
      (3)   Copies of all project notifications and reports filed with DEP and
NYSDOL for the project, with any amendments or variances;
      (4)   Copies of all asbestos abatement permits, including associated
approved plans and work place safety plan;
      (5)   A copy of the project air sampling log, chain of custody forms, and
all air sampling results;
      (6)   A copy of the abatement contractor's log;
      (7)   All data related to bulk sampling including the results of any
asbestos surveys performed by an asbestos investigator;
      (8)   Copies of all waste manifests;
      (9)   A copy of all project monitor's reports.
   (b)   In addition to the project record required in subsection (a), the
asbestos abatement contractor shall maintain, for at least thirty (30) years
after the end of the project, a project summary for each asbestos project in
which they engage. These records may be maintained in an electronic
recordkeeping system instead of in paper form. That project record must consist
of the following:
      (1)   Name, address, and DEP certificate number of all individuals who
worked on the project;
      (2)   Location and general description of the project;
      (3)   Amount of ACM abated;
      (4)   Start and completion dates;
      (5)   Name, address, and NYSDOL asbestos handling license number of the
air monitoring company;
      (6)   Name, address, and ELAP registration number of the laboratory used
for air sample analysis;
      (7)   Name and address of the site used for disposal of the ACM waste
generated by the project;
      (8)   Name and address of the asbestos hauler;
      (9)   Copy of the abatement contractor's log and the project air sampling
log;
      (10)   Copy of the project monitor's report.
   (c)   The building owner, contractor or air monitor, as applicable, must
make the project record or project summary required by this section available
for inspection by DEP within 72 hours of request, except that during the
project the project record must be made available upon request.
   (d)   In addition to the project record required in subdivision (a), the air
monitoring company must maintain, for at least thirty (30) years after the end
of the project, a project summary for each asbestos project in which the
company engages. These records may be maintained in an electronic recordkeeping
system instead of in paper form. The project summary must consist of the
following:
      (1)   The DEP certificate number of all air monitoring technicians who
worked on the project;
      (2)   The location and general description of the project;
      (3)   The start and completion dates for the project;
      (4)   The name, address, and ELAP registration number of the laboratory
used for air sample analysis; and
      (5)   A copy of the air sampling log, chains of custody, laboratory
reports, and sample location sketches.
   (e)   All records required to be kept by this section must be stored in a
manner that minimizes the possibility of water damage. The party responsible
for maintaining the records must immediately notify DEP if any records are
lost, damaged, or destroyed.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 8/21/2019,
eff. 9/20/2019; amended City Record 4/28/2022, eff. 5/28/2022; amended City
Record 1/15/2025, eff. 2/14/2025)
**** Subchapter D: Air and Bulk Sampling, Monitoring and Analysis ****
** Part 1: Applicability **
§ 1-31 Performance of Air and Bulk Sampling, Monitoring and Analysis.
Air sampling, monitoring, and analysis on asbestos projects, and bulk sampling
and analysis to determine asbestos content, shall be performed in accordance
with the provisions of the following 15 RCNY §§
1-31 through
1-45 inclusive.
§ 1-32 Abatement Not to Proceed Without Air Monitor.
The abatement contractor shall not perform any abatement activities unless the
air monitoring technician is physically present at the work place and the air
monitoring required by this subchapter is being conducted.
(Added City Record 1/15/2025, eff. 2/14/2025)
** Part 2: Personnel Qualifications and Equipment Specifications **
§ 1-36 Persons Qualified to Perform Sampling and Analysis.
   (a)   Sampling and analysis shall be performed by:
      (1)   A third party who is contracted by the building owner, holds a
current NYSDOL asbestos handling license, and is completely independent of all
parties involved in the asbestos project. The third party who conducts air
sampling on an asbestos project shall not be a subcontractor of the abatement
contractor, and shall not have any business, personal, or other relationship
with the abatement contractor. The building owner must select and hire the air
monitoring company without recommendation or reference from the abatement
contractor. It shall be a violation of this subsection, chargeable against the
abatement contractor, the air monitoring company, and the building owner, for
an air monitoring company to conduct air monitoring on an asbestos project
where there is a business or personal relationship between the abatement
contractor and the air monitoring company. It shall be considered prima facie
evidence of a business or personal relationship between an abatement contractor
and an air monitoring company when the same company performs air monitoring on
all or virtually all of a given abatement contractor's projects. The person who
conducts air sampling must be currently certified as a New York State Asbestos
Project Air Sampling Technician when performing air sampling. Failure to have a
valid certification based either on office records or upon request shall be a
violation chargeable against the individual conducting the sampling; or
      (2)   Sampling and analysis staff which may not be independent of the
building owner but are independent of the abatement contractor involved in the
asbestos project, but only if such staff:
         (i)   performs in conjunction with a third-party quality assurance
program in which 10 percent of the samples, except for bulk samples initially
found to contain ACM, from each project are randomly selected and will be
analyzed by both entities; and
         (ii)   in the case of air sampling, possesses valid New York State
Asbestos Project Air Sampling Technician Certification.
      (3)   Sampling and analysis staff of a public service corporation with
respect to asbestos projects that involve electric, steam or gas generation,
distribution or transmission facilities provided that the requirements of
subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of paragraph 2 of this section are complied with.
   (b)   One air sampling technician must be present per three work areas in
one work site to observe and maintain air sampling equipment for the duration
of the air sample collection, except that if there are multiple work areas on
the same floor, only one air sampling technician is required for that floor.
   (c)   Bulk sample analysis (PLM or gravimetric reduction and TEM analysis)
must be performed by laboratories with the appropriate accreditation in the
ELAP.
   (d)   Air Sample Analysis (PCM) must be performed by laboratories with the
following qualifications:
      (1)   Successful completion by the laboratory's active analysts of the
NIOSH 582 training course which outlines the NIOSH 7400 method; and
      (2)   Analysts with skills in the appropriate methodology and proficiency
in the NIOSH PAT Program for PCM analysis; and
      (3)   Accreditation in ELAP for the appropriate analytical method.
   (e)   Air Sample Analysis (TEM) must be performed by analysts who possess
skills in TEM analysis, are accredited in ELAP, and participate in an in-house
quality assurance program using the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST SRM 1876 b) or traceable standard.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 8/21/2019,
eff. 9/20/2019; amended City Record 4/28/2022, eff. 5/28/2022; amended City
Record 1/15/2025, eff. 2/14/2025)
§ 1-37 Sampling Equipment Requirements.
   (a)   Bulk sampling requirements.
      (1)   Bulk samples shall be taken by whatever method minimizes the
potential for fiber release.
      (2)   Any material which remains exposed as a result of the sampling
procedure shall be sealed.
   (b)   Area air sampling requirements. Area air sampling equipment for Phase
Contrast Microscopy (PCM) shall be utilized in accordance with the equipment
and sampling procedures specified within the NIOSH 7400 Method modified for
area sampling.
   (c)   Area air sampling equipment for Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM)
shall be utilized in accordance with the sampling procedures specified within
40 C.F.R. Part 763, Subpart E, Appendix A – Section II Mandatory Transmission
Electron Microscopy Method, Subsection B - Sampling.
   (d)   Air sampling pumps must have a constant controlled flow and must have
the flow rate capacity to perform sampling as specified in these rules. A
properly calibrated rotometer must be used to check the flow rate. A rotometer,
along with its current calibration sheet, must be available at the work place
for the duration of air sample collection. Primary and secondary calibration
devices must be calibrated as per NYSDOH ELAP requirements.
   (e)   Sampling pumps, cassettes, and tubing shall be checked before, during
and after use. Cassettes must be labelled with a sample identification number
prior to the commencement of air sampling. The sampling assembly shall be
checked for leaks and occlusions throughout the shift and documented in the
project air sampling log by the Asbestos Project Air Sampling Technician or
project monitor.
   (f)   A project air sampling log must be created and maintained in a
permanently bound book by the air monitoring company. The project air sampling
log must be available at the work site. A copy of the project air sampling log
must be submitted to the department within 72 hours of request. The project air
sampling log must contain the following information for all area air samples
collected on the asbestos project:
      (1)   Name of the company and the Asbestos Project Air Sampling
Technician performing the project air sampling, per work shift or day for all
area air samples collected.
      (2)   Dates of project air sample collection, per work shift or day of
area air samples, with appropriate reference to the work area to which the air
samples apply.
      (3)   Sample location sketch, showing the sample ID numbers, identifying
all project air sample locations, per work shift or day of area air samples.
The sketch must be made within one hour of the beginning of sample collection.
      (4)   Flow rate primary or secondary calibration device identification
number, method of flow rate primary or secondary device calibration and date of
last calibration, per work shift or day of area air samples.
      (5)   Flow rate of sampling pumps with pre and post calibration listed
for each area air sample collected.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 4/28/2022,
eff. 5/28/2022)
§ 1-38 Asbestos Assessment Report – Asbestos Survey and Sampling Requirements.
   (a)   The asbestos survey shall at a minimum identify and assess the exact
locations and quantities of ACM, PACM, and suspect miscellaneous ACM. The
asbestos investigator is responsible for the identification and assessment of
all types of ACM, PACM and suspect miscellaneous ACM within each area, as
indicated by the proposed scope of work or job description(s) indicated in the
DOB permit applications or plans.
   (b)   The asbestos investigator shall assume that some or all of the areas
investigated contain ACM, and for each area that is not assumed to contain ACM,
must collect bulk samples and submit for analysis in accordance with 15 RCNY §§
1-36(c),
1-37(a) and
1-44(c) and EPA publications 560/5-85-024 and 560/5-85-030A, and 40 C.F.R. Part
763.80, 763.85, and 763.86.
      (1)   PACM Sampling Requirements. 
         (a)   Surfacing Material. Surfacing material includes but is not
limited to fireproofing, acoustical plaster, finish plasters and skim coats of
joints. Surfacing materials must be sampled as follows:
            i.   At least 3 samples from each homogeneous area that is 1,000
square feet (sf) or less.
            ii.   At least 5 samples from each homogeneous area that is greater
than 1,000 sf but that is 5,000 sf or less.
            iii.   At least 7 samples from each homogeneous area that is
greater than 5,000 sf.
         (b)   Thermal System Insulation (TSI). TSI includes, but is not
limited to, equipment insulation, boiler, breeching, boiler rope, duct, or tank
insulation, cement or mortar used for boilers and refractory brick, piping and
fitting insulation including but not limited to wrapped paper, aircell,
millboard, rope, cork, preformed plaster, job molded plaster and coverings over
fibrous glass insulation. TSI must be sampled as follows:
            i.   At least 3 samples from each homogeneous area of TSI.
            ii.   At least one sample from each homogeneous area of patched TSI
if the patched section is less than 6 linear feet or 6 square feet.
            iii.   In a manner sufficient to determine if the material is ACM,
for packed fittings such as elbows, valves, tees, etc.
            iv.   Samples are not required where the asbestos investigator has
determined that the TSI is fiberglass, foam glass, rubber, or other non-
asbestos containing building material.
         (c)   Suspect Miscellaneous Materials. Other suspect miscellaneous
materials including, but not limited to, insulation board, vapor barriers,
coatings, non-metallic or non-wood roof decking, felts, cementitious board
(transite), pipe (transite), flashing, shingles, galbestos, dust and debris,
floor tiles, cove base, floor leveler compound, ceiling tile, vermiculite
insulation, gaskets, seals, sealants (including for condensate control),
vibration isolators, laboratory tables and hoods, chalkboards, pipe penetration
packing and other fire-stopping materials, millboard, electrical wire
insulation, fire curtains, fire blankets, fire doors, brakes and clutches,
mastics, adhesives, glues, caulks, sheet flooring (linoleum), wallpaper,
drywall, plasterboard, spackling/ joint compound, textured paint, grout,
glazing compound, and terrazzo. Suspect miscellaneous materials must be sampled
as follows: At least 2 samples shall be taken, or samples shall be taken in a
manner sufficient to determine if the material is ACM.
         (d)   Only persons certified by DEP as asbestos investigators or by
NYSDOL as Asbestos Inspectors may select and collect bulk samples for analysis.
NYSDOL-certified Asbestos Inspectors may only do so in the physical presence of
and under the supervision of a DEP-certified asbestos investigator.
(Added City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 1/15/2025,
eff. 2/14/2025)
** Part 3: Monitoring Procedures **
§ 1-41 Air Sampling Schedule.
   (a)   At a minimum, air sampling shall be conducted in accordance with the
following schedule:
Abatement Activity Pre-Abatement During Abatement Post-Abatement
Abatement Activity              Pre-Abatement During Abatement Post-Abatement
Equal to or Greater than 10,000
ft. 2 or 10,000 linear ft. of   PCM            PCM               TEM
ACM per work area
Less than 10,000 ft. 2 or       PCM            PCM               PCM
10,000 linear ft. of ACM
Large Asbestos Projects
1. Full Containment             10             5                 10
2. Glovebag inside Tent         5 a           5 a               5 a 
3. Exterior Foam and Vertical   –            5 c               5 d 
   Surfaces
4. Interior Foam                10             5 c               10 d 
Small Asbestos Projects
1. Full Containment             6              3                 6
2. Glovebag inside Tent         3 b           3 b               3 b 
3. Tent                         3 b           3 b               3 b 
4. Exterior Foam and Vertical   –            3 c               3 d 
   Surfaces
5. Interior Foam                6              3 c               6 d 
Minor Projects
1. Glovebag inside Tent         –            1                 1 d 
2. Tent                         –            1                 1 d 
3. Exterior Foam and Vertical   –            –               1 d 
   Surfaces
4. Interior Foam                –            1                 1 d 
 
a   if more than three (3) tents then two (2) samples required per enclosure.
b   if more than three (3) tents then one (1) sample required per enclosure.
c   samples shall be taken within the work area(s).
d   area sampling is required only if:
   –   visible emissions are detected during the project;
   –   during-abatement area sampling results exceeded 0.01 f/cc or the pre-
abatement area sampling result(s) for interior projects where applicable; or
   –   the work area to be reoccupied is an interior space at a school,
healthcare, or daycare facility.
   Note: TEM is acceptable wherever PCM is required. TEM is required in schools
in accordance with AHERA regulations.
   (b)   Pre-Abatement. Prior to commencement of abatement activities, the
number of samples specified below shall be taken during normal occupancy
activities and circumstances at the work site. Samples shall be taken at the
following locations:
      (1)   For large full-containment and interior foam method asbestos
projects, a minimum of five samples inside and five samples outside the
proposed work area.
      (2)   For small full-containment and interior foam method asbestos
projects, a minimum of three samples inside and three outside the proposed work
area.
      (3)   For large and small asbestos projects employing the glovebag
procedure within a tent, a minimum of five and three samples, respectively, or
two samples per enclosure if more than three enclosures.
      (4)   For small asbestos projects solely employing tent procedure, a
minimum of three samples inside each proposed work area, or two samples per
enclosure if more than three enclosures.
      (5)   For all exterior projects (foam or vertical surface), no pre-
abatement sampling is required.
   (c)   During abatement. Frequency and duration of the air sampling during
abatement shall be representative of the actual conditions during the
abatement. Area sampling shall be conducted daily and continuously during a
work shift. If more than one daily work shift is required to accomplish the
work, area sampling shall be performed on each work shift. Area sampling is not
required on days when there are no abatement activities. For project air
samples collected during the abatement, the period of time permitted between
completion of air sample collection and receipt of results on the job site
shall not exceed 48 hours. The following minimum schedule of samples shall be
required during the work shift.
      (1)   For large asbestos projects employing full containment, area air
sampling shall be performed at the following locations:
         (i)   Two area samples outside the asbestos project work area in
uncontaminated areas of the building, remote from the decontamination
facilities.
            (A)   Primary location selection shall be within 10 feet of
isolation barriers.
            (B)   Where negative ventilation exhaust ducting runs through
uncontaminated building areas, one area sample will be required in these areas
to monitor any potential fiber release.
            (C)   Where exhaust tubes have been grouped together in banks of up
to five (5) tubes, with each tube exhausting separately and the bank of tubes
terminating together at the same controlled area, one area air sample shall be
taken.
         (ii)   One area sample within five feet of the uncontaminated entrance
to each worker decontamination and waste decontamination enclosure system, or
parallel worker and waste decontamination system, if applicable; and
         (iii)   One area sample within 5 feet of the unobstructed exhaust from
a negative pressure ventilation system exhausting indoors but not within a
duct.
         (iv)   One area sample outside, but within 25 feet of, the building or
structure, if the entire building or structure is the work area.
      (2)   For large asbestos projects involving interior foam method, area
air sampling shall be performed at the following sampling locations:
         (i)   One area sample taken outside the work area within 10 feet of
isolation barriers.
         (ii)   One area sample taken within five feet of the uncontaminated
entrance to each worker decontamination and waste decontamination enclosure
system, or parallel worker and waste decontamination system, if applicable.
         (iii)   One area sample within 5 feet of the unobstructed exhaust from
a negative pressure ventilation system exhausting indoors but not within a
duct, if applicable.
         (iv)   Three area samples inside the work area, which must be
representative of the work area. The air samplers must be placed separate and
apart from one another and must not be grouped together.
         (v)   One area sample where the negative ventilation exhaust ducting
runs through uncontaminated building areas, if applicable.
      (3)   For large asbestos projects involving exterior foam method or
removal of ACM from vertical surfaces, a minimum of five continuous area
samples shall be taken concurrently with the abatement for each work area using
the following minimum requirements:
         (i)   Four area samples inside the work area and remote from the
decontamination systems, which must be representative of the work area. The air
samplers must be placed separate and apart from one another and shall not be
grouped together.
         (ii)   One area sample within five feet of the uncontaminated entrance
to each worker and waste decontamination enclosure system, or parallel worker
and waste decontamination system, if applicable.
         (iii)   One area sample outside the work area within 25 feet of the
building or structure, if the entire building or structure is the work area.
         (iv)   One area sample inside the building or structure at the egress
point to the work area, if applicable.
      (4)   For large asbestos projects employing the glovebag procedure within
a tent, a minimum of five continuous air samples shall be taken concurrently
with the abatement for each work area, unless there are more than three
enclosures, in which case two area samples per enclosure are required.
         (i)   Four area samples taken outside the work area within ten feet of
tent enclosure(s).
         (ii)   One area sample taken within five feet of the uncontaminated
entrance to each worker and waste decontamination enclosure system, or parallel
worker and waste decontamination system, if applicable.
         (iii)   One area sample within five feet of the unobstructed exhaust
from a negative pressure ventilation system exhausting indoors, but not within
a duct, if applicable.
         (iv)   One area sample where negative ventilation exhaust ducting runs
through uncontaminated building areas, if applicable.
      (5)   For small asbestos projects employing full containment, a minimum
of three continuous area samples shall be taken concurrently with the abatement
for each work area at the following locations:
         (i)   Two area samples taken outside the work area within ten feet of
the isolation barriers.
         (ii)   One area sample within five feet of the uncontaminated entrance
to each worker or waste decontamination enclosure system, or parallel worker
and waste decontamination system, if applicable.
         (iii)   One area sample within five feet of the unobstructed exhaust
from a negative pressure ventilation system exhausting indoors, but not within
a duct, if applicable.
         (iv)   One area sample where negative ventilation exhaust ducting runs
through an uncontaminated building area, if applicable.
      (6)   For small asbestos projects involving the use of foam method on the
exterior of a building or the removal of ACM from exterior surfaces, a minimum
of three continuous area samples shall be taken concurrently with the abatement
for each work area at the following locations:
         (i)   Two area samples inside the work area and remote from the
decontamination systems. Air samples inside the work area must be
representative of the work area. The air samplers must be placed separate and
apart from one another and shall not be grouped together.
         (ii)   One area sample within five feet of the uncontaminated entrance
to each worker and waste decontamination enclosure system, or parallel worker
and waste decontamination system, if applicable.
         (iii)   One area sample inside the building or structure at the egress
point to the work area, if applicable.
      (7)   For small asbestos projects using the tent procedure (with or
without the use of glovebags), a minimum of three area samples shall be taken
concurrently with the abatement for each work area unless there are more than
two enclosures, in which case one sample per enclosure is required.
         (i)   Two area samples taken outside of the work area within ten feet
of the tent.
         (ii)   One area sample within five feet of the uncontaminated entrance
to each worker and waste decontamination system, or parallel worker and waste
decontamination system, if applicable.
         (iii)   One area sample within five feet of the unobstructed exhaust
from a negative pressure ventilation system exhausting indoors, but not within
a duct, if applicable.
         (iv)   One area sample where negative ventilation exhaust ducting runs
through uncontaminated building areas, if applicable.
      (8)   For small asbestos projects employing interior foam procedures, a
minimum of three continuous area samples shall be taken concurrently with the
abatement for each work area at the following locations:
         (i)   One area sample taken inside the work area.
         (ii)   One area sample taken within five feet of the uncontaminated
entrance to each worker and waste decontamination enclosure system, or parallel
worker and waste decontamination system, if applicable.
         (iii)   One area sample taken outside the work area within ten feet of
the isolation barriers.
         (iv)   One area sample where negative ventilation exhaust ducting runs
through uncontaminated building areas, if applicable.
      (9)   For minor projects employing glovebag or tent procedures, one area
sample shall be taken outside the glovebag or tent, not more than five feet
from the uncontaminated entrance to the glovebag or tent.
   (d)   Post-abatement. Post-abatement clearance air monitoring shall include
at a minimum the number of area samples specified below, to be taken for each
homogeneous work area.
      (1)   For small asbestos projects:
         (i)   involving full containment or interior foam method (if required
by 15 RCNY §
1-41(a)), three area samples inside and three outside the work area;
         (ii)   involving tent procedure (with or without the use of
glovebags), three area samples inside each work area or one area sample inside
each tent if there are more than three tents;
         (iii)   involving exterior foam method or removal from vertical
surfaces, three area samples inside the restricted area beneath and/or
immediately adjacent to the work area, only if visible emissions were detected
during the project, or abatement area samples exceeded 0.01 f/cc.
      (2)   For large asbestos projects:
         (i)   a minimum of five area samples inside and five outside the work
area, for projects involving full containment or interior foam method (if
required by 15 RCNY §
1-41(a)). In addition to the five sample minimum, one representative area
sample must be collected both inside and outside the work area for every 5,000
square feet above 25,000 square feet of floor space when ACM has been abated.
         (ii)   a minimum of five area samples inside each tent enclosure where
glovebag procedures are being used, or two area samples inside each tent where
glovebag procedures are being used if there are more than three tents;
         (iii)   involving exterior foam method or removal from vertical
surfaces, five area samples inside the restricted area beneath and/or
immediately adjacent to the work area, only if visible emissions were detected
during the project, or abatement area samples exceeded 0.01 f/cc.
      (3)   When TEM analysis is employed a minimum of 5 samples from outside
the work area shall also be collected.
      (4)   For minor projects post-abatement clearance air monitoring is not
required, unless visible emissions were detected outside the work area and/or
levels exceeded 0.01 f/cc during abatement, or the project was conducted inside
a school, daycare, or healthcare institution. In such cases, one area sample
shall be taken.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 4/28/2022,
eff. 5/28/2022)
§ 1-42 Monitoring Requirements.
Monitoring requirements and procedures for other than post-abatement clearance
air monitoring are as follows:
   (a)   The sampling zone for air samples shall be representative of the
building occupants' breathing zone. However, at no time shall the sampling
cassette be placed less than 4 feet from the ground. Air samplers shall be
placed so that they are not influenced by unusual air circulation patterns or
by the configuration of the space or by each other. Air sampling cassettes
shall be mounted upon commercially-available aluminum tripods and shall not be
placed within two feet of walls or obstructions such as the corners of rooms or
furniture.
   (b)   If possible, ambient samplers should be placed about 6 feet above the
ground surface in reasonable proximity to the building and away from
obstructions and drafts that may unduly affect airflow. For outdoor samples, if
access to electricity and concerns about security dictate a rooftop site,
locations near vents and other structures on the roof which would unduly affect
airflow shall be avoided.
   (c)   Samples shall have a chain of custody record. The project air sampling
log required pursuant to 15 RCNY §
1-37(f) does not satisfy the chain of custody requirement.
   (d)   In accordance with the above criteria, area samples (see 15 RCNY §
1-41) shall conform to the following schedule:
 
Area Samples for Analysis by Minimum Volume Flow Rate
PCM 25 mm                    560            5 to 15 liters/min.
TEM 25 mm                    560            1 to 10 liters/min.
TEM 37 mm                    1,250          1 to 10 liters/min.
 
   (e)   For small projects including tent procedures, sampling shall start
with the installation of the containment and shall run concurrently with the
procedure.
(Amended City Record 8/21/2019, eff. 9/20/2019)
§ 1-43 Post-Abatement Clearance Air Monitoring.
Post-abatement clearance air monitoring requirements are as follows:
   (a)   (1)   Sampling shall not begin until a visual inspection, conducted by
a project monitor who is independent of the abatement contractor and by the
asbestos handler supervisor, confirms that all containerized waste has been
removed from work and holding areas and there is no visible ACM debris or
residue on or about all abated surfaces; and
      (2)   Sampling shall not begin until at least 1 hour after the area is
dry from the third cleaning (see 15 RCNY §
1-112(h)) and no visible pools of water or condensation remain. For pre-
demolition asbestos abatement activity, sampling shall begin 2 hours after the
area is dry and no visible pools of water or condensation remain.
   (b)   Samplers shall be placed at random around the work area. If the work
area contains the number of rooms equivalent to the number of required samples
based on floor area, a sampler shall be placed in each room. When the number of
rooms is greater than the required number of samples a representative sample of
rooms shall be selected.
   (c)   The samplers must be placed separate and apart from one another in
locations outside the work area but within the building and shall be located to
capture any air that might escape through the isolation barriers and shall be
no further than 50 feet from the entrance to the work area, and 25 feet from
the isolation barriers.
   (d)   The following aggressive sampling procedures shall be used within the
work area during all clearance air monitoring:
      (1)   Before starting the sampling pumps, use forced air equipment (such
as a 1 horsepower leaf blower) to direct exhaust air against all walls,
ceilings, floors, ledges and other surfaces in the work area.
         (i)   For asbestos projects: this pre-sampling procedure shall take at
least 5 minutes per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area; then install one 20-inch fan
per 10,000 cubic feet of room space. Then immediately place the fan on slow
speed and point it toward the ceiling.
         (ii)   For pre-demolition asbestos abatement activity, this pre-
sampling procedure shall take at least three minutes, after which the 20-inch
fan shall be left running unattended in the work area throughout sampling. This
procedure shall be acceptable when the floor area of the work area is less than
500 square feet. At or above 500 square feet of floor area within the work
area, the aggressive sampling procedures specified in this subdivision (d) for
asbestos projects shall be conducted.
      (2)   Start the sampling pumps and sample for the required time or
volume.
      (3)   Turn off the pump and then the fan(s) when sampling is completed.
   (e)   For post-abatement monitoring, area samples shall conform to the
following schedule:
 
Area Samples for Analysis by Minimum Volume Flow Rate
PCM                          1,800 Liters   5 to 15 liters/min.
TEM                          1,250 Liters   1 to 10 liters/min.
 
   (f)   Each homogeneous work area which does not meet the clearance criteria
shall be thoroughly recleaned using wet methods, with the negative pressure
ventilation system in operation. New samples shall be collected in the work
area as described above. The process shall be repeated until the work site
passes the test.
   (g)   For an asbestos project with more than one homogenous work area, the
release criterion shall be applied independently to each work area.
(Amended City Record 4/28/2022, eff. 5/28/2022)
§ 1-44 Analysis and Reporting Results.
Laboratory analyses and reporting shall be considered evidence of compliance
with this chapter only if they conform to the following requirements:
   (a)   PCM area air samples shall be analyzed and reported in accordance with
the NIOSH 7400 method using "A" Counting Rules.
   (b)   TEM area air samples must be analyzed and reported in accordance with
the mandatory or non-mandatory Electron Microscopy Methods set forth at 40
C.F.R. Part 763, Subpart E.
   (c)   Bulk samples must be analyzed and reported in accordance with
analytical methods approved by ELAP and the Method for the Determination of
Asbestos in Bulk Building Materials found in 40 C.F.R. Part 763, Subpart E, or
other methods approved by the National Institute of Standards and Technology,
the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health, or the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.
   (d)   Bulk and air sampling results/reports shall be submitted directly to
the Department upon request within 72 hours.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 1/15/2025,
eff. 2/14/2025)
§ 1-45 Action Criteria.
   (a)   When visible emissions occur outside the work area, or any area air
sample has indicated a determinant level of fiber concentrations greater than
the larger of baseline levels or 0.01 f/cc, work shall stop for inspection.
      (1)   For large or small asbestos projects, the integrity of barriers, if
disturbed, shall be restored. Clean-up of surfaces outside of the work area
using HEPA vacuums or wet cleaning techniques shall be done prior to resuming
abatement activities.
      (2)   For tent procedures, HVAC systems to or in the work area shall be
shut down and the work area shall be wet cleaned or HEPA vacuumed until the
area air samples indicate the fiber concentration is below the determinant
level. If fiber concentrations remain above the determinant level for longer
than 24 hours, isolation barriers and engineering controls shall be installed
and maintained.
   (b)   Clearance and/or reoccupancy criteria. (1) The clearance criteria
shall be applied to each homogeneous work area independently.
      (2)   For PCM analysis involved in alteration or renovation projects, the
clearance air monitoring shall be considered satisfactory when every sample is
less than or equal to 0.01 f/cc or less than the ambient concentration,
whichever is larger.
      (3)   For TEM analysis, the clearance monitoring will be considered
satisfactory if conducted in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part 763, Subpart E,
Appendix A Section IV – Mandatory Interpretation of Transmission Electron
Microscopy Results to Determine Completion of Response Actions.
      (4)   Clearance air monitoring results shall be submitted directly to the
Department within 24 hours of request.
**** Subchapter E: Personnel Protection and Equipment Specifications ****
** Part 1: Personnel Protection and Hygiene **
§ 1-51 Personnel Protection and Hygiene Requirements.
   (a)   Prior to project initiation, all workers engaged in abatement
activities on an asbestos project or minor project must be certified by DEP and
NYSDOL.
   (b)   At least one asbestos handler supervisor shall be present at the work
site while abatement activities are being conducted on an asbestos project or
minor project, except that during minor projects the supervisor does not have
to be physically present at all times but must be readily available.
   (c)   Personal protective equipment must be worn by all individuals inside
the work place during abatement activities, except that gloves need not be worn
during those work place preparation activities which do not involve the
disturbance of ACM. Personal protective equipment must meet the following
specifications:
      (1)   Disposable clothing including head, hand, foot and full body
protection shall be provided by the contractor in sufficient quantities and
adequate sizes for all workers and authorized visitors.
      (2)   Hard hats, protective eyewear, gloves, rubber boots and/or other
footwear must be provided by the contractor as required for workers and
authorized visitors. Safety shoes and hard hats must be in accordance with the
most recent ANSI standards.
      (3)   Contaminated clothing shall be sealed in impermeable bags and the
bags shall be appropriately labeled.
   (d)   Personal air monitoring shall be performed in accordance with current
OSHA regulations. Such records shall be made available within 72 hours to
authorized Department representatives upon request.
   (e)   Personal Hygiene at the work site shall meet the following
requirements:
      (1)   There shall be no smoking on any floor of the building where
abatement activities are taking place.
      (2)   Jewelry, watches, and cellular telephones shall not be worn,
carried, or kept in contaminated areas.
      (3)   The contractor shall provide clean change areas for the workers.
Change areas shall be equipped with separate storage facilities for protective
clothing and street clothing.
      (4)   If lunch areas are provided, they shall be located outside the work
place in an area in which the airborne concentrations are below 0.01 f/cc.
      (5)   There shall be no eating, drinking, application of cosmetics, or
chewing of gum or tobacco inside the work place. There shall be no food or
beverages present in the work place.
      (6)   There shall be no lighters or matches in the work place.
   (f)   The contractor must have available the following information at the
work place:
      (1)   A copy of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Regulations for
Asbestos, 40 C.F.R. 61 Subparts A and M and a copy of OSHA Asbestos
Regulations, 29 C.F.R. § 1926.1101, and 12 NYCRR Part 56; and
      (2)   A list of telephone numbers for local hospital, location of
hospital and/or emergency squad, local fire department, the building owner (or
representative) and the N.Y.C. Asbestos Control Program, and
      (3)   A copy of these Rules, the most recent Asbestos Abatement Notice
(Form ACP-13), asbestos abatement (ATRU) permits, any variance application
(Form ACP-9 and all associated documents and drawings) and DEP approval
thereof, and
      (4)   A copy of all Safety Data Sheets (SDS) for chemicals used during
the asbestos project, and
      (5)   Original New York City Asbestos handler and supervisor
certificates, or their digital or electronic equivalent as approved by DEP, and
NYSDOL asbestos handler and supervisor certificates, of all workers in the work
site, and
      (6)   A copy of the current New York State Department of Labor asbestos
handling license of the abatement contractor and air monitoring company.
      (7)   A copy of any asbestos survey performed in the affected building in
accordance with these rules.
   (g)   The contractor must post signs during all abatement activities. Signs
must be posted at all approaches to the work place including internal doorways
which provide access to the work place. These signs must include the following
information:
 
 
DANGER
ASBESTOS MAY CAUSE CANCER, CAUSES DAMAGE TO LUNGS
AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL ONLY
WEAR RESPIRATORY PROTECTION AND PROTECTIVE CLOTHING IN THIS AREA
 
   (h)   Warning labels must be affixed to all waste containers containing
asbestos material and must include the following information:
 
DANGER
CONTAINS ASBESTOS FIBERS
MAY CAUSE CANCER, CAUSES DAMAGE TO LUNGS
DO NOT BREATHE DUST
AVOID CREATING DUST
 
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 1/15/2025,
eff. 2/14/2025)
** Part 2: Equipment Specifications **
§ 1-61 Materials and Equipment.
The materials and equipment used during all abatement activities shall conform
with the following:
   (a)   During abatement activities, replacement materials shall be stored
outside the work area in a manner to prevent contamination. Materials required
for the asbestos project (i.e. plastic sheeting, replacement filters, duct
tape, etc.) shall be stored to prevent damage or contamination.
   (b)   When asbestos-containing material that has been used for fireproofing
or insulation is removed, the replacement material shall comply with all
applicable provisions of the New York City Administrative Code and regulations.
   (c)   For plasticizing, fire-retardant polyethylene sheeting with 6-mil
thickness or greater, in sizes to minimize the frequency of joints, shall be
employed.
   (d)   Duct tape and selected adhesive shall be capable of sealing joints of
adjacent sheets of polyethylene, facilitating attachment of polyethylene sheets
to finished or unfinished surfaces, and of adhering under both dry and wet
conditions, including during the use of amended water.
   (e)   Airtight and watertight containers must be provided to receive and
retain any asbestos-containing waste materials. Plastic bags used for waste
storage or disposal must be a minimum of 6-mil in thickness. All containers
must be labeled in accordance with OSHA Regulation 29 C.F.R. 1926.1101.
   (f)   Materials used to enclose ACM shall be impact resistant and assembled
to be airtight Gypsum panels taped at the seams, tongue and groove boards, and
boards with spline joints all qualify.
   (g)   Power tools used to drill, cut into, or otherwise disturb ACM shall be
manufacturer-equipped with HEPA filtered local exhaust ventilation. Abrasive
removal methods, including the use of beadblasters, are prohibited.
   (h)   Ladders or scaffolds of sufficient dimension and quantity shall be
available so that all work surfaces can be easily and safely reached by
inspectors and asbestos handlers.
      (1)   Ladders. Where ladders are used to access or reach work surfaces
for the conduct of abatement activities, care must be taken to prevent
breaching of the containment areas and the ladder's integrity must be
maintained to ensure safety. Ladders and their use shall comply with OSHA 29
C.F.R. 1926. Subpart X Ladders 1926.1053.
      (2)   Scaffolds. Where scaffolds are used to reach work surfaces or for
the conduct of abatement activities, scaffold joints and ends shall be sealed
with tape to prevent incursion of asbestos fibers. Scaffolds and their use
shall comply with OSHA 29 C.F.R. 1926. Subpart L Scaffolds 1926.450; 451 and
452.
      (3)   Walking Surfaces. Walking and working surfaces shall be protected
from tripping or stepping into or through holes or openings, including
skylights, by covers secured to the surface in accordance with OSHA Section 29
C.F.R. 1926.501.
   (i)   Electrical equipment shall be Underwriters Laboratory listed and
approved.
   (j)   Surfactants, strippers, sealers, or any other chemicals used during
the asbestos project shall be non-carcinogenic and non-toxic.
   (k)   Plastic sheeting used in the construction of temporary enclosures
shall be fire-retardant in accordance with NFPA 701. Wood or other materials
used in the construction of temporary enclosures shall be noncombustible or
fire-retardant in accordance with NFPA 255, ASTM D 2898, ASTM E 84, and UL 723.
   (l)   Equipment and materials may be substituted for those specified in this
chapter only if determined to be equivalent after review by the Department.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 4/28/2022,
eff. 5/28/2022)
**** Subchapter F: Asbestos Project Procedures ****
** Part 1: Applicability **
§ 1-71 Applicability.
In addition to 15 RCNY §§
1-01 through
1-61, the following 15 RCNY §§
1-81 through
1-83,
1-91 through
1-94 and
1-111 and
1-112 shall apply to all asbestos projects. 15 RCNY §§
1-101 through
1-110 shall apply to all asbestos abatement activities.
** Part 2: Work Place Preparation **
§ 1-81 General Work Place Preparation Requirements.
The following procedures shall be followed during the conduct of abatement
activities on asbestos projects. The procedures set forth in this subdivision
shall be performed in the order set forth below:
   (a)   The building owner or designated representative must provide
notification to all occupants of the work place and immediate adjacent areas of
the asbestos project. Information provided in the notification must include
contractor, project location and size, amount and type of ACM, abatement
procedure, dates of expected occurrence and the Call Center "311" for
government information and services. Postings of this notification must be in
English and Spanish, at eye level, in a conspicuous, well-lit place, at the
entrances to the work place and immediate adjacent areas. The notice must have
the following heading: NOTICE OF ASBESTOS ABATEMENT, in a minimum of one inch
sans serif, gothic or block style lettering, with the balance of the lettering
of the notice to be of the same type lettering in a minimum of one quarter inch
size. The notices must be posted 7 calendar days prior to the start of the
project and must remain posted until clearance air monitoring is satisfactorily
concluded. A lessee initiating an asbestos project must give 10 calendar days
notice to the owner of the subject building.
   (b)   A floor plan showing the areas of the building under abatement and the
location of all fire exits in said areas shall be prominently posted in the
building lobby or comparable location, along with a notice stating the location
within the building of the negative air cutoff switch required under 15 RCNY §
1-91(f), if applicable.
   (c)   The work place shall be vacated by the occupants prior to work place
preparation and until successful clearance air monitoring.
   (d)   Electric power to all work areas shall be shut down and locked out
except for electrical equipment that must remain in service. Safe temporary
power and lighting shall be provided in accordance with all applicable codes.
Existing light sources (e.g. house lights) shall not be utilized. All power to
work areas shall be brought in from outside the area through ground-fault
circuit interrupter at the source.
      (1)   If electrical circuits, machinery, and other electrical systems in
or passing though the work area must stay in operation due to health and safety
requirements, the following precautions must be taken:
         (i)   All unprotected cables, except low-voltage (less than 24 volts)
communication and control system cables, panel boxes of cables and joints in
live conduit that run through the work area shall be covered with three (3)
independent layers of six (6) mil fire retardant polyethylene. Each layer shall
be individually duct taped and sealed. All three (3) layers of polyethylene
sheeting shall be left in place until satisfactory clearance air sampling
results have been obtained.
         (ii)   Any energized circuits remaining in the work area shall be
posted with a minimum two (2) inch high lettering warning sign which reads:
DANGER LIVE ELECTRICAL – KEEP CLEAR. A sign shall be placed on all live covered
barriers at a maximum of ten (10) foot intervals. These signs shall be posted
in sufficient numbers to warn all persons authorized to enter the work area of
the existence of the energized circuits.
   (e)   The worker decontamination enclosure system shall be installed or
constructed prior to plasticizing the work area or before disturbing ACM.
   (f)   (1)   Prior to erection of partitions, ACM that may be disturbed
during this activity must be removed using a tent procedure (including
engineering controls) using wet methods.
      (2)   Removal by the above procedures shall be limited to a maximum of a
one foot wide strip running the length and/or height of the partition and is
allowed only to facilitate erection of the partitions.
   (g)   All boilers and other equipment within the work area shall be shut
down, locked out, and tagged out and the burner/boiler/equipment accesses and
openings shall be sealed in accordance with 15 RCNY §
1-81(n) until abatement activities are complete. If the boiler or other
exhausted equipment will be subject to abatement, all breeching, stacks,
columns, flues, shafts, and double-walled enclosures serving as exhausts or
vents shall be segregated from the affected boiler or equipment and sealed
airtight to eliminate potential chimney effects within the work area. Heating,
Ventilation and Air Conditioning (HVAC) System Isolation methods are listed
below in order of preference; the more complex and potentially problematic
methods maybe used when the more preferred procedures are impractical.
      (1)   shut down and lock out HVAC systems and install isolation barriers
(see 15 RCNY §
1-81(n)) to prevent contamination and fiber dispersal to other areas of the
structure, or
      (2)   isolate locally and provide temporary HVAC, or
      (3)   positive pressurization of the HVAC system. This procedure shall be
applied only under the direction and control of a professional engineer, or
other knowledgeable licensed professional.
   (h)   Abatement shall not commence until work place preparation has been
completed.
   (i)   Movable objects within the proposed work areas shall be pre-cleaned
(i.e., prior to commencing general abatement) using HEPA filtered vacuum
equipment and/or wet cleaning methods and such objects shall be removed from
the work area. If carpeting is left in place, it shall be covered with fire
retardant 6-mil plastic sheeting, and then 3/8 in. rigid flooring prior to
normal plasticizing.
   (j)   All flammable materials shall be removed from the work area and all
sources of ignition (including but not limited to pilot lights) shall be
extinguished.
   (k)   Fixed objects which will remain within the proposed work areas must be
pre-cleaned using HEPA filtered vacuum equipment and/or wet cleaning methods as
appropriate, and enclosed with two layers of fire retardant 6-mil plastic
sheeting sealed to protect from re-contamination. Sprinklers, standpipes, and
other fire protection systems must remain in service and must not be
plasticized.
   (l)   Any source of emergency lighting which is temporarily blocked as a
result of work place preparation shall be replaced for the duration of the
project by battery operated or temporary exit signs, exit lights, or exit path
markings.
   (m)   Prior to plasticizing, the proposed work areas shall be pre-cleaned
using HEPA filtered vacuum equipment and/or wet cleaning methods. Methods that
raise dust, such as sweeping or vacuuming with equipment not equipped with HEPA
filters, are prohibited.
   (n)   The isolation barriers (i.e., sealing off of all openings, including
but not limited to windows, corridors, doorways, barriers, skylights, ducts,
grills, diffusers, and any other penetrations of the work place) shall be
installed with two layers of fire retardant 6-mil plastic sheeting sealed with
tape. All seams of HVAC or other system components that pass through the work
place shall also be sealed.
   (o)   The work area shall be segregated from the remainder of the work site
by construction of temporary structural partitions as follows:
      (1)   Partitions shall be constructed of conventional 2 x 3 (minimum)
wood or metal stud framing, 16"CC maximum, to support barriers in all openings
larger than 32 ft 2 , except where any one dimension is 1 foot or less, or
where openings are exits covered in subdivision (p) below.
      (2)   A solid construction material (e.g. fire rated plywood) of at least
3/8" thickness shall be applied to the work side of the framing. In secure
interior areas where partitions are not subject to access from the public, an
additional layer of fire retardant 6-mil plastic sheeting may be substituted
for the solid construction material.
      (3)   The partitions shall be caulked/sealed at the floor, ceiling,
walls, joints and fixtures to form an airtight seal.
      (4)   Where the opening is an exit covered in subdivision (s) below, or
where the partition would block egress, the partition shall consist of two
sheets of fire-retardant 6-mil plastic, prominently marked as an exit with
signage so as to be visible both in normal light and in the event of a power
failure. Cutting tools (e.g., knife, razor) shall be attached to the work area
side of the sheeting for use in the event that the barrier must be cut open to
allow egress.
      (5)   Means of egress shall not be obstructed by hardwall barriers.
   (p)   In addition to the isolation barriers, floor and wall surfaces shall
be sealed with a minimum of two layers of fire retardant 6-mil plastic
sheeting, except where the only ACM being abated in the project is vinyl
asbestos floor tile or other flooring material, in which case the floor need
not be sealed; or the only material being abated in the project is wall plaster
or other wall material, in which case the walls need not be sealed. The plastic
layers on the floor shall extend 6 inches up the walls. Walls shall be covered
with plastic sheeting down to the floor level, thus overlapping the floor
material by a minimum of 6 inches. There shall be a distance of at least 6
inches between seams of adjacent layers.
   (q)   After isolation barriers are in place, ceiling-mounted objects not
previously sealed that will interfere with ACM abatement shall be removed and
cleaned. Amended water spraying or HEPA filtered vacuum equipment shall be used
during fixture removal to reduce fiber dispersal.
   (r)   Suspended ceiling tiles and T-grid components, contaminated by ACM,
shall remain in place until the work area has been fully prepared as outlined
in this section and electrical and HVAC systems have been shutdown. Suspended
ceiling components shall be removed and disposed of as asbestos-containing
waste or, if non-porous, retained for reuse after wet cleaning / HEPA
vacuuming. Isolation barriers shall be installed in all openings above the
ceiling before disturbance of ACM commences.
   (s)   Entrances to the work place that will not be used for worker entry or
emergency exits shall be locked to prevent unauthorized entry.
   (t)   Exits from the work area shall be maintained, or alternative exits
shall be established, in accordance with section 1027 of the New York City Fire
Code. Exits shall be checked at the beginning and end of each work shift
against blockage or impediments to exiting.
   (u)   Signs clearly indicating the direction of exits shall be maintained
and prominently displayed within the work area. The signs shall bear a
horizontal arrow or arrows indicating the direction to the exit, above which
the word "EXIT" shall be printed in minimum 5" letter size.
   (v)   No smoking signs shall be maintained and prominently displayed within
the work place. The signs shall be a minimum of 10 by 14 inches and shall bear
the International "No Smoking" symbol, under which the words "NO SMOKING" shall
be printed in minimum 2" letter size.
   (w)   Floor drains shall be sealed individually with two layers of fire
retardant 6-mil plastic sheeting and tape, and then covered as all other floor
surfaces. Pits, sumps, etc., shall be covered with adequate fire rated plywood
sheeting and secured to floor slabs in a manner which prevents a tripping
hazard, prior to required plasticizing.
   (x)   Elevators running through the work area must conform to the following:
      (1)   The elevator door in the work area must be enclosed with
conventional 2 x 4 stud framing, covered with 3/8" fire rated plywood sheeting
and sealed at all edges and seams. The barrier must be covered and lapped for 8
inches with two layers of fire retardant 6-mil plastic sheeting adhered
individually with edges taped for air tightness. There shall be no more than a
six inch clearance between the elevator door and hard wall barrier.
      (2)   Elevators not remaining in service shall have the fuses removed and
the power switch locked in the open position.
      (3)   Elevators that remain in operation shall conform to the following
additional procedures to minimize the piston effect that results:
         (i)   Elevator control shall be modified to bypass the work area.
         (ii)   A final larger layer of fire retardant 6-mil plastic sheeting
is to be taped airtight but with slack forming a larger perimeter diaphragm.
Air leakage across the barrier shall be corrected upon discovery, and the
elevator shaft shall be checked for airborne asbestos contamination.
         (iii)   This system shall be smoke tested daily.
      (4)   Elevator shafts shall not be used as waste chutes or to convey any
ACM.
      (5)   Signage must be posted in the main lobby stating the specific
floors where the elevators are out of service due to abatement.
   (y)   Adequate toilet facilities must be provided in the vicinity of the
clean room external to the work place. Where such facilities do not exist,
portable service must be provided.
   (z)   At least one functional fire extinguisher with a minimum rating 2-A:
10-B:C shall be required for each work place. In the case of large asbestos
projects, at least two such fire extinguishers shall be required.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 8/21/2019,
eff. 9/20/2019; amended City Record 1/15/2025, eff. 2/14/2025)
§ 1-82 Worker Decontamination Enclosure System.
The following procedures shall be followed during the conduct of abatement
activities on asbestos projects:
   (a)   Worker decontamination enclosure systems must be located outside the
work area and attached to all locations where workers will enter or exit the
work area. One system at a single location for each contained work area is
required. These systems may consist of existing rooms outside of the work area,
that offer direct access to the work area and general egress from the work
place. When this situation does not exist, enclosure systems may be constructed
or may consist of prefabricated or trailer units. Adequate heat and light shall
be safely provided.
   (b)   The worker decontamination enclosure system shall consist of a clean
room, a shower room, and an equipment room, in series, separated from each
other by airlocks and from the work area and non-work place by curtained doors
(see Illustration I).
   (c)   Worker decontamination enclosure systems shall be fully lined
utilizing two layers of fire retardant 6-mil opaque plastic sheeting at a
minimum, or the equivalent.
   (d)   When the decontamination enclosure is constructed outdoors or in areas
with public access it shall be fully framed and fire retardant plywood sheathed
or equivalent to prevent unauthorized entry. When located outdoors, it shall be
waterproof and windproof.
   (e)   Prefabricated or trailer decontamination units:
      (1)   shall at a minimum, have functionality and security equivalent to
constructed decontamination enclosure facilities, and
      (2)   shall be completely decontaminated prior to removal from the work
site.
   (f)   The clean room:
      (1)   shall contain secure crew lockers or shelves, and clean sealable
plastic bags for storage of street clothes, and
      (2)   shall contain shelves or appropriate facilities for storage of
respirators, and
      (3)   shall contain clean disposable clothing, replacement filters for
respirators, towels and other necessary personal protective equipment, and
      (4)   shall not be used for storage of tools, equipment or materials,
other than personal protective equipment, nor used as office space, and
      (5)   shall be equipped with a lockable door to secure the work place
during off-shift hours.
   (g)   The shower room:
      (1)   shall contain a minimum of one (1) shower per 6 workers calculated
on the basis of the largest shift, and
      (2)   shall have shower heads supplied with hot and cold water adjustable
at the shower, and
      (3)   shall be constructed to ensure against water leakage, and shall
contain a rigid catch basin at least six (6) inches deep, and
      (4)   shall contain liquid bath soap, shampoo, and clean dry towels in
sufficient quantity for each worker for each showering.
   (h)   Shower water shall be continuously drained, collected and filtered
through a system with a least 5.0 micron particle size collection capability. A
system containing a series of several filters with progressively smaller pore
sizes shall be used to avoid rapid clogging of the filtration system by large
particles. Pumps shall be installed, maintained and utilized in accordance with
manufacturer's recommendations.
      (1)   Filtered wastewater shall be discharged either to a sewer or
drummed and then properly disposed.
      (2)   Used filters shall be disposed of as asbestos-containing waste
material.
   (i)   The equipment room:
      (1)   shall be used for storage of equipment and tools used on the job
that have been cleaned previously in the work area, and
      (2)   may contain a limited supply of replacement filters (in sealed
containers until used) for HEPA vacuums and pressure ventilation equipment,
extra tools, containers of surfactant and other materials and equipment that
may be required during the abatement activity, and
      (3)   shall contain labeled 6-mil plastic bags for collection of
disposable clothing, and
      (4)   shall be used to store contaminated footwear (e.g. rubber boots and
other reusable footwear) and contaminated clothing for reuse for the duration
of the abatement activity or until disposed.
(Amended City Record 1/15/2025, eff. 2/14/2025)
§ 1-83 Waste Decontamination Enclosure System.
The following procedures shall be followed for removal of asbestos-containing
waste material and equipment during the conduct of abatement activities on
asbestos projects: (a) The waste decontamination enclosure system shall be
located outside the work area and attached to all locations through which ACM
waste will be removed from the work area. A waste decontamination enclosure
system shall consist of two totally enclosed chambers and shall also comply
with the following requirements:
      (1)   the washroom shall be constructed with a curtained doorway to the
work area and an airlock doorway to the holding area (see Illustration II); and
be equipped with a catch basin and a drain installed to collect and deliver
wastewater to either the shower drain or to a separate holding vessel where it
is filtered;
      (2)   the holding area shall be constructed with a curtained doorway to
the washroom and a lockable door to the outside (see Illustration II); if
remote from the washroom, it shall comply with all applicable NYC Department of
Sanitation regulations pursuant to Local Laws 70 of 1985 and 21 of 1987.
   (b)   Where there is only one means of egress from the work area:
      (1)   the holding area of the waste decontamination enclosure system may
branch off from the equipment/decontamination room (see Illustration III). Thus
constructed, the equipment room alternates as a waste washroom. In this case
the waste washroom shall be equipped with a catch basin and a drain, installed
to collect and deliver waste water to either the shower drain or a separate
holding vessel from where it is filtered, or
      (2)   where total asbestos-containing material disturbed in the asbestos
project is less than 1,000 linear feet or 1,000 square feet, the shower room
may be used as a waste washroom and shall be equipped as set forth in 15 RCNY §
1-83(b)(1), and
         (i)   the clean room, in the configuration shown in Illustration I,
may not be used for waste storage but may be used for waste transfer to carts,
which are stored outside the clean room in a designated holding area.
   (c)   The waste decontamination enclosure system shall be constructed to
meet the requirements of 15 RCNY §§
1-82(a), (c), (d), (e), (g)(3) and (h).
§ 1-84 Small Asbestos Project Worker and Waste Decontamination Enclosure
System.
The following alternative to 15 RCNY §§
1-82 and
1-83 shall be applicable for small projects only:
   (a)   The worker decontamination enclosure system shall consist of, as a
minimum, an equipment room, a shower room, and a clean room separated from each
other and from the work area by curtained doorways. Equipment storage, personal
gross decontamination and removal of disposable clothing shall occur in the
equipment room prior to entering the shower. All other requirements set forth
in 15 RCNY §
1-82 and 15 RCNY §
1-92 shall apply.
   (b)   For small asbestos projects with only one exit from the work area, the
shower room may be used as a waste washroom. The clean room shall not be used
for waste storage. All other requirements set forth in 15 RCNY §§
1-83 and
1-93 shall apply.
** Part3: Work Place Procedures **
§ 1-91 Engineering Controls.
The following procedures shall be followed during the conduct of abatement
activities on asbestos projects:
   (a)   All asbestos projects shall utilize negative pressure ventilation
equipment.
      (1)   On all asbestos projects, a manometer shall be used to document the
pressure differential. The manometer shall be installed and made operational
once the negative pressure has been established in the work area. Magnahelic
manometers shall be calibrated at least every six months, and a copy of the
current calibration certification shall be available at the work site.
   (b)   The negative pressure ventilation equipment shall operate
continuously, 24 hours a day, from the establishment of isolation barriers
through successful clearance air monitoring. If such equipment shuts off,
adjacent areas shall be monitored for asbestos fibers.
   (c)   A static negative air pressure of 0.02 inches (minimum) water column
shall be maintained at all times in the work place during abatement to ensure
that contaminated air in the work area does not filter back to uncontaminated
areas.
   (d)   If more than one ventilation unit is installed, units shall be turned
on one at a time while checking the integrity of all barriers for secure
attachment and the need for additional reinforcement.
   (e)   A dedicated power supply for the negative pressure ventilating units
shall be utilized. The negative air equipment shall be on a ground fault
circuit interrupter (GFCI) protected circuit separate from the remainder of the
work area temporary power circuits.
   (f)   If the containment area of an asbestos project covers the entire floor
of the affected building, or an area greater than 15,000 square feet on any
given floor, the installation of a negative air cut off switch or switches
shall be required at a single location outside the work place, such as inside a
stairwell one floor below the lowest floor containing a work place, or at a
secured location in the ground floor lobby when conditions warrant (such as
when the work place is in a basement or below). The required switch or switches
must be installed by a licensed electrician, pursuant to a permit issued by the
Department of Buildings. If negative pressure ventilation equipment is used on
multiple floors the cut off switch must be able to turn off the equipment on
all floors.
   (g)   On loss of negative pressure or electric power to the negative
pressure ventilating units, abatement shall stop immediately and shall not
resume until power is restored and negative pressure ventilation equipment is
operating again. When power failure or loss of negative pressure equipment
lasts or is expected to last longer than one-half hour:
      (1)   the make-up air inlets shall be sealed airtight, and
      (2)   the decontamination systems shall be sealed airtight after the
evacuation of workers and/or authorized visitors from the work area, and
      (3)   all adjacent areas shall be monitored for asbestos fiber
concentration upon discovery of, and subsequently throughout, the power
failure.
   (h)   Negative pressure ventilation equipment shall be installed and
operated to provide at least one air change in the work area every 15 minutes.
Where there are no floor or wall barriers because floor or wall material is
being abated, there shall be at least one air change in the work area every ten
minutes.
   (i)   Openings made in the isolation barrier to accommodate these units
shall be made airtight. The units shall remain within the work area unless
located securely outside the building.
   (j)   Negative air pressure equipment shall be in compliance with ANSI Z9.2
(2012), Local Exhaust Ventilation.
   (k)   Negative air pressure systems shall be operated in accordance with
"Specifications and Operating Procedures for the Use of Negative Pressure
Systems for Asbestos Abatement, Guidance for Controlling Asbestos-Containing
Materials in Buildings", EPA Report Number 560/5-85-024 (1985).
   (l)   Negative pressure ventilation equipment shall be exhausted to the
outside of the building away from occupied areas.
      (1)   All openings (including but not limited to operable windows, doors,
vents, air intakes or exhausts of any mechanical devices) less than 15 feet
from the exterior exhaust duct termination location shall be plasticized or
made airtight, or a second negative pressure ventilation unit with the primary
unit's capacity shall be connected in series prior to exhausting to the
outside.
      (2)   Negative pressure ventilation equipment shall exhaust away from
areas accessible to the public.
      (3)   All ducting must be sealed and braced or supported to maintain
airtight joints. Ducts must be reinforced and must be installed so as to
prevent breakage. Damage to ducts must be repaired immediately and air
monitoring must be conducted in the affected space.
   (m)   Where ducting to the outside is not possible, a second negative
pressure ventilation unit compatible with the primary unit's capacity shall be
connected in series. The area receiving the exhaust shall have sufficient, non-
recycling exhaust capacity to the outside of the structure, and must be a
normally non-occupied area.
   (n)   Careful installation shall be done to ensure that the ducting does not
release fibers into uncontaminated building areas.
   (o)   Routine smoke testing and daily inspection must be performed by the
Asbestos Handler Supervisor to ensure that the ducting does not release fibers
into uncontaminated building areas.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 1/15/2025,
eff. 2/14/2025)
§ 1-92 Work Place Entry and Exit Procedures.
The following procedures shall be followed during the conduct of abatement
activities on asbestos projects:
   (a)   Entrance procedures.
      (1)   All workers and authorized visitors shall enter the work area
through the worker decontamination enclosure system.
      (2)   All individuals who enter the work area shall sign the abatement
contractor's log located in the clean room, upon each entry and exit. The
abatement contractor's log shall be permanently bound and at a minimum shall
identify fully the building owner, agents, contractor(s), the project, each
work area and worker respiratory protection employed, and other pertinent
information including daily activities, cleanings and waste transfers, names
and certificate numbers of asbestos handler supervisors and asbestos handlers;
results of inspections of decontamination systems, barriers, and negative
pressure ventilation equipment; summary of corrective actions and repairs; work
stoppages with reason for stoppage; manometer readings at least twice per work
shift; daily checks of emergency and fire exits and any unusual events. The
abatement contractor's log shall be available for examination during abatement
activities by the Department, the owner and the workers. A copy of the
abatement contractor's log shall be submitted directly to the Department within
72 hours of request.
      (3)   All individuals before entering the work area shall be familiar
with all posted regulations, personal protection requirements and emergency
procedures. The abatement contractor's log headings shall indicate, and the
signatures shall be used to acknowledge, that the regulations and procedures
have been reviewed and understood by all persons prior to entering the work
area. The postings and abatement contractor's log headings shall be in English
and in the language of the majority of the asbestos handlers.
      (4)   All individuals shall proceed first to the clean room, remove all
street clothing, store these items in clean sealable plastic bags or a locker
and don personal protective equipment. Clean personal protective equipment
shall be provided by the abatement contractor and utilized by each individual
for each separate entry into the work area.
   (b)   Exit procedures.
      (1)   Before leaving the work area, each individual shall remove the
gross contamination from the outside of the respirators and protective clothing
by wet cleaning, and/or HEPA vacuuming.
      (2)   In the equipment room, all personal protective equipment except
respirators shall be removed. Disposable clothing shall be deposited into
labeled containers for disposal. Reusable contaminated clothing, footwear, and/
or head gear shall be stored in the equipment room when not in use.
      (3)   Still wearing a respirator, each person shall proceed to the shower
room, clean the outside of the respirator and the exposed face area under
running water prior to removal of the respirator, and then fully and vigorously
shower and shampoo to remove residual asbestos contamination. Respirators shall
be washed thoroughly with soap and water or a suitable sanitizing agent.
Various types of respirators may require slight modification of these
procedures.
      (4)   After showering and drying, personnel shall proceed to the clean
room and don clean disposable clothing if returning to the work area or street
clothing if remaining outside the work area.
   (c)   When abatement activities are located in a confined space the
contractor must comply with all the requirements set forth in OSHA 29 C.F.R.
1910.146.and 1926.21(a) and (b).
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 4/28/2022,
eff. 5/28/2022)
§ 1-93 Equipment and Waste Container Decontamination and Removal Procedures.
The following procedures shall be followed whenever equipment or containers are
removed from the work area during an asbestos project:
   (a)   When the worker decontamination enclosure system shown in Illustration
I alternates as a waste decontamination enclosure system, the clean room shall
be considered a holding area during the period of active waste transfer only
for the purpose of the loading of carts. Storage of waste and carts in the
clean room is prohibited.
   (b)   Where the waste decontamination enclosure system is part of the worker
decontamination enclosure system (see Illustration III), waste removal shall
not occur during worker shift changes or when workers are showering or
changing. Care shall be taken to prevent short circuiting and cycling of air
outward through the shower and clean room.
   (c)   Where only one means of egress exists and the shower room is used as a
waste washroom, workers are to be stationed in each room/area of the
decontamination enclosure to transfer/process (see subdivisions (d), (h) and
(I) of this section) the containers and equipment to or from adjacent sections.
These workers are not to cross into the adjacent areas/rooms until the waste/
equipment transfer is finished for that period and the workers have gone
through decontaminations required by 15 RCNY §
1-92. The clean room/holding area workers shall have entered from
uncontaminated areas with appropriate personal protective equipment; or prior
to the start of waste transfer, these workers shall have exited the work area,
fully decontaminated, and subsequently donned clean personal protective
equipment.
   (d)   External surfaces of contaminated containers and equipment shall be
cleaned by wet cleaning and/or HEPA vacuuming in the work area before
transferring such items into the decontamination enclosure system. Contaminated
workers shall not enter the washroom during this procedure.
   (e)   The cleaned containers of ACM and equipment shall be recontainerized
(double-bagged) by either placing them in uncontaminated leak-tight plastic
bags or sheeting as the item's physical characteristics demand while in the
washroom of the waste decontamination enclosure system. Air volume shall be
minimized and the bags of sheeting shall be sealed. Items that may puncture or
tear the plastic bags or sheeting shall be placed in a hardwall container and
sealed.
   (f)   The clean recontainerized items shall be moved into the airlock for
subsequent transfer to the holding area. The washroom workers shall not enter
this airlock or the work area until waste removal is finished for that period.
   (g)   Recontainerized items and cleaned equipment shall be removed from the
airlock to the holding area by workers who have entered from uncontaminated
areas with appropriate personal protective equipment.
   (h)   The recontainerized items of ACM and cleaned, bagged equipment shall
be placed in open top, watertight plastic carts. These carts shall be held in
the holding area pending removal. The carts shall be HEPA vacuumed or wet-
cleaned following the removal of the containers of ACM from them.
   (i)   The exit from the waste decontamination enclosure system shall be
secured to prevent unauthorized entry.
   (j)   The carts shall be stored in a holding area of the work site.
§ 1-94 Maintenance of Decontamination Enclosure Systems and Barriers.
The following procedures shall be followed during the conduct of abatement
activities on asbestos projects:
   (a)   All plastic barriers inside the work place and partitions constructed
to isolate the work area from occupied areas shall be inspected by the asbestos
handler supervisor at least twice per shift.
   (b)   Smoke tubes shall be used to test the integrity of the work area
barriers and the decontamination enclosure systems daily at a minimum both
before abatement activity begins and at the end of each shift. A visual
inspection of the barriers, including the use of differential manometers, shall
be considered acceptable as a back-up test.
   (c)   Damage and defects in the decontamination enclosure system shall be
repaired immediately. The decontamination enclosure system shall be maintained
in a clean and sanitary condition at all times.
   (d)   At any time during the abatement activity, if visible emissions are
observed, or elevated asbestos fiber counts outside the work area are measured,
or if damage occurs to barriers, abatement shall stop. The source of the
contamination shall be located, the integrity of the barriers shall be
restored, and visible residue shall be cleaned up using appropriate HEPA
vacuuming and wet cleaning procedures immediately.
   (e)   Inspections (including all inspections and testing required by
subdivision (b) of this section), observations, and unusual incidents (e.g.
barrier damage, contamination beyond the work area, etc.) must be documented in
the abatement contractor’s log by the asbestos handler supervisor and in the
project air sampling log.
   (f)   The daily inspection to ensure that exits have been checked against
exterior blockage or impediments to exiting as per 15 RCNY §
1-81(t) shall be documented in the abatement contractor's log.
   (g)   If exits are found blocked, abatement activities shall stop until the
blockage is cleared.
(Amended City Record 4/28/2022, eff. 5/28/2022; amended City Record 1/15/2025,
eff. 2/14/2025)
** Part 4: Abatement Procedures **
§ 1-101 Applicability.
The following 15 RCNY §§
1-102 through
1-110 inclusive shall apply to all abatement activities.
§ 1-102 ACM Disturbance, Handling and Removal Procedures.
The following procedures shall be followed during the conduct of abatement
activities:
   (a)   Abatement of asbestos-containing materials shall be by wet methods.
ACM shall not be removed or disturbed without being adequately wet. Dry removal
of asbestos-containing material is prohibited, unless EPA approval has been
obtained. The EPA-approved alternate removal plan shall be submitted to the
Department for approval a minimum of 15 days before work is scheduled to begin
or begins. The plan shall explain and justify why ACM must be removed dry and
how asbestos fibers will be controlled to prevent their release.
   (b)   When amended water is used, the ACM must be sprayed with sufficient
frequency and quantity for enhanced penetration. Sufficient time must be
allowed for penetration to occur prior to removal action or other disturbance
taking place. Accumulation of standing or free water is prohibited. Soft
loosely bound ACM must be saturated. Material that resists wetting, such as
tremolite or amosite, must be thoroughly wetted on all surfaces while work is
being conducted.
   (c)   When used, removal encapsulants that minimize fiber generation and
enhance penetration, shall be applied per manufacturer's specifications and in
accordance with federal guidelines.
   (d)   ACM on detachment from the substrate is to be bagged directly or
dropped onto a flexible catch basin and promptly bagged. Detached ACM is not
permitted to lie on the floor for any period of time. Excess air in the bag
must be minimized and the bag must be sealed. Material that resists wetting
must not be dropped. ACM must not be dropped from a height greater than 10
feet. Above 10 feet in height dust-free enclosed inclined chutes may only be
used inside a work area that is under negative pressure. Vertical chutes are
prohibited. The angle of the chute must not exceed 60 degrees from horizontal.
   (e)   Large components removed intact that cannot be containerized shall be
maintained wet, wrapped (minimizing excess air) in at least one layer of fire
retardant 6-mil polyethylene sheeting, and secured by sealing with tape.
   (f)   After completion of all stripping work, surfaces from which asbestos-
containing materials have been removed shall be cleaned (e.g. wet-brushed and/
or wet-cleaned) to remove all visible residue.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 4/28/2022,
eff. 5/28/2022)
§ 1-103 Encapsulation Procedures.
All sections of these rules must be followed in conjunction with this section
except 15 RCNY §
1-102(e), §
1-104, §
1-105, §
1-107 through §
1-111, §
1-112(c), (d), (e), (g), and (h).
Encapsulation procedures must be conducted with the full containment of the
work area (see 15 RCNY §
1-81) or the tent procedure (see 15 RCNY §
1-106) as follows:
   (a)   All material used for repair or encapsulation of asbestos-containing
material shall have a flame spread rating, fireproofing, and smoke
characteristics similar to the material being encapsulated. The encapsulate
shall not alter the insulating characteristics of the material subject to
encapsulation, and shall comply with current fire proofing standards and the
encapsulate shall not add excess weight to the material increasing the
potential that the material may lose cohesion or adhesion.
   (b)   Loose or hanging asbestos-containing materials shall be removed in
accordance with the requirements of 15 RCNY §
1-102 and §
1-111.
   (c)   Only pigmented (non-transparent) encapsulants shown to be ratable as
acceptable or marginally acceptable on the basis of Battelle Columbus
Laboratory test procedures and rating requirements developed under the 1978
USEPA contract shall be used for encapsulation.
   (d)   The encapsulant solvent or vehicle must not contain a volatile
substance.
   (e)   Latex Paint with solids content greater than 15 percent may be used as
an encapsulant only as follows:
      (1)   as a lockdown sealant for coating all non-metallic surfaces, or
      (2)   for sealing of cementitious ACM.
   (f)   Encapsulants shall be field tested prior to use by applying each to a
small area to determine suitability of the material to be encapsulated.
      (1)   Testing is to occur only after the isolation barriers are in place.
      (2)   Testing shall be by the USEPA method specified in the appendix of
"Guidelines for the Use of Encapsulants on Asbestos-Containing Materials"
(June, 1981) or ASTM Standard Test Method E 736-80. The encapsulated materials
shall achieve a cohesive/adhesive strength of 100 lb/ft perpendicular to the
surface.
   (g)   Application of bridging encapsulants over ACM shall provide the
manufacturer's specified number of inches or minimum dry film thickness.
   (h)   A different color for each coat of encapsulant (per manufacturer's
specifications) shall be used.
   (i)   Penetrating encapsulants shall be applied to penetrate existing
asbestos-containing materials to the substrate. During treatment with a
penetrating encapsulant, selected random core samples of the asbestos-
containing materials shall be removed to check the depth of penetration. The
resulting space shall be treated as outlined (in subdivision (a)) above and re-
encapsulated.
   (j)   Encapsulants shall be applied using airless spray equipment.
      (1)   Spraying shall occur at the lowest pressure range possible to
minimize fiber release from encapsulant impact at the surface. It shall be
applied with a consistent horizontal or vertical motion.
      (2)   Each subsequent coat of encapsulant shall be applied at a right
angle to the preceding coat application or per manufacturer's specifications.
   (k)   Encapsulated asbestos-containing materials shall be identified (e.g.
using labels, signs or color coding) in order to warn building maintenance
personnel in the event encapsulated materials must be disturbed.
   (l)   The following maintenance procedures are required, except when the
encapsulated material is on utility lines located in the street:
      (1)   A periodic inspection and maintenance program, consisting of an
inspection at least annually to check for damage to all encapsulated surfaces.
Recoating and repairs are to be performed according to procedures in this
section.
      (2)   Maintenance of records by the building owner, on the locations and
condition of the encapsulated material and on alteration, renovation,
modification, or other procedures that resulted in disturbance of the
encapsulated material.
      (3)   When conditions change and encapsulation is no longer an
appropriate method, additional abatement methods should be conducted.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 4/28/2022,
eff. 5/28/2022)
§ 1-104 Enclosure Procedures.
All sections of these rules must be followed in conjunction with this section
except 15 RCNY §
1-102(e), §
1-103, §
1-105, §
1-107 through §
1-111, §
1-112(c), (d), (e), (g), and (h).
Enclosure procedures must be conducted with the full containment of the work
area (see 15 RCNY §
1-81) or the tent procedure (see 15 RCNY §
1-106) as follows:
   (a)   Loose and hanging asbestos-containing materials that may be disturbed
during the installation of hangers or other support/framing materials for the
enclosure shall be removed by wet methods in accordance with 15 RCNY §
1-102 and §
1-111.
   (b)   After installation of hangers, brackets or other enclosure supports
and before installation of enclosure materials, damaged areas of fireproofing/
thermal insulation shall be repaired using a replacement material.
   (c)   Utilities' service components shall be lowered or removed as necessary
and reinstalled in a manner which permits proper utilization and does not
disturb the integrity of the enclosures.
   (d)   Enclosed asbestos-containing materials shall be identified (e.g.,
using a sign, label, or color coding) in order to warn building maintenance
personnel in the event that the enclosure must be disturbed.
   (e)   The following maintenance procedures are required:
      (1)   A periodic inspection and maintenance program, consisting of an
inspection at least annually to check for damage to all enclosed surfaces. Re-
enclosure and repairs are to be performed according to the requirements of this
section.
      (2)   Maintenance of records by the building owner, on the locations and
condition of the enclosed material and on alteration, renovation, modification,
or other procedures resulting in disturbance of the enclosed material.
      (3)   When conditions change and enclosure is no longer an appropriate
method of asbestos abatement, additional abatement methods should be conducted.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 4/28/2022,
eff. 5/28/2022)
§ 1-105 Glovebag Procedures.
Glovebag procedures may only be used in conjunction with the full containment
of the work area (see 15 RCNY §
1-81) or the tent procedure (see 15 RCNY §
1-106).
The following procedures shall be followed during the conduct of abatement
activities:
   (a)   Glovebag procedures must be done using commercially available
glovebags of 6-mil clear plastic, appropriately sized for the project.
Glovebags may not be shifted and must not be moved from the initial surface to
another surface, or reinstalled on the initial surface once removed. Glovebag
procedures may only be used on horizontal piping.
   (b)   The glovebag procedure shall be performed in accordance with the
following:
      (1)   All necessary tools and materials shall be brought into the work
area before the glovebag procedure begins.
      (2)   Air monitoring shall be conducted in accordance with 15 RCNY §§
1-31 through
1-45.
      (3)   Glovebag procedures shall be conducted by workers specifically
trained in glovebag procedures and equipped with appropriate personal
protective equipment.
      (4)   The insulation diameter worked shall not exceed one half the bag
working length above the attached gloves.
      (5)   The ACM within the secured glovebag shall be wetted with amended
water prior to stripping.
      (6)   The bag shall be attached over duct tape which has been placed
securely around the insulation, forming a smooth seal. The bag shall be
securely attached to the insulation in a manner to prevent air transfer.
      (7)   After placement, each glovebag must pass a smoke test. The glovebag
shall be placed under negative pressure utilizing a HEPA vacuum, and a smoke
tube shall then be aspirated to direct smoke at all seams and seals from
outside the glovebag. Any leaks detected by the smoke test shall be duct taped
airtight.
      (8)   If the insulation adjacent to the section which will be worked on
is damaged, or if the insulation terminates or is jointed or contains an elbow
adjacent to the work section, the adjacent insulation shall be wrapped in fire
retardant 6-mil polyethylene sheeting and sealed airtight with duct tape.
      (9)   After the insulation has been removed, the surface shall be sprayed
with amended water and brush-scrubbed to remove all visible ACM. The surface,
the interior of the bag, the insulation and the tools shall then be sprayed
with amended water. The enclosed volume shall be misted and time allowed for
the mist to settle out before breaking the seal to remove the glovebag.
      (10)   Any insulation ends created by this procedure shall be:
         (i)   sealed with encapsulant prior to bag removal, or
         (ii)   thoroughly wetted before bag removal and sealed with wettable
cloth end caps and spray glue or any combination of these materials immediately
following bag removal.
      (11)   The tool pouch shall be separated from the bag prior to disposal
by twisting it and the wall to which it is attached several times, and taping
the twist to hold it in place, thus sealing the bag and the pouch which are
severed at the midpoint of the twist. Alternatively, the tools can be pulled
through with one or both glove inserts, thus turning the gloves inside out. The
glove(s) is/are then twist sealed forming a new pouch, taped and severed mid-
seal forming two separate bags.
      (12)   A HEPA vacuum shall be used for evacuation of the glovebag in
preparation for removal of the bag from the surface for clean-up in the event
of a spill, and for post project clean-up.
      (13)   With the glovebag collapsed and the ACM in the bottom of the bag,
the bag shall be twisted several times and taped to seal that section during
bag removal.
      (14)   A 6-mil plastic bag shall be slipped around the glovebag while it
is still attached to the surface. The bag shall be detached from the surface by
removing the tape or cutting the top with blunt scissors.
      (15)   The asbestos-containing waste, the clean-up materials, and
protective clothing shall be wetted sufficiently, double-bagged minimizing air
content, sealed separately, and disposed of in conformance with 15 RCNY §§
1-93 and
1-102.
      (16)   A visual clearance inspection must be conducted by the asbestos
handler supervisor and project monitor after the work area dries, to ensure the
absence of ACM residue or debris in the work area. The clearance inspection
must be documented in the abatement contractor's log and the project air
sampling log.
   (c)   [Reserved.]
   (d)   Glovebag procedures may only be utilized as part of a large or small
asbestos project within full containment as set forth in 15 RCNY §
1-81, or inside a tent constructed in accordance with 15 RCNY §
1-106.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 4/28/2022,
eff. 5/28/2022)
§ 1-106 Tent Procedures.
All sections of these rules must be followed in conjunction with this section
except 15 RCNY §
1-112(a) - (h). Tent Procedures must be conducted as follows:
   (a)   Tent procedures must be limited to the removal of less than 260 linear
feet and 160 square feet of ACM on any individual floor and must not result in
disturbance of ACM during tent erection. Tent procedures may be used as part of
a large asbestos project only as provided for in 15 RCNY §
1-81(f) or in conjunction with the glovebag procedure set forth in 15 RCNY §
1-105. Multiple tent enclosures may be used as part of a large asbestos project
on an individual floor only in conjunction with the use of the glovebag
procedure set forth in 15 RCNY §
1-105. Multiple tent enclosures without the use of the glovebag procedure on a
large asbestos project require a variance for the use of modified tent
procedures and a remote worker decontamination enclosure. Air monitoring shall
be conducted in accordance with 15 RCNY §§
1-31 through §
1-45.
   (b)   Tent procedures must be conducted in a constructed or commercially
available fire retardant plastic tent, plasticizing and sealing all surfaces
and fixed objects not being abated within the tent periphery forming an
enclosure. The tent must be of fire retardant 6-mil plastic at a minimum, with
seams heat-sealed, or double-folded, stapled and taped airtight and then taped
flush with the adjacent tent wall. This is a single use barrier that must not
be reused once dismantled or collapsed.
   (c)   There shall be an airlock at the entrance to the tent, unless there is
an attached worker or waste decontamination system.
   (d)   Asbestos handlers involved in the tent procedure must wear personal
protective equipment as specified in 15 RCNY §
1-51(c), plus a second disposable suit. All street clothes must be removed and
stored in a clean room within the work site. The personal protective equipment
with two disposable suits must be used for installation of the tent and
throughout the procedure if a decontamination unit with a shower is not
physically connected to the tent. If a decontamination unit (with shower and
clean room at a minimum) is physically connected to the tent, only one
disposable suit shall be required; in this case, prior to exiting the tent, the
worker must HEPA vacuum and wet clean the disposable suit.
   (e)   The tent shall be attached to the surface to produce an airtight seal
except for an appropriate section to allow for make-up air into the tent.
   (f)   Negative pressure ventilation equipment shall be used to continuously
exhaust the enclosed area as specified under 15 RCNY §
1-91, Engineering Controls.
   (g)   Removal of ACM shall be by wet methods in accordance with 15 RCNY §
1-102.
   (h)   ACM removed shall be placed in a leak-tight container without dropping
it.
   (i)   Upon completion of abatement, and prior to tent collapse, the enclosed
surfaces shall:
      (1)   be wet cleaned using rags, mops or sponges; and
      (2)   be permitted sufficient time to dry, prior to HEPA vacuuming all
substrates; and
      (3)   be encapsulated to lockdown residual asbestos.
   (j)   Upon barrier disturbance, loss of engineering controls, or termination
of tent usage, the tent and the enclosed surfaces shall be treated according to
subdivision (i) above.
   (k)   The bagged waste shall be wet cleaned or HEPA vacuumed and then
transferred outside the tent, double bagged, and appropriately handled prior to
disposal.
   (l)   The outer disposable suit (if 2 suits are worn) shall be HEPA vacuumed
in the tent prior to exiting. The outer disposable suit shall be removed in the
airlock and a clean suit shall be worn over the inner suit. The workers shall
immediately proceed to a shower at the work site. The inner disposable suit and
respirator shall be removed in the shower after appropriate wetting. The
disposable clothing shall be disposed of as asbestos-containing waste material.
The workers shall then fully and vigorously shower with supplied liquid bath
soap, shampoo, and clean dry towels.
   (m)   The negative pressure ventilation equipment shall be used to filter a
minimum of 4 volume changes through the tent after completion of abatement but
prior to collapse of the tent/barrier. All required air monitoring must be
successfully completed before the tent/barrier is collapsed.
   (n)   The tent shall be collapsed inward, enclosing the contaminated
clothing. This contaminated material shall be disposed of in another plastic
bag. The HEPA vacuum shall be decontaminated and sealed.
   (o)   Glovebag procedures for removal of material within the tent for any
sized project shall follow the rules set forth in 15 RCNY §
1-105.
   (p)   A visual clearance inspection must be conducted by the asbestos
handler supervisor and project monitor after the work area dries, to ensure the
absence of ACM residue or debris in the work area. The clearance inspection
must be documented in the abatement contractor's log and the project air
sampling log.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 4/28/2022,
eff. 5/28/2022; amended City Record 1/15/2025, eff. 2/14/2025)
§ 1-107 Foam Procedure for Roof Removal.
All sections of these rules must be followed in conjunction with this section
with the exception of 15 RCNY §
1-81(m), §
1-81(p), §
1-91, §
1-102(b), §
1-112(c), (d), (e), (g) and (h).
   (a)   These procedures apply only to the removal of asbestos-containing
roofing material (ACRM) from exterior roof surfaces. The work area on the roof
must be cordoned off with clearly visible barriers such as caution tape, and
only persons authorized by the building owner or the building owner's
representative may have access.
      (1)   The contractor must establish and maintain a warning line system on
the roof throughout the project.
      (2)   The contractor must comply with the requirements set forth in OSHA
29 C.F.R. 1926. Subpart M, Fall Protection standard, specifically 29 C.F.R.
1926. 500; 501; and 502.
      (3)   Only persons authorized by the building owner or the building
owner's representative may have access to the roof during abatement activities.
      (4)   Walking Surfaces. Walking and working surfaces shall be protected
from tripping or stepping into or through holes or openings, including
skylights, by covers secured to the surface in accordance with OSHA Section 29
C.F.R. 1926.501.
   (b)   The foam or viscous liquid shall be non-toxic, shall not require
special respiratory protection for handling, and shall not affect the handling
and disposal of the waste.
   (c)   The foam or viscous liquid shall coat and maintain a stable blanket
(minimum 1" thickness) for the duration of the removal process and shall leave
an identifiable colored residue when it dissipates.
   (d)   The foam or viscous liquid shall wet the ACRM. The ACRM shall be kept
wet through the bagging process.
   (e)   Persons entering the work area must wear personal protective equipment
as required by 15 RCNY §
1-51 as well as correctly-fitting, good traction rubber boots.
   (f)   Abatement shall not be carried out during adverse weather conditions
(e.g. precipitation, high winds, ambient temperature below 32 degrees
Fahrenheit, etc.).
   (g)   The worker decontamination unit may be attached to each work area at
an entry/exit from each work area in accordance with 15 RCNY §
1-82, or may be remote, in which case the work area shall be equipped with an
airlock at the entrance. For removal of less than 1,000 square feet of ACRM, in
addition to the shower head(s), the shower room shall be equipped with a
flexible hose for waste decontamination. For 1,000 square feet or more of ACRM
removal, a separate waste decontamination facility as per 15 RCNY §
1-83 shall be located at an entry/exit from each work area. Remote holding
areas for the asbestos containing waste shall comply with
Title 16, Chapter 8, Rules of the City of New York (16 RCNY §§
8.01 et seq.).
   (h)   Movable objects shall be removed from the work area, or kept in place
and wrapped in one sheet of fire retardant 6 mil plastic sheeting.
   (i)   Provisions must be made to ensure a safe and adequate air supply to
any affected building. All vents, skylights, air intakes, windows and doors
opening onto the roof, and all other openings must be sealed with 2 layers of
fire retardant 6mil plastic or fitted with HEPA filters when appropriate.
Vents, air intakes, etc. can be vertically extended temporarily to a height of
ten feet instead of sealing them with 2 layers of plastic or HEPA-filters.
Drains may be equipped with 5 micron filtering system in lieu of being sealed.
   (j)   Fixed objects including perimeter walls, bulkheads, cooling towers,
ducts and other rooftop accessories must be covered in one sheet of fire
retardant 6 mil plastic up to a height of at least six feet.
   (k)   Prior to actual removal, the built-up roofing shall be blanketed and
wetted with a minimum 1" coating of the acceptable foam or viscous liquid which
shall be maintained for the duration of the removal until the material is
bagged. The foam or viscous liquid shall be confined to the work area.
   (l)   Power tools used to drill, cut into, or otherwise disturb the ACRM
shall be equipped with HEPA-filtered local exhaust ventilation and operated to
prevent potential fiber release.
   (m)   Clean-up procedures shall include the removal and direct bagging of
ACRM, so that loose ACRM does not accumulate on the roof. Exterior or interior
chutes are prohibited to transport ACRM from the roof to lower floors. Clean-up
procedures shall also include the removal of all visible accumulations of
asbestos containing waste and the removal of all excess foam or similar viscous
liquids. Following the removal of all debris, the work area shall be thoroughly
wet cleaned.
   (n)   The work area shall be allowed to dry completely before the visual
inspection is conducted. The project monitor and asbestos handler supervisor
shall confirm the absence in the work area of ACM, asbestos-containing waste or
debris, and foam or other viscous liquid. This visual inspection must be
documented in the abatement contractor's log and project air sampling log.
   (o)   Upon successful visual inspection, all installed plastic sheeting
shall be removed.
   (p)   Air monitoring shall be conducted in accordance with the relevant
provisions of Subchapter D of these rules.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 4/28/2022,
eff. 5/28/2022)
§ 1-108 Foam/Viscous Liquid Use in Flooring Removal.
All sections of these rules must be followed in conjunction with this section
with the exception of 15 RCNY §
1-81(m), §
1-81(p), §
1-91(c), §
1-102(b), §
1-112(d), and §
1-112(g).
   (a)   These procedures only apply to the removal of surface flooring
material including vinyl asbestos floor tiles (VAT), ACM floor coverings (e.g.,
linoleum) and associated mastics and adhesives, where the only ACM being abated
in the work area is flooring material.
   (b)   The foam or viscous liquid shall be non-toxic, shall not require
special respiratory protection for handling, and shall not affect the handling
and disposal of the waste.
   (c)   The foam or viscous liquid shall coat and maintain a stable blanket
(minimum 1" thickness) for the duration of the removal process and shall leave
an identifiable colored residue when it dissipates. The acceptable foam or
viscous liquid shall be maintained for the duration of the removal until the
material is bagged.
   (d)   The foam or viscous liquid shall coat and wet the ACM. The ACM shall
be kept wet through the bagging process.
   (e)   Persons entering the work area must wear personal protective equipment
as required by 15 RCNY §
1-51 as well as correctly-fitting, good-traction rubber boots.
   (f)   Baseboards and wall surfaces up to a minimum height of four feet above
the floor must be covered with a layer of fire retardant 6-mil plastic
sheeting. If hand power tools are used during the abatement, wall surfaces must
be covered with a layer of 6-mil polyethylene sheeting to a minimum height of
six feet. Abrasive removal methods, including the use of grinders and
beadblasters, are prohibited.
   (g)   Negative air pressure ventilation shall be provided to allow make-up
air into the work area, and the air outlet from the work area shall be at or
near the floor level.
   (h)   Clean-up procedures shall involve removal and bagging of the ACM, of
visible accumulations of asbestos containing waste, and of all traces of foam
or similar viscous liquid. Following the removal of all debris, the work area
shall be thoroughly wet cleaned and HEPA-vacuumed.
   (i)   The work area shall be allowed to dry completely before the visual
inspection is conducted. The project monitor and asbestos handler supervisor
shall confirm the absence in the work area of ACM, asbestos-containing waste or
debris, and foam or other viscous liquid. This visual inspection must be
documented in the abatement contractor's log and project air sampling log.
   (j)   Upon successful visual inspection, plastic sheeting shall be removed
from baseboards and wall surfaces. Isolation barriers shall remain in place.
   (k)   Air monitoring shall be conducted in accordance with the relevant
provisions of Subchapter D of these rules.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 4/28/2022,
eff. 5/28/2022; amended City Record 1/15/2025, eff. 2/14/2025)
§ 1-109 Abatement from Vertical Exterior Surfaces.
All applicable sections of these rules shall be followed in conjunction with
this section except 15 RCNY §
1-81(m), §
1-81(p), §
1-91, and §
1-112(c), (d), (e), (g), and (h).
This section shall apply to projects involving the abatement of asbestos-
containing materials from the vertical exterior surfaces (and associated
horizontal surfaces, e.g. coping stones on top of a parapet wall) of a building
or structure, including but not limited to the following materials:
   Caulking or glazing compounds
   Asphaltic mastic or tar (e.g., flashing on parapet walls)
   Cement siding or shingles (including Transite)
   Paints
   Sealants for coping stone caps or clay roofing tiles
   (a)   The work area shall be prepared as follows:
      (1)   The entire surface to be abated and ground-level perimeter shall be
considered the work area unless partitions and warning tape are used to define
the work area, except that if the horizontal surface below the surface to be
abated is not the ground (e.g., surface to be abated is inside parapet wall on
roof), the horizontal surface underneath the abatement shall be considered the
work area, not the ground.
      (2)   A restricted area shall be established using warning tape extending
at least 25 feet from the affected areas of the building or to the nearest
vertical obstruction or the curb.
      (3)   The restricted area may be entered only by certified workers or
authorized visitors.
      (4)   Before plasticizing, the restricted area shall be inspected for ACM
debris and, if necessary, pre-cleaned using HEPA vacuums and wet methods.
      (5)   All openings to the building or structure's interior which are
within 25 feet of the affected ACM shall be closed and made airtight.
      (6)   Scaffolding erected to access the ACM shall be constructed,
maintained, and used in accordance with applicable federal, state, and city
laws. The contractor must comply with the requirements set forth in OSHA 29
C.F.R. 1926. Subpart M, Fall Protection and Subpart L (Scaffolds) and the NYC
Building Code.
      (7)   Elevated platforms being used to access the affected ACM shall be
plasticized with two layers of fire-retardant 6-mil plastic, which shall extend
up from the platform to at least the height of the mid-rail on three sides, and
shall be attached directly to the building just below the surfaces under
abatement.
      (8)   The ground-level restricted area shall be cleared of all moveable
objects and plasticized with two sheets of fire-retardant 6-mil plastic, which
shall be extended one foot up the side of the building. The plasticized area
shall be twenty-five feet wide or to the curb. This plastic shall be cleaned,
replaced, and disposed of as asbestos waste at the end of each shift.
      (9)   Sidewalk bridges in the restricted area shall be covered with two
layers of fire-retardant 6-mil plastic, placed over and secured to the bridge,
spread across the full width of the bridge and up the interior walls of the
bridge so the walls are fully plasticized.
   (b)   A worker/waste decontamination system shall be constructed within the
restricted area.
   (c)   Persons entering the work area must wear personal protective equipment
as required by 15 RCNY §
1-51.
   (d)   Removal Procedure. 
      (1)   Removal of ACM must be by wet methods in accordance with 15 RCNY §
1-102.
      (2)   ACM removed must be placed in a leak-tight container without
dropping the ACM into the container.
   (e)   Cleanup Procedure. 
      (1)   The stripped substrate must be HEPA vacuumed and wet-wiped.
      (2)   A visual clearance inspection must be conducted by the asbestos
handler supervisor and project monitor after the work area dries, to ensure the
absence of ACM residue or debris in the work area.
      (3)   After the inspection is completed, the warning tapes and barriers
may be removed.
      (4)   The clearance inspection must be documented in the abatement
contractor's log and the project air sampling log.
   (f)   Air monitoring must be conducted in accordance with the relevant
provisions of Subchapter D of these rules.
   (g)   Abatement must not be performed under this section during bad weather
(e.g. precipitation, high winds, temperatures in the immediate outdoor
surroundings below 32 degrees Fahrenheit, etc.).
   (h)   Power tools used to drill, cut into, or otherwise disturb ACM must be
equipped with HEPA-filtered local exhaust ventilation and operated to prevent
potential fiber release.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 4/28/2022,
eff. 5/28/2022)
§ 1-110 Controlled Demolition with Asbestos in Place.
   (a)   A building or structure may be demolished with asbestos in place only
if the building is in imminent danger of collapse as set forth in § 28-215.1 of
Title 28 of the Administrative Code and/or 56 NYCRR 11.5(c).
   (b)   A condemnation order or declaration issued by the Department of
Buildings (DOB) or a signed and sealed condemnation letter from the Owner's
registered design professional which has been acknowledged by the Department of
Buildings (DOB) must be submitted to the DEP through the ARTS E-File system. A
site-specific scope of work identifying the steps to control asbestos emissions
during the controlled demolition must be submitted and approved by DEP prior to
the commencement of work. The contractor must comply with all procedures set
forth in the approved scope of work document. Any variation from the approved
scope of work must be approved in advance by DEP.
   (c)   The demolition shall be performed in accordance with § 28-215.1 of
Title 28 of the Administrative Code and/or 56 NYCRR 11.5(c).
(Amended City Record 4/28/2022, eff. 5/28/2022; amended City Record 1/15/2025,
eff. 2/14/2025)
** Part 5: Clean-up Procedures **
§ 1-111 Preliminary Clean-up Procedures.
The following clean-up requirements shall be followed during the conduct of
abatement activities on asbestos projects:
   (a)   (1)   All waste generated shall be bagged, wrapped or containerized
immediately upon removal. The personal and waste decontamination enclosure
systems and floor and scaffold surfaces shall be HEPA vacuumed and wet cleaned
at the end of each work shift at a minimum.
      (2)   Visible accumulations of asbestos-containing waste material shall
be containerized utilizing non-metallic dust pans and non-metallic squeegees or
HEPA vacuums.
      (3)   Metal shovels shall not be used to pick up or move accumulated
asbestos-containing waste material or any other debris in the vicinity of
isolation or surface barriers.
   (b)   The waste decontamination enclosure system shall be wet cleaned twice
using wet cleaning methods upon completion of waste removal. When the worker
decontamination enclosure shower room alternates as a waste container wash
room, the shower room shall be washed immediately with cloths or mops saturated
with a detergent solution prior to wet cleaning.
   (c)   The worker decontamination enclosure system shall be wet cleaned /
HEPA vacuumed, as appropriate, after each shift change and meal break.
   (d)   If there is free standing water or if flooding occurs in the work
area, work must stop until the water is collected and safely and properly
removed.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019)
§ 1-112 Additional Clean-up Procedures (Final).
Additional clean-up procedures shall be performed in the order set forth below
prior to commencement of clearance air monitoring.
   (a)   After removal of visible accumulations of asbestos-containing waste
material, all surfaces must be HEPA vacuumed. To pick up excess water and
saturated debris, a wet-dry shop HEPA vacuum, dedicated to asbestos abatement,
may be used.
   (b)   All surfaces in the work area shall be wet cleaned (first cleaning).
   (c)   A thin coat of lockdown encapsulant shall be applied to all surfaces
in the work area which were not the subject of removal or abatement, including
the cleaned layer of the surface barriers and excluding sprinklers, standpipes,
and other active elements of the fire suppression system.
   (d)   After the first cleaning, the work area shall be vacated for 12 hours
to allow fibers to settle.
   (e)   The cleaned and encapsulated layer of the surface barriers shall be
removed from the walls and floors.
   (f)   All objects and surfaces in the work area shall be HEPA vacuumed and
wet cleaned a second time.
   (g)   After the second cleaning, the work area shall be vacated for 4 hours
before wet cleaning and/or HEPA vacuuming all surfaces in the work area for a
third cleaning.
   (h)   After the plastic barriers on the walls and floors have been removed,
a third cleaning shall be performed of all surfaces in the work area by wet
cleaning and/or HEPA vacuuming. A minimum of a one hour waiting period shall be
conducted to allow the work area to dry prior to the visual inspection by the
air monitor and asbestos supervisor.
   (i)   Before starting clearance air monitoring, a thorough visual inspection
must be conducted to verify the absence of asbestos-containing waste material
(e.g. dust). This inspection must be documented in the project air sampling
log.
   (j)   All containerized waste shall be removed from the work area through
the decontamination enclosures and the holding area.
   (k)   All tools and equipment shall be removed from the work area and
decontaminated in the waste decontamination enclosure system. Cloths, mops, and
other cleaning aids shall be disposed of as asbestos-containing waste material.
   (l)   After successful clearance air monitoring (see 15 RCNY §§
1-31 et seq.), the isolation barriers shall be removed and the remaining worker
and waste decontamination enclosure(s) must be dismantled and removed from the
work site. All plastic sheeting must be cleaned using a HEPA vacuum and
disposed of as asbestos contaminated waste.
   (m)   Within 21 days of the completion of all steps set forth above,
including successful clearance air monitoring, a project monitor’s report (Form
ACP15) must be submitted to DEP. Failure to submit the ACP15 Form will result
in suspension of the air monitor’s account and the contractor’s account in the
ARTS E-File System until the form is submitted. This report must be based on an
inspection performed after the completion of all steps listed in this section,
and may not be based on the visual inspection performed prior to the
commencement of clearance air monitoring. This inspection must be documented in
the project air sampling log. The project monitor who prepares the report must
be independent of the abatement contractor. If a project is being performed on
multiple floors of a building, a separate project monitor’s report may be
submitted as each floor is completed. Compliance with this subdivision is the
responsibility of the building owner.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019 amended City Record 4/28/2022,
eff. 5/28/2022; amended City Record 1/15/2025, eff. 2/14/2025)
**** Subchapter G: Pre-Demolition Abatement Activity Procedures ****
** Part 1: Applicability **
§ 1-120 Applicability of Regulations to Pre-Demolition Abatement Activities.
The following regulations shall apply to pre-demolition abatement activities:
15 RCNY §§
1-01 through   General Regulations
1-61
15 RCNY §     Work Place Preparation Requirements
1-81*
15 RCNY §     Worker Decontamination Enclosure System
1-82
15 RCNY §     Waste Decontamination Enclosure System
1-83
15 RCNY §
1-91 through   Work Place Procedures
1-94
15 RCNY §     ACM Disturbance, Handling and Removal Procedures
1-102
15 RCNY §     Glovebag Procedure
1-105
15 RCNY §     Tent Procedure
1-106
15 RCNY §     Foam Procedure for Roof Removal
1-107
15 RCNY §     Foam/Viscous Liquid Use in Flooring Removal
1-108
15 RCNY §     Abatement from Vertical Exterior Surfaces
1-109
15 RCNY §
1-120 through  Pre-Demolition Abatement Activity Procedures
1-128
 
* Subsections (b), (j), (l), (u), (v) and (z) only.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019)
** Part 2: Work Procedures **
§ 1-125 Work Area Preparation.
The following work area preparation shall be followed during the conduct of
pre-demolition abatement activities:
   (a)   Prior to the start of abatement activities on asbestos projects the
building owner or designated representative must post a general notification at
all main entrances to the structure. Postings of this notification must be in
English and Spanish, at eye level in a conspicuous well-lit place that can be
viewed by the public without obstruction. Information provided in the
notification must include contractor, project location, that the project is
regulated by NYC DEP, and the Call Center "311" for government information and
services. The notice must have the following heading: NOTICE OF ASBESTOS
ABATEMENT, in a minimum of one inch sans serif, gothic or block style
lettering, with the balance of the lettering of the notice to be of the same
type lettering in a minimum of one quarter inch size. The notification must be
posted throughout all abatement activities.
   (b)   The building shall be vacated prior to the start of abatement
activities.
   (c)   Electric power to all work areas shall be shut down and locked out.
Safe temporary power and lighting shall be provided in accordance with all
applicable NYC Code(s) and Regulations. Existing light sources (e.g., house
lights) shall not be utilized. All power to a work area shall be brought in
from outside the area through ground-fault interrupter at the source.
   (d)   The worker decontamination enclosure system shall be installed or
constructed prior to plasticizing the work area and before disturbing ACM. The
waste decontamination enclosure system shall be installed or constructed prior
to commencement of abatement. The area in which these systems are located shall
require HVAC system isolation and plasticizing of electrical outlets and
equipment that are within 6 inches of floor level.
   (e)   Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning (HVAC) System shall be shut
down and locked out. Isolation barriers shall be installed to prevent interior
duct work contamination.
   (f)   Abatement shall not commence until work place preparation has been
completed.
   (g)   Methods that raise dust, such as sweeping or vacuuming with equipment
not equipped with HEPA filters, are prohibited.
   (h)   Objects which can be removed from the work area prior to abatement
without disturbing ACM shall be pre-cleaned using HEPA-filtered vacuum
equipment and/or wet cleaning.
   (i)   The isolation barriers (i.e. sealing off of all openings, including
but not limited to windows, corridors, doorways, barriers, skylights, ducts,
grills, diffusers, and any other penetrations of the work areas) shall be
installed with 2 layers of fire retardant 6-mil plastic sheeting separately
sealed with tape. All seams of HVAC or other system components that pass
through the work area shall also be sealed. Chimney effects in stacks, columns,
flues, shafts, double- walled enclosures, etc., that impact the work area,
shall be eliminated by sealing the accesses with solid material covered with a
double layer of 6-mil plastic sealed with tape.
   (j)   Cinderblock and porous construction materials, painted or unpainted,
must be covered with one layer of fire retardant 6-mil plastic sheeting, sealed
at edges and seams.
   (k)   Flooring within the work area shall be water-tight.
   (l)   Suspended ceiling tiles and T-grid components in proximity to ACM
shall remain in place until the work area has been fully prepared as outlined
in this section and electrical and HVAC systems have been shut down.
Contaminated suspended ceiling components shall be removed prior to abatement
and treated with a penetrating encapsulant.
   (m)   Required means of egress, including emergency and fire exits, must be
maintained at all times during abatement activities except as otherwise
provided, pursuant to the New York City Building and Fire Codes. Exits must be
checked daily to ensure that there is no blockage or impediments to exiting.
   (n)   Entrances to the work area that will be used for worker entry or
emergency exits shall be locked against unauthorized entry.
   (o)   Elevators running through the work area shall conform to the
following:
      (1)   The elevator door in the work area shall be enclosed with
conventional 2 x 4 stud framing, covered with 3/8" fire rated plywood sheeting
and sealed at all edges and seams. The barrier shall be covered and lapped for
8 inches with two layers of fire retardant 6-mil plastic sheeting adhered
individually with edges taped for airtightness.
      (2)   Elevators not remaining in service shall have the fuses removed and
the power switch locked in the open position.
      (3)   Elevators that remain in service shall conform to the following
additional procedures to minimize the piston effect that results:
         (i)   Elevator control shall be modified to bypass the work area.
         (ii)   A final larger layer of fire retardant 6-mil plastic sheeting
is to be taped airtight but with slack forming a larger perimeter diaphragm.
Air leakage across the barrier shall be corrected upon discovery, and the
elevator shaft shall be checked for airborne asbestos contamination.
         (iii)   This system shall be smoke tested daily.
      (4)   Elevator shafts shall not be used as waste chutes for asbestos-
containing waste material.
   (p)   Adequate toilet facilities shall be provided in the vicinity of the
clean room external to the work place. Where such facilities do not exist,
portable service shall be provided.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 8/21/2019,
eff. 9/20/2019)
§ 1-126 ACM Procedures: Order of Work.
No ACM removal shall be performed in a building concurrently with the full
demolition of such building or with the removal of one or more stories of such
building, except as otherwise provided in these rules pursuant to 15 RCNY §§
1-03 and
1-26. This subsection shall not apply to emergency work being performed
pursuant to Article 215 of Chapter 2 of Title 28 of the Administrative Code.
§ 1-127 Clean-up Procedures During Abatement.
The following clean-up procedures shall be followed during conduct of pre-
demolition abatement:
   (a)   (1)   All waste generated shall be bagged, wrapped, or containerized
immediately upon removal. The personal and waste decontamination enclosure
systems shall be HEPA vacuumed and wet cleaned at the end of each work shift at
a minimum.
      (2)   Visible accumulations of asbestos-containing waste material may be
containerized utilizing rubber dust pans and rubber squeegees or HEPA vacuums.
Metal shovels may also be used EXCEPT in the vicinity of plastic sheeting which
could be perforated by these tools.
   (b)   The waste decontamination enclosure system shall be wet cleaned twice
using wet cleaning methods upon completion of waste removal. When the worker
decontamination enclosure shower room alternates as a waste container wash
room, the shower room shall be washed immediately with cloths or mops saturated
with a detergent solution prior to wet cleaning.
   (c)   The worker decontamination enclosure system shall be wet cleaned /
HEPA vacuumed, as appropriate, after each shift change and meal break.
   (d)   If there is free standing water or if flooding occurs in the area,
work must stop until the water is collected and safely and properly removed.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019)
§ 1-128 Clean-up Procedures: Preparation for Clearance Air Monitoring.
The following final clean-up procedures for pre-demolition abatement shall be
performed prior to commencement of clearance air monitoring:
   (a)   All visible accumulations of asbestos-containing waste material shall
be removed and containerized. Metal shovels may be used to pick up or move
accumulated waste EXCEPT in the vicinity of plastic sheet isolation and surface
barriers which could be perforated by these tools. The areas around the plastic
sheet isolation barriers shall be cleaned of visible accumulations utilizing
rubber dust pans and rubber squeegees. To pick up excess water and gross wet
debris, a wet-dry shop HEPA vacuum dedicated to asbestos abatement may be used.
   (b)   All containerized waste shall be removed from the work area through
the decontamination enclosures and the holding area.
   (c)   All surfaces in the work area shall be wet cleaned using rags or mops.
After allowing sufficient time for drying of the work area, HEPA vacuums shall
be used to thoroughly clean all surfaces after gross clean-up.
   (d)   The plastic sheeting installed, pursuant to 15 RCNY §
1-125(j), must be cleaned as in subdivision (c) above, then sprayed with a
lockdown encapsulant and removed when dry.
   (e)   All surfaces in the work area which were not the subject of removal or
abatement shall be sprayed with a lockdown encapsulant, which upon drying will
not dissolve upon rewetting. Sufficient time for drying shall be allowed.
   (f)   All tools and equipment shall be removed from the work area and
decontaminated in the equipment decontamination enclosure system.
   (g)   After successful clearance air monitoring (see 15 RCNY §§
1-31 et seq.), a HEPA vacuum must be used to clean up any dust or debris when
removing the isolation barriers.
   (h)   Within 21 days of the completion of all steps set forth above,
including successful clearance air monitoring, a project monitor’s report (Form
ACP15) must be submitted to DEP. Failure to submit the ACP15 Form will result
in suspension of the air monitor’s account and the contractor’s account in the
ARTS E-File System until the form is submitted. This report must be based on an
inspection performed after the completion of all steps listed in this section
and may not be based on the visual inspection performed prior to the
commencement of clearance air monitoring. This inspection must be documented in
the project air sampling log. The project monitor who prepares the report must
be independent of the abatement contractor. If a project is being performed on
multiple floors of a building, a separate project monitor’s report may be
submitted as each floor is completed. Compliance with this subdivision is the
responsibility of the building owner.
(Amended City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 1/15/2025,
eff. 2/14/2025)
* Illustrations *
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-148.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-150.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-152.jpg]
Chapter 2: Engineering Criteria for Fossil Fuel Burning Boilers and Water
Heaters
§ 2-01 Introduction and Applicability.
All owners of fossil fuel burning boilers and water heaters that require a
registration and have heat input equal to or greater than 2.8 million BTU/hour
but less than 4.2 million BTU/hour or require a certificate of operation under
the New York City Air Pollution Control Code, as codified in Chapter 1 of Title
15 of the New York City Administrative Code, are subject to these rules.
In order for a registration or work permit to be issued an application must be
filed and accompanied by plans and any additional information that may be
requested by the department. The application will enable the department to
evaluate the design of equipment installation for compliance with the
specification requirements described in 15 RCNY §
2-11. Upon issuance of a registration or work permit, the equipment shall be
installed and adjusted to meet the performance requirements specified in 15
RCNY §
2-08.
(Amended City Record 5/13/2016, eff. 6/12/2016)
§ 2-02 Definitions.
   (1)   AP-42. "AP-42" means the United States Environmental Protection Agency
publication AP-42, Compilation of Air Pollutant Emission Factors, Volume I:
Stationary Point and Area Sources (fifth edition, 1995).
   (2)   ASHRAE. "ASHRAE" means the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating,
and Air Conditioning Engineers.
   (3)   ASTM International. "ASTM International" is formerly known as the
American Society for Testing and Materials.
   (4)   Barometric damper. "Barometric damper" means a device which consists
of a damper counter-weighted and set such that boiler room barometric pressure
will cause the damper to open or close to check variations in chimney draft and
thereby maintain a constant draft directly upstream of the barometric draft
regulator location.
   (5)   Biogas. "Biogas" means a mixture of methane and carbon dioxide
produced by the anaerobic digestion of organic matter used as a fuel; includes
landfill gas and digester gas.
   (6)   Boiler. "Boiler" means equipment that is used to heat water or any
other transfer medium for the purpose of generating hot water and/or steam. The
hot water and/or steam generated by a boiler may be used for heating,
processing, or generating power for other purposes, including but not limited
to, cooking and sanitation.
   (7)   British thermal unit. "British thermal unit" (Btu) means the amount of
energy needed to heat one pound of water by one degree Fahrenheit.
   (8)   Burner. "Burner" means a device for the final conveyance of the fuel,
or a mixture of fuel and air, to the combustion zone.
   (9)   Calibration test. "Calibration test" means to calibrate the qualified
combustion analyzer in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications.
   (10)   Certificate of operation. "Certificate of operation" means a document
issued by the department authorizing the operation of a specific piece of
equipment or apparatus that may emit an air contaminant.
   (11)   Chimney. "Chimney" means a primarily vertical structure containing
one or more flues, for the purpose of carrying gaseous products of combustion
and air from fuel-burning appliances to the outside atmosphere.
   (12)   Chimney diameter. "Chimney diameter" means for round chimneys, the
diameter shall be taken as the actual inside diameter. Where the chimney is
provided with a liner, its inside diameter is the chimney diameter. For
rectangular chimneys, the equivalent diameter for equal friction and capacity
shall be used based on the inside rectangular dimensions.
   (13)   Chimney height. "Chimney height" is the distance from the centerline
of the entrance of the combustion gases into the chimney to the top of the
chimney.
   (14)   Combustion efficiency. "Combustion efficiency" means a measurement of
the burner's ability to burn fuel. It is the heat input minus the stack losses.
   (15)   Combustion efficiency test. "Combustion efficiency test" means a test
of steady state combustion efficiency carried out by a qualified combustion
tester using a qualified combustion analyzer.
   (16)   Condensing Boiler. "Condensing boiler" means a boiler that is
designed to operate at stack temperatures where flue gases can condense,
thereby recovering its latent heat of vaporization, before leaving the heat
exchanger.
   (17)   Crown sheet. "Crown sheet" means that part of a boiler forming the
top of the furnace in a firebox boiler, or the equivalent surface in other
types.
   (18)   CSA Group. "CSA Group" means the Canadian Standards Association.
   (19)   Custom-design boiler. "Custom-design boiler" means a boiler designed
for a specific installation.
   (20)   Department. "Department" shall mean the New York City Department of
Environmental Protection.
   (21)   Draft. "Draft" shall mean negative static pressure, measured relative
to atmospheric pressure.
   (22)   Dual-fuel. "Dual-fuel" means any equipment that uses both heating oil
and gas as a fuel.
   (23)   Equivalent diameter. The term "equivalent diameter" referred to in
the definition of transition section means the equivalent diameter of a square
or rectangular section based on equal friction.
   (24)   ETL. "ETL" is the name of the certification listed mark from
Intertek.
   (25)   Existing equipment. "Existing equipment" refers to any combustion
equipment or apparatus legally installed before the promulgation of this
chapter.
   (26)   Flame impingement. "Flame impingement" refers to the condition which
exists when the flame resulting from the combustion of the fuel comes into
contact with any interior surface of the furnace in such a way as to result in
incomplete combustion of the fuel. Such condition may manifest itself in the
formation of carbon at the contact location.
   (27)   Fuel oil grade no. 2. "Fuel oil grade no. 2" means a fuel oil meeting
the current definition of fuel oil grade no. 2 as classified by ASTM
International Standard D 396-12.
   (28)   Fuel oil grade no 4. "Fuel oil grade no. 4" means a fuel oil meeting
the current definition of fuel oil grade No. 4 as classified by ASTM
International Standard D 396-12.
   (29)   Fuel oil grade no 6. "Fuel oil grade no. 6" means a fuel oil meeting
the current definition of fuel oil grade No. 6 as classified by ASTM
International Standard D 396-12.
   (30)   Flue gases. "Flue gases" means the products of combustion passing
through the flue connection to the chimney.
   (31)   Furnace volume. "Furnace volume" is the space encompassed by the
chamber floor, the refractory walls, the heat absorbing water walls of the
boiler firebox, and the crown sheet, shell or water tubes of the boiler. If a
target wall is installed in the furnace, the furnace volume shall be reduced by
the volume behind the face of the target wall.
   (32)   Heat release. "Heat release" is the heat liberated by the combustion
of the fuel (Btu/hr) per cubic foot of furnace volume.
   (33)   In-Kind Replacement. "In-kind replacement" means the replacement of a
boiler or burner with equipment of the same make and model number.
   (34)   Induced draft fan. "Induced draft fan" is an acceptable fan intended
for removal of flue gases from the boiler and providing pressure differential
for proper combustion.
   (35)   Louver efficiency. "Louver efficiency" means the percentage of the
total open area, not including obstructions such as blades and the frame,
divided by the gross area of the louver.
   (36)   Low-fire setting. "Low-fire setting" is the setting which determines
the oil firing rate at which burner ignition occurs where low-high-off, low-
high-low-off, or modulating combustion controls are utilized based upon the
manufacturer's recommendations.
   (37)   Low-high-low-off combustion control. "Low-high-low-off combustion
control" is a control capable of initiating the burner such that ignition
occurs at the low-fire setting, after which the burner fires at the maximum
heat input rating in order to satisfy the demand, and varies the coordinated
fuel-air input, between the maximum heat input rating rate and the low-fire as
a result of variations in demand.
   (38)   Low-high-off-combustion control. "Low-high-off combustion control" is
a control capable of initiating the burner such that ignition occurs at the
low-fire setting, after which the burner fires at the maximum heat input rating
until the demand has been satisfied.
   (39)   Maximum Heat Input Rating. "Maximum heat input rating" means the
maximum steady-state fuel firing rate of the burner, measured in Btu per hour
of gross heat input, as determined by the manufacturer's design rating of the
burner.
   (40)   Mechanical ventilation. "Mechanical ventilation" is ventilation which
is provided by a fan capable of maintaining the room in which the fuel burning
equipment is located at a pressure not less than outside atmospheric pressure
while the combustion equipment is in operation.
   (41)   Natural Gas. "Natural gas" means a mixture of methane and other gases
with an odorant as supplied by the local utility serving the premises.
   (42)   New installation. "New installation" refers to new construction, for
which combustion equipment or apparatus is installed.
   (43)   Non-openable window. "Non-openable window" refers to lot line windows
which are not legally required for light and ventilation by the Building Code,
Multiple Dwelling Code or other regulatory rule, code or statute.
   (44)   NOx. "NOx" means the pollutant oxides of nitrogen which is the term
used to describe the sum of nitric oxide (NO), nitrogen dioxide (NO 2 ) and
other oxides of nitrogen.
   (45)   On-off combustion control. "On-off combustion control" is a control
capable of starting up or shutting down the burner in response to variations in
demand.
   (46)   Opacity. "Opacity" means the degree to which emissions reduce the
transmission of light and obscure the view of an object in the background.
Opacity is measured on a percent scale in accordance with U.S. EPA Method 9.
   (47)   Overall efficiency. "Overall efficiency" means the ratio of the
energy output to the energy input or the heat input minus all the losses.
   (48)   Owner. "Owner" means and includes the owner of the equipment, a
lessee of the equipment or his or her agent, a tenant, operator, or any other
person who has regular control of equipment or apparatus.
   (49)   Particulate. Particulate means any air or gas-borne material, except
water, that exists as a liquid or solid. The determination of the quantity of
particulates present in a stack shall be determined in accordance with U.S. EPA
Method 5.
   (50)   Percent oxygen (%O2). "Percent oxygen (%O 2 )" is the percentage of
the dry flue gases that the oxygen occupies.
   (51)   Post-purge. "Post-purge" refers to the function of operating the
burner fan after flame-out.
   (52)   Power operated draft regulator. "Power operated draft regulator" is a
control which is capable of maintaining a constant pressure in the furnace
under all normal operating conditions, and in addition is provided with a low-
draft cut-off which will shut the burner off when the draft falls below a pre-
selected minimum. The time relay shall delay switch action to prevent shut-down
from initial exaggerated fluctuations in pressure.
   (53)   Pre-purge. "Pre-purge" refers to the function of operating the burner
fan before flame ignition.
   (54)   Pressure differential. "Pressure differential" refers to the absolute
value of the difference in pressure between any two points in the system.
   (55)   Qualified combustion analyzer. "Qualified combustion analyzer" means
an instrument that is capable of directly measuring flue gas carbon monoxide,
oxygen, and the temperatures of the boiler room, stack gas, calculating
combustion efficiency for the specific fuel used, displaying the results, and
creating an electronic or printed record of the results. All qualified
combustion analyzers shall be calibrated to the manufacturer's specifications.
   (56)   Qualified combustion tester. "Qualified combustion tester" means (i)
a licensed New York City Class A and B oil burner equipment installer, (ii) a
professional engineer or registered architect licensed pursuant to Education
Law section 7202 or 7302, (iii) a New York City Licensed Master Plumber, (iv)
employees working under the supervision of those licensees listed in paragraphs
(i), (ii), or (iii) of this subdivision, or (v) persons who demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Commissioner that their experience (a minimum of two years
in related boiler work), qualifications, and references makes them qualified to
perform a combustion test.
   (57)   Radial distance. "Radial distance" means the shortest distance
between a receptor location and the centerline of the chimney outlet.
   (58)   Receptor. "Receptor" is any point at which a person in a nearby
building can become exposed to the flue gases emanating from the chimney of the
subject installation (e.g., openable window, occupiable terrace). Receptor
shall also include air-conditioning and ventilating intakes. (Note: non-
openable windows are not considered to be receptor locations.)
   (60)   Registration. "Registration" means a document issued by the
department for the installation and/or operation of a boiler or water heater
that has a heat input equal to or greater than 2.8 million BTU/hour but less
than 4.2 million BTU/hour.
   (61)   Smoke reading. "Smoke reading" means the measurement of smoke density
as measured in accordance with ASTM International Standard D 2156-09.
   (62)   Stack loss. "Stack loss" means the sensible heat carried away by the
dry flue gas and the sensible and latent heat carried away by the water vapor
in the flue gas.
   (63)   Transition section. "Transition section" means a section of duct,
breeching or stack used to connect these elements with structures of different
cross-sectional dimensions. The required length for such transition section
must conform with:
      L = 4(D 1 -D 2 )
      Where, 
         D 1 = the diameter (or equivalent diameter) of the larger cross-
sectional structures.
         D 2 = the diameter (or equivalent diameter) of the smaller cross-
sectional structures.
   (64)   Venting Calculations: "Venting calculations" means calculations that
determine the acceptance of the combustion air supply and boiler flue gas
venting. These calculations include:
      (1)   Flue venting: draft for atmospheric or non-power vented boilers,
equivalent length for direct vent or sealed combustion appliances,
      (2)   Combustion air: louvers, dedicated inlet or infiltration.
   (65)   UL. "UL" means the Underwriters' Laboratory.
   (66)   Water Heater. "Water heater" means equipment which is used to heat
and store water.
   (67)   Work Permit. "Work permit" means a permit issued for the installation
of a device or apparatus.
(Amended City Record 5/13/2016, eff. 6/12/2016)
§ 2-03 Variances.
   (a)   An application for any variance from these rules shall be made
directly to the Department using an application form prescribed by the
department. Work involving a variance may not commence before the receipt of
the department's approval of the application, which will be reviewed and
processed within four weeks.
   (b)   The variance application shall be prepared by a professional engineer
or registered architect and submitted by the owner or authorized agent, and
must submit the application with the following information:
      (1)   Identification of those portions of the rules for which a variance
is requested, providing each numbered section and subsection;
      (2)   Explanations as to why the procedures required by the rules would
cause unreasonable hardship;
      (3)   A written proposal describing the alternative procedures the
applicant will employ to satisfy the requirement as modified.
   (c)   The department will approve or deny the variance application to be
filed on a form prescribed by the department, after considering several factors
including whether the applicant has demonstrated undue hardship.
§ 2-04 Application for Work Permit/Certificate of Operation.
   (a)   Filing of application.
      (1)   The application, supplementary data and calculation sheet(s) and
plans must be signed and sealed by a professional engineer or registered
architect licensed under §§ 7202 or 7302 of the New York State Education Law.
The application must include all essential details pertaining to the equipment,
and the manner in which new equipment will be installed. The department may
accept online applications from licensed individuals who pre-register with the
department. All documents must be professionally certified by the same person.
      (2)   Only one type and size of equipment may be included on any one
application. For example, a boiler and furnace, different sizes of similar
equipment, identical boilers with different (although equivalent) burners must
be filed separately.
      (3)   When filed, the application must include any supplementary data and
calculation sheet(s), plans and any additional forms as may be required by the
department.
      (4)   All filings specifying condensing boilers must be submitted with
the installation specific ventilation requirements (louver or mechanical
ventilation fan specifics), breeching requirements (dimensions and length
specifics), and chimney (stack) requirements (dimensions and height specifics)
obtained from the manufacturer. Such calculations and summary sheets must be
submitted. The filing engineer must certify that all of the manufacturer's
recommendations and specifications will be followed in the use of materials,
design, installation, and operation of the condensing boiler. The fresh-air
requirements, draft calculations, chimney, and breeching plan required in this
section must not apply to condensing boilers.
   (b)   Contents of application. The application must include the following:
      (1)   The authorization of the equipment owner and his or her name,
address and signature. The signature must be that of the proprietor where the
business is a sole proprietorship. If the business is a partnership, the
signature must be that of a partner. In the case of a corporation, the
signature must be that of an officer of the corporation. In all instances, the
signatory must indicate his or her title after his or her signature.
      (2)   The certification of the engineer or architect and his name,
address, signature and seal.
      (3)   A licensed oil-burner installer must certify all oil burning
installations and dual-fuel installations. A licensed oil-burner installer or a
licensed plumber must certify all gas-fired installations.
         (i)   If, at the time of filing an application, an installer has not
yet been selected, the statement "To be submitted on amendment" must be shown
on the application form in place of the certification of the licensed
installer. The department will notify the engineer or architect when the
application is approved. The work permit will not, however, be issued until the
required certification and information is submitted.
      (4)   Heat load calculations. Heat load calculations must be submitted
for new and replacement boilers only when the boiler maximum heat input rate
size changes by more than 20 percent greater than the previously filed
application of record. Heat load calculations must consist of a summary sheet
documenting the boiler horsepower needed to meet the building load condition,
consistent with the ASHRAE procedures, see 2009 ASHRAE Fundamentals, Chapters
17 and 18.
      (5)   Detailed data on equipment. Detailed data (as specified here) on
the specific type of existing equipment or new equipment which is to be
installed. Note that in the case of existing equipment, if a reasonable effort
to determine the make and model number proves unsuccessful, an attempt must be
made to compare unknown equipment to an equivalent known unit of equipment.
      (6)   Venting Calculations. Venting calculations for stack draft adequacy
must be required for all new buildings, boilers, and chimneys. Calculations
must be submitted on a form prescribed by the department or through summary
sheets from computerized or hand venting calculations that conform to
procedures in 2009 ASHRAE Fundamentals Chapter 21 and 2012 ASHRAE Systems and
Equipment Chapter 35. The calculations must be stamped by a professional
engineer. If needed, the department reserves the right to request that detailed
venting calculations be submitted if further review is required.
   (c)   Plans.
      (1)   The plans, as specified below, must be filed, with each application
and must include the premise address of the installation. The plans must not be
smaller than 8 1/2 × 11 inches nor larger than 11 x 17 inches and details must
be shown legibly in black ink on a white background. When approved, the plans
must be so designated and returned with the approved work permit. In addition
to the specifics indicated below, elevation and plan views of various aspects
of the installation must be required to schematically show the location of
equipment, apparatus, controls, etc. Non-related piping, valves, electric
wiring, controls and other construction details must not be included.
      (2)   Plot plan. The plot plan must include the following:
         (i)   building location.
         (ii)   location and names of cross streets and the northerly
direction.
         (iii)   location of the boiler room and the stack outlet.
         (iv)   a statement which certifies: "The chimney extends a minimum
distance of 3 ft above all construction located within 10 ft of the centerline
of the chimney outlet."
         (v)   for new chimneys, a statement that certifies: "The minimum
radial distance from the centerline of the chimney to an acceptable receptor
location is ________ ft," with the distance specified.
         (vi)   for existing chimneys, a statement that certifies: "The minimum
radial distance from the centerline of the existing chimney to an acceptable
receptor location
            (a)   located at a height equal to or greater than the chimney
outlet is ________ ft and
            (b)   located below the chimney outlet is ________ ft," with the
distance specified.
         (vii)   the engineer or architect must determine the distances for
subdivisions (iv), (v), and (vi), to be shown in the blank spaces, in
accordance with 15 RCNY §
2-13.
      (3)   Boiler room layout. The boiler room layout must include the
following:
         (i)   boiler location.
         (ii)   burner location.
         (iii)   breeching layout schematic, including the length, elbows,
cross sectional dimensions; and location of "test holes." In addition, a plan
note must be required which indicates specific compliance with the distance
requirements of "test holes" from dampers, etc.
         (iv)   location and cross-sectional dimensions of the stack. Only the
cross-sectional dimension of the outlet must be required for existing stacks.
         (v)   location of fixed ventilation. Ducts and other such pertinent
details must be shown and dimensioned. Length, elbows, cross-sectional
dimensions and inlet and outlet locations must be included for any new
ventilation ducts.
         (vi)   location of smoke alarms, draft controls, oil meters, fans,
cleanouts, fuel pumps, etc., when applicable. These locations may be shown
schematically.
         (vii)   locations of all combustion equipment located in the same room
or on the same stack and not covered by the subject application, including the
manufacturer, model number, and fuel delivery rate when not shown on the
application. The fixed ventilation supplied for all combustion equipment must
be clearly shown on the plans, even if all such equipment is not covered by the
subject application.
         (viii)   a plan note must be acceptable in all instances where they
serve the same purpose as plan details.
      (4)   Boiler plan. The boiler plan must include the following:
         (i)   plan and elevation views of the boiler showing overall boiler
dimensions.
         (ii)   combustion chamber dimensions.
         (iii)   furnace volume and heat release calculations. When the
manufacturer's drawings with specifications are being submitted as a boiler
plan, all copies must also specifically contain the model number, boiler gross
output, actual total furnace volume, heat release, address of premise. Field
measurements can be accepted for existing boilers in place of the
manufacturer's drawings. Professional engineer/registered architect seal and
signature is required for manufacturer's drawings and field measurement
submittals.
      (5)   Certificate of Compliance. All oil-fired boilers and associated
burners, boiler/burner assemblies, and control equipment installed under this
chapter must comply with the following equipment acceptance requirements. This
ensures that such equipment meets the minimum design and performance standards
of the department. The list of accepted equipment will be posted on the
internet, through a web portal that is linked to nyc.gov or any successor
website maintained by, or on behalf, of the city of New York. Equipment may be
added to the list of accepted equipment upon application from the manufacturer
on a form prescribed by the department, or where the department determines that
the equipment has performed in a satisfactory manner.
Equipment Acceptance Requirements
         (a)   List of accepted equipment. If the application for the work
permit is to install equipment that appears on the list of accepted equipment,
no additional certification is required.
         (b)   UL/CSA/ETL listed equipment. If the application for the work
permit is to install equipment that is listed by UL, CSA Group, or ETL, a
certification of compliance from a professional engineer must be submitted on a
form prescribed by the department.
         (c)   Unlisted and custom equipment. If the application for the work
permit is to install custom equipment, or equipment that is not on the
department's list of accepted equipment and is not UL, CSA Group, or ETL-
listed, a certification of compliance from a professional engineer must be
submitted on a form prescribed by the department.
§ 2-05 Application for Registration.
   (a)   Filing of application. 
      (1)   The application must be signed by the owner. The application must
include all essential details pertaining to the equipment as set forth on the
application form, and the manner in which new equipment will be installed. All
documents must be certified by a professional engineer or registered architect.
      (2)   Only one type and size of equipment may be included on any one
application. For example, applications for a boiler and a furnace, which
constitute similar equipment of different sizes, or applications for identical
boilers with different (although equivalent) burners must be filed separately.
      (3)   When filed, the application must include any supplementary data and
calculation sheet(s), plans and any additional forms required by the department
by rule.
   (b)   Contents of application. The application must include the following:
      (1)   The authorization of the equipment owner and his or her name,
address and signature. The application must be signed by the proprietor where
the business is a sole proprietorship. If the business is a partnership, the
application must be signed by a partner. In the case of a corporation, the
application must be signed by an officer of the corporation. In all instances,
the signatory must indicate his or her title after his or her signature.
      (2)   A licensed professional engineer or architect must certify the
following:
         i.   Venting calculations for stack/draft adequacy, which shall meet
the same criteria as set forth in 15 RCNY §
2-04(b)(6).
         ii.   Certificate of Compliance. All oil-fired boilers and associated
burners, boiler/burner assemblies, and control equipment installed under this
chapter must comply with the following equipment acceptance requirements so
that such equipment meets the minimum design and performance standards of the
department.
            Equipment Acceptance Requirements
            (a)   List of accepted equipment. If the application for the
registration is to install equipment that appears on the list of accepted
equipment, no additional certification is required.
            (b)   UL/CSA/ETL listed equipment. If the application for the
registration is to install equipment that is listed by UL, CSA Group, or ETL, a
certification of compliance from a professional engineer must be submitted on a
form prescribed by the department and available on the department's website.
            (c)   Unlisted and custom equipment. If the application for the
registration is to install custom equipment, or equipment that is not on the
department's list of accepted equipment and is not UL, CSA Group, or ETL-
listed, a certification of compliance from a professional engineer must be
submitted on a form prescribed by the department and available on the
department's website.
   (c)   Boiler Room Plan. The plans, as specified below, must be filed with
each application and must include the premise address of the installation. The
plans must not be smaller than 8 1/2 by 11 inches nor larger than 11 by 17
inches and details must be shown legibly in black ink on a white background.
      (1)   The boiler room layout must include the following:
         (i)   boiler location.
         (ii)   burner location.
         (iii)   breeching layout schematic, including the length, elbows,
cross sectional dimensions; and location of "test holes."
         (iv)   location and cross-sectional dimensions of the stack. Only the
cross-sectional dimension of the outlet is required for existing stacks.
         (v)   location of fixed ventilation. Ducts and other such pertinent
details must be shown along with their dimensions. Length, elbows, cross-
sectional dimensions and inlet and outlet locations must be included for any
new ventilation ducts.
         (vi)   location of smoke alarms, draft controls, fans, cleanouts, when
applicable. These locations may be shown schematically.
         (vii)   locations of all combustion equipment located in the same room
or on the same stack and not covered by the subject application, including the
manufacturer, model number, and fuel delivery rate when not shown on the
application. The fixed ventilation supplied for all combustion equipment must
be clearly shown on the plans, even if all such equipment is not covered by the
subject application.
   (2)   A licensed oil-burner installer must certify all oil burning
installations and dual-fuel installations. A licensed oil-burner installer or a
licensed plumber must certify all gas-fired installations.
(Amended City Record 5/13/2016, eff. 6/12/2016)
§ 2-06 Field Verification.
   (a)   (1)   New certificate of operation requests. A request for inspection
must be submitted by the installer or owner and must include the installer's
certification that the installation has been completed in accordance with the
Notice of Application/Plans Approval and is ready for inspection.
      (2)   The request for inspection must be submitted using forms prescribed
by the department. The request must be submitted within thirty days of the
equipment being capable of operation and before the expiration of the work
permit.
   (b)   Certificate of operation renewals. The owner of a device that is
required to have a certificate of operation or the owner's authorized
representative must submit a request for inspection using a form prescribed by
the department.
   (c)   Appointments. An appointment, arranged by the department, must be made
such that the installer or owner must meet the department's engineer at the
specified time and meeting place. Installations must be complete and ready for
testing when the inspecting engineer(s) arrives. The owner or his
representative must ensure that the following facilities and/or conditions
exist so as to enable the department's engineer to properly evaluate the
installation:
      (1)   That entry and suitable access to all parts of the equipment and
apparatus is provided.
      (2)   That adequate lighting is provided throughout the boiler room.
      (3)   That facilities, not necessarily of a permanent nature (for example
a sturdy, appropriately sized ladder, or ladders), are provided to enable
proper verification and testing of the installation. Wooden ladders are not
acceptable.
      (4)   That the boiler room has no health and safety hazards. The
existence of disintegrating suspected asbestos containing material, water or
steam leak from a pressurized boiler, flue gas leak from the breeching,
inadequate lighting, or any other hazard will preclude an inspection and
performance test and will result in the issuance of a Notice of Installation
Disapproval.
      (5)   That all equipment can be readily identified with regard to make,
model, type, and any other applicable characteristics or designations.
   (d)   Approvals and Reinspections.
      (i)   Upon completion of a satisfactory performance test and approval of
inspection, the design firing rate of the burner must not be increased without
notification to the department, and modification to the work permit / plan
approval.
      (ii)   A reinspection will be required for failed performance tests and/
or a disapproval of inspection. An additional form prescribed by the department
must be submitted in order for the reinspection to occur.
   (e)   This section applies to registrations that are subject to the
requirements of 15 RCNY §
2-01. 
(Amended City Record 5/13/2016, eff. 6/12/2016)
§ 2-07 Cancellation of Field Appointments.
   (a)   A request to cancel an appointment must be submitted in writing at
least 2 business days before the inspection date unless due to an emergency.
   (b)   The request for a new inspection must be made in accordance with 15
RCNY §
2-06.
   (c)   A second inspection cancellation for the same equipment will result in
the issuance of a Notice of Installation Disapproval.
§ 2-08 Performance Testing.
   (a)   Performance requirements.
      (1)   All installations, including pre-existing equipment, must be
required to operate such that upon evaluation of performance tests (as outlined
in subdivision (e) below) it is determined that they meet the following minimum
requirements:
      (2)   When the boiler is fired at 80 to 110 percent of the burner's
maximum operational oil/gas delivery rate as specified in the application,
provided that this is less than the burner's maximum design oil/gas delivery
rate, oil burning installations must have a combustion efficiency of at least
83 percent and gas burning installations must have a combustion efficiency of
at least 80 percent. Dual-fuel installations must meet the requirements for
each respective fuel.
         Oil fired installations which cannot achieve a combustion efficiency
of at least 83 percent but which can achieve a combustion efficiency of at
least 80 percent will have no more than one renewal cycle (three years) in
which to perform necessary alterations to bring the equipment into compliance.
Gas fired installations which cannot achieve a combustion efficiency of at
least 80 percent will have one renewal cycle (three years) in which to perform
necessary alterations to bring the equipment into compliance.
      (3)   When the boiler is fired at 80 to 110 percent of the burner's
maximum operational oil/gas delivery rate as specified in the application,
provided that this is less than the burner's maximum design oil/gas delivery
rate, the maximum acceptable smoke reading must be smoke spot no. 3 in
accordance with ASTM International Standard D 2156-09.
      (4)   When the boiler is fired at 80 to 110 percent of the burner's
maximum operational oil/gas delivery rate as specified in the application,
provided that this is less than the burner's maximum design oil/gas delivery
rate), the installation must be capable of providing adequate pressure
differential (e.g., draft) at conditions specified in subdivision (e) of this
section.
      (5)   For installations which have low-high-low-off or modulating
combustion controls, adherence to the requirements in paragraphs (a)(1) and
(2), listed above, must also be demonstrated when the burner is fired at low-
fire. For installations which utilize modulating combustion controls, the
department requires and reserves the right to verify that the performance
requirements in paragraphs (a)(1) and (2), listed above, are also met at
intermediate firing rates.
      (6)   For multiple boiler installations the requirements in paragraphs
(a)(1), (2), (3) and (4), listed above, must be demonstrated for each boiler
when said boilers are operated simultaneously rather than individually when
there is sufficient load demand from the premise. However, each boiler in a
multiple boiler installation, when fired separately (i.e., all other boilers
are shut down), must also meet these requirements and the department reserves
the right to verify same.
      (7)   In no case must the flame impinge on any interior surface within
the furnace.
   (b)   Preparation for performance tests. In order to facilitate
implementation of the performance test by the department's engineer, provision
must be made by the installer, sufficiently in advance of the scheduled
inspection, such that:
      (1)   Continuous, uninterrupted operation of the boiler at 80 to 110
percent of the burner's maximum operational oil/gas delivery rate as specified
in the application, provided that this is less than the burner's maximum design
oil/gas delivery rate, for a minimum period of twenty minutes is insured. Under
no circumstances must the boiler pressure relief valve(s) be tampered with to
accomplish this.
      (2)   Two 3/8 inch diameter holes are provided in the breeching,
approximately 4 inches apart and placed so that the one closest to the boiler
is approximately one breeching diameter downstream from the boiler outlet.
Since these holes must be used for the measurement of boiler outlet gas
temperature, percentage of O 2 and smoke reading, it is important that they be
placed in the system such that air infiltration from a barometric damper, smoke
alarm port, etc., does not affect the composition of the combustion gases.
      (3)   Two 3/8 inch diameter holes are provided in the breeching placed
one on each side of any power operated draft regulator damper, approximately
one breeching diameter from the centerline of the damper. Note that the
location of one or both of these holes may, of necessity, be in the boiler
outlet.
      (4)   All test holes are a minimum of one breeching diameter from any
flow disturbance such as a bend, expansion or contraction.
      (5)   Any insulation is neatly removed from approximately a 4" × 4" area
surrounding any test hole in the breeching.
      (6)   All test holes are kept closed with a sheet metal screw or other
acceptable method when not being used for testing purposes. All test holes must
be marked in such a way that their location can be readily determined.
   (c)   Performance test equipment. All test data obtained during the
performance test must be recorded on a form provided by the department.
   (d)   Procedure for performance tests. The following is an outline of the
procedure which must be used to obtain data necessary for evaluating the
performance of an installation and determining whether it meets the
requirements specified in subdivision (a), above.
      (1)   Verify that all conditions in the boiler room are characteristic of
proper operating conditions (i.e., boiler room door is shut, non-fixed
ventilation sources such as windows are shut, etc.).
      (2)   The burner must be started up and operated at 80 to 110 percent of
the burner maximum operational oil/gas delivery rate as specified in the
application, provided that this is less than the burner's maximum design oil/
gas delivery rate, depending on the demand load throughout the sequence of
steps specified in paragraph (4) below.
      (3)   The probe(s) of the testing equipment must be inserted into the
test holes provided at the required locations.
      (4)   Commencing after burner startup, boiler outlet gas temperature must
be read at one minute intervals until the difference between two successive
readings is not greater than 5°F at which time steady state conditions will be
assumed and the following data must be obtained and recorded:
         (i)   The boiler outlet gas temperature must be determined. In
addition, the ambient air boiler room temperature in the vicinity of the burner
must be determined.
         (ii)   The percent oxygen (O 2 ) in the flue gas must be determined.
         (iii)   The pressure differential across the damper of a power
operated draft regulator must be determined. This is not applicable to
condensing boilers.
            (A)   The pressure differential measurements and the gas
temperature and outside ambient air temperature measurements must be used to
determine whether adequate pressure differential (e.g., draft) can be provided
when outside ambient air temperature is 94F.
            (B)   When a power operated draft regulator is used, the pressure
differential measured across the damper must be equal to or greater than the
value obtained when the height of the stack (H) is multiplied by ΔDr/H, i.e.
               ΔP ≥ H × (ΔDr/H)
               where,
                  ΔP (inches H 2 O) is the pressure differential measured
across the power operated draft regulator damper.
                  ΔDr/H (inches H 2 O/ft) is the differential draft per foot
obtained from Table I using the outside ambient temperature measured when the
performance test was conducted.
                  H (feet) is the height of the stack.
            (C)   When a barometric or manual damper is used, the theoretical
pressure differential caused by the barometric or manual damper must be equal
to or greater than the value obtained when the height of the stack is
multiplied by ΔDr/H, i.e.
               ΔP ≥ H × (ΔDr/H)
               where ΔP, ΔDr/H, and H are defined in (B).
The static pressure is measured at the boiler outlet. The barometric damper or
manual damper is gradually opened until the calculated DP is measured. The
barometric damper is then returned to its original setting and the manual
damper is then returned to its initial position and fixed. The department will
review alternative demonstrations of adequate pressure differential if they
comply with 2009 ASHRAE Fundamentals Chapter 21, and are stamped by a
professional engineer.
      (5)   The smoke reading must be determined and recorded in accordance
with ASTM D 2156 (2009).
      (6)   For boilers which have low-high-low-off or modulating controls,
upon completion of the above sequence of steps, the burner firing rate must be
changed to low-fire for all boilers with a maximum heat input rating greater
than 4.2 million Btu per hour.
      (7)   Dual-fuel burners will be tested separately for oil and gas on high
fire and on low-fire if the maximum heat input rating is greater than 4.2
million Btu per hour.
      (8)   For multiple boiler installations, all boilers must be started up
and operated simultaneously at 80 to 110 percent of their respective maximum
operational oil/gas delivery rates as specified in the application, provided
that this is less than the burner's maximum design oil/gas delivery rate, and
the boiler outlet gas temperature, boiler room ambient air temperature,
percentage of O 2 , smoke reading, and pressure differential must be determined
for each boiler. The burner firing rates for all boilers must then be changed
to their respective low-fire firing rates, and the boiler outlet gas
temperature, boiler room ambient air temperature, percentage of O 2 in the flue
gas, and smoke reading, must be determined for each boiler at this firing rate.
   (e)   Evaluation. The boiler outlet gas temperature, boiler room air
temperature, percentage of O 2 in the flue gas, draft measurement, and smoke
reading data must be used to determine whether the installation meets the
minimum performance requirements for combustion efficiency, adequate reserve
draft and smoke reading.
§ 2-09 Annual Tune-ups and Record Keeping Requirements.
An owner of equipment that is required to have a certificate of operation must
perform annual tune-ups and combustion tests. Records of the dates and
procedures of each tune-up and results of these tests must be kept by the owner
for a minimum of five years and must be submitted within five business days if
requested by the department.
   (a)   Annual equipment tune-ups and combustion efficiency test.
      (1)   The owner of the equipment must commission a tune-up for the
equipment and test the combustion efficiency. The tune-up and combustion
efficiency test must occur at both high-fire and normal operating conditions.
         (i)   A qualified combustion tester must perform a combustion
efficiency test for each piece of equipment and each oil fired boiler in
accordance with 15 RCNY §
2-08(a)(1).
         (ii)   The tune-up required to increase boiler efficiency must be
conducted in accordance with Subpart JJJJJJ of Part 63 of Title 40 of the Code
of Federal Regulations and the guidelines outlined by the department. The
results of the tune-up must be recorded on a form provided by the department.
   (b)   Combustion Analyzer Requirements.
      (1)   The combustion efficiency test must be performed using a qualified
combustion analyzer that has passed an annual calibration test. The results of
the annual calibration test must be kept and be submitted within five business
days if requested by the department. If the minimum combustion efficiencies are
not achieved, it is the responsibility of the owner to ensure proper
maintenance and repairs occur.
      (2)   The equipment used must conform with the following requirements:
 
              Accuracy Resolution 
Oxygen (O 2 )  + 0.2%   0.1%
Pressure/Draft + 2%     0.04" water column
Temperature    + 0.5%   0.1 °F
 
An optional test using the following standards may be applied as provided in
the following chart:
 
                    Accuracy                   Resolution 
Carbon Monoxide (CO) + 2 ppm at 0.0 to 39.9 ppm 0.1 ppm
                     + 5% at 40.0 to 500 ppm
Nitric Oxide (NO)    + 5 ppm at 0 - 100 ppm     1 ppm
                     + 5% 101 - 2,000 ppm
 
      (3)   The following procedure must be followed in the use of the
combustion analyzer:
         (i)   Set up the combustion analyzer per manufacturer's instructions.
In uncontaminated air (outdoor) start the analyzer and allow unit to complete
the zeroing process. Never allow the analyzer to zero in the breeching.
         (ii)   Verify that the combustion analyzer condensate/water trap plug/
access is properly sealed, that there is no water in the water trap, and
thermocouple tip is not touching the side of probe tube. The test and record
measurement criteria must be provided on a form prescribed by the department.
   (c)   This section applies to registrations that are subject to the
requirements of 15 RCNY §
2-01. 
(Amended City Record 5/13/2016, eff. 6/12/2016)
§ 2-10 [Reserved.]
§ 2-11 Installation Design.
   (a)   General considerations.
      (1)   All equipment and apparatuses, in addition to complying with the
requirements of the department, must also meet the requirements of other
agencies, such as the New York City Board of Standards and Appeals, the Fire
Department of New York, and the New York City Department of Buildings.
Compliance with any requirements of either New York State or federal rules and
regulations that may be instituted and not covered here is required. In the
absence of any regulatory provisions, consideration must be given to
recommendations published in the standards of nationally recognized
organizations. These organizations include the American National Standards
Institute, the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air Conditioning
Engineers, the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, the American Gas
Institute, Underwriters' Laboratories, and the National Fire Protection
Association, and the recommendations of equipment or apparatus manufacturers.
      (2)   The design engineer must estimate the heat demand before selecting
a boiler or boilers. When application is made for an installation for a new
structure or for a replacement boiler (when the boiler maximum heat input
rating size is increased by more than 20 percent from the previously filed
application of record), the analysis and calculations for estimating the heat
demand must be submitted in a form acceptable to the department. This must be
done in accordance with the procedures prescribed by the 2009 ASHRAE
Fundamentals Handbook, or as required for the New York City Energy Conservation
Code, as codified in Chapter 10 of Title 28 of the New York City Administrative
Code, and as accepted by the department.
      (3)   For dual-fuel installations using #6 or #4 fuel oil as a back-up
fuel for natural gas, design requirements set forth by the department must be
followed. However, these installations must still meet the #2 fuel oil emission
standards and must be held to the most recent performance requirements.
   (b)   Fuel burners.
      (1)   An oil burner must be capable of atomizing the oil by properly
mixing it with adequate combustion air. A gas-fired burner must be capable of
mixing the gas with adequate combustion air.
      (2)   A new burner must be listed by UL, CSA Group, ETL, or any other
national recognized testing laboratory that uses UL testing conditions and have
their Listing Mark label.
      (3)   A new burner, except for atmospheric equipment, must have, integral
with it, a fan which is capable of supplying all combustion air.
      (4)   A burner must be sized such that, when fired with a boiler, the
fuel delivery rate is within 80 percent and 110 percent of the maximum heat
input rating of the boiler.
   (c)   Fresh Air Requirements.
      (1)   Provision must be made to provide a sufficient amount of air for
proper combustion (to the oil-or natural gas-burning equipment room) and, in
addition, a sufficient amount of bypass air necessary for the proper operation
of a barometric damper when used. In addition, sufficient air must be provided
to adequately ventilate the room and maintain the ambient temperature at safe
and comfortable limits under normal conditions of use. In all cases a separate
ventilation system must be provided independent of any other ventilation
system.
         (i)   Mechanical ventilation must be designed such that 226 cfm @ 94F
is provided for each million Btu per hour for up to 30 percent excess
combustion air. Larger fan capacities would be needed for installations
operating with greater than 30 percent excess combustion air. In all cases,
where the combustion air is not ducted directly from the outside to the burner
air intake, the room in which the burning equipment is located must be
maintained at a pressure not less than outside atmospheric pressure. Exhaust
fans are acceptable for ventilation provided the net ventilation is greater
than or equal to the amount required for combustion.
         (ii)   When mechanical ventilation is not utilized, the minimum
requirement for combustion air entrance must be a louvered opening in a wall to
the outside air. The louvered opening must have a net free area of 86 square
inches for every one million Btu per hour (based on the maximum heat input
rating) and must never be less than the average internal cross-sectional area
of the chimney. In addition, the net free area of the louver must be increased
in size equivalent to the opening of a barometric damper or dampers, when
provided, for bypass air. When necessary, a metal grate over a vault below the
sidewalk may be permitted as long as the net free area requirement is met and
suitable drainage facilities are provided. The net free area when the actual
louver efficiency is unknown must be based on a maximum efficiency of 60
percent for both motorized and fixed metal single vane louvers and 50 percent
for fixed metal double vane louvers. Where the efficiency of the louver can be
demonstrated by the manufacturer to be greater than the above, the greater
value may be used. The area of the louver is to be based on the inside frame
dimensions and not the outside or nominal dimensions. The louver must be so
constructed or suitably located or protected (i.e., cinder blocks, metal bars)
so that it cannot be crushed or deformed since this would diminish the free
area. Furthermore, any reduction of free area due to protective devices must be
considered. Screening over louvers, if provided, must be not smaller than 1/
4 inch mesh and must be readily accessible for cleaning.
         (iii)   When ducts are required to provide fresh air, they must meet
the same minimum requirement for cross-sectional area as specified in
subparagraph (ii) above. Note that a louver is not required where ducts are
utilized to provide ventilation, although, consideration should be given to
protective devices and any diminution of free area resulting from same. Access
ports must be provided for the purpose of cleaning and observing conditions
within the duct(s). All access ports must be ample size, but not less than 8 ×
8 inches. A tight metal fitting cover must be provided for each port. All ports
must be closed when not in use.
            (A)   Access ports for cleanout must be located to allow
accessibility to all duct sections and must be placed at intervals to allow for
safe and reasonable access to all sections of the breeching for the purposes of
cleaning. The number of clean-outs must be determined by the configuration of
the duct lay-out. Every duct must be provided with at least one access port for
cleanout.
            (B)   Access ports for observation purposes must be provided within
one diameter of all internal dampers.
            (C)   One access port may be used to serve both functions if
suitably located.
         (iv)   Motorized louvers or motorized dampers in ducts must be
provided, on installations where the maximum heat input rate of the boiler(s)
is 7.0 million Btu per hour or greater which must close off the admission of
combustion air during burner-off periods.
      (2)   Breeching must be installed so as to vent the combustion gases from
the boiler to the chimney.
         (i)   Access ports must be provided for the purpose of cleaning and
observing conditions within the breeching. All access ports must be of ample
size but not less than 8 × 8 inches. A tight fitting metal cover must be
provided for each port. All ports must be closed when not in use.
            (A)   Access ports for the cleanout of oil burning installations
must be located to allow accessibility to all breeching sections and must be
placed at intervals to allow for safe and reasonable access to all sections of
the breeching for the purposes of cleaning. The number of clean-outs must be
determined by the configuration of the breeching lay-out. Every breeching must
be provided with at least one access port for cleanout.
            (B)   For short breeching runs (less than 15 feet in total), the
barometric damper may be used as the clean-out port.
            (C)   Access ports for observation purposes must be provided within
one diameter of all internal motorized damper locations.
            (D)   One access port may be used to serve both functions if
suitably located.
         (ii)   The following should be considered when designing a new
breeching:
            (A)   The equivalent inside diameter should normally be no smaller
than the outlet of the boiler and should be sized on the basis of maintaining a
flue gas velocity not greater than 30 feet per second.
            (B)   Breechings should be as short and straight as possible to
prevent unnecessary draft losses (which may necessitate larger chimneys,
induced draft fans, etc.).
            (C)   Breechings should be constructed so that changes in
direction, shape and cross-sectional area are accomplished separately. All such
changes should be accomplished as gradually as possible to eliminate turbulence
with consequent adverse effects on available draft. If the width of breeching
is greater than the inside width of the chimney, a contoured transition piece
should be installed. The transition section should maintain the area of the
breeching while altering its configuration so as not to exceed the chimney
width.
            (D)   The breeching connection to the chimney should be such that
it ends flush with the inside surface of the chimney.
      (3)   Chimneys must be designed and installed so as to vent the products
of combustion to the atmosphere while at the same time avoiding a potential or
actual nuisance. Chimneys must not be fitted with raincaps or covers of any
kind.
         (i)   New chimneys or reconstructed chimneys must be of tight
construction and must be provided with a cleanout chamber at the base. The
chamber must have a horizontal cross-sectional area equal to that of the
chimney and must be equipped with a tightly fitted metal door of ample size but
not less than 8 × 8 inches. The bottom of the breeching must be located at
least one chimney diameter above the base of the cleanout chamber. Factory-made
chimneys and special gas vents must be installed per the manufacturer's
specifications.
   (d)   Control devices.
      (1)   A boiler must be provided with acceptable control device(s) so as
to maintain the desired boiler output under all normal operating conditions to
meet the minimum performance requirements described in 15 RCNY §
2-08.
      (2)   A burner must be provided with acceptable control device(s) so as
to maintain the desired fuel-air ratio under all normal operating conditions to
assure complete and smokeless combustion.
      (3)   The burner control system must be permanently interlocked, unless
the system is continuously staffed and supervised, with all ventilation fans,
motorized louvers and dampers to prevent operation of the burner without the
proper operation of the fan, louver, or damper. This must be accomplished with
an air switch, or other approved means, to assure that the fan is operating or
that the louver/damper has opened before the main fuel valve opens. This
requirement does not prohibit operating fans and opening louvers or dampers for
ventilation purposes during periods when the burner(s) are not in operation,
although continuous, uninterrupted operation of the fan, independent of the
burner, must not be permitted except for existing central ventilation systems.
      (4)   Provision must be made, concerning the burner fan, to cause minimum
pre-purge and post-purge periods as recommended by the burner manufacturer to
prevent accumulation of unburned oil.
   (e)   Draft Regulators.
      (1)   All installations must be designed such that an adequate draft can
be maintained to provide sufficient combustion air and remove the products of
combustion under normal conditions of use or when the outside temperature
varies between 11°F and 94°F.
      (2)   Power operated draft regulators must be of an acceptable type
designed to maintain a safe damper opening at all times and arranged to prevent
starting of the burner unless the damper is opened to a safe position. The
damper must be sized so that it comprises the full cross-sectional area of the
breeching with appropriate allowances for clearance. Upon shut-down of the
burner the damper must go to a safe closed position. The axis-rod (i.e.,
control rod) about which the damper rotates must have a square cross section or
if round, must be welded to the control arm. An arrow must be provided on the
axis-rod to indicate the position of the damper.
      (3)   Draft sensing lines must be a minimum of 1 1/4 inch pipe size,
installed through the furnace wall, provided with a full size cleanout plug,
and must otherwise conform to the equipment manufacturer's specifications.
Details concerning the length and diameter of the draft sensing lines must be
shown on the plans or specified in the plan notes.
      (4)   Barometric dampers must be of an acceptable type designed so as to
provide a constant draft at a point directly upstream of the barometric damper
under all normal operating conditions or when the outside temperature varies
between 11°F and 94°F. However, in no case under steady state conditions must a
pressure exist in the breeching at the barometric damper which is greater than
the boiler room pressure. The minimum cross-sectional opening of the barometric
damper must be at least as large as the diameter or equivalent diameter of the
breeching to which it is connected.
      (5)   A draft control must not be required where an acceptable boiler
assembly is designed and installed according to the manufacturer's
requirements, and a positive pressure exists at a location in the chimney
within three diameters of the chimney outlet.
      (6)   A boiler must be provided with acceptable control device(s) so as
to maintain adequate draft (positive or negative as required) necessary for
proper gas flow both to supply sufficient combustion air and exhaust combustion
gases under all normal load and atmospheric conditions.
         (i)   A separate draft control must be provided for each boiler and be
of the same type and must be installed per the manufacturer's specifications.
         (ii)   Draft control must be accomplished by a power operated draft
regulator with low-draft cut-off. A barometric damper may be substituted for a
power operated draft regulator if
            (A)   an on-off or low-high-off with low-fire start combustion
controller is used or
            (B)   a forced draft burner is used.
      (7)   Oil-fired equipment, including dual-fuel installations, must be
provided with a smoke alarm and combustion shutoff. This equipment must conform
to the following specifications as well as applicable sections of the Air
Pollution Control Code: The requirements of the above paragraph must not apply
to a temperature controlled dual-fuel system (as set forth below) when the
maximum heat input rate is less than 4.2 million Btu per hour. A temperature
controlled dual-fuel system must comprise a fuel burning installation capable
of burning natural gas and #2 fuel oil. The system must be designed and must
operate such that the fuel burned will normally be gas except that when the
outdoor temperature drops below 20°F, the equipment will automatically switch
to #2 fuel oil and when the outdoor temperature rises above 25°F, the equipment
will automatically return to natural gas operation.
         (i)   The smoke alarm must be regulated for both brightness intensity
of the light source and sensitivity of the detector. It is recommended that the
light source have a relatively uniform intensity over a reasonably long life.
         (ii)   The smoke alarm must cause both an audible (loud enough to be
heard 20 feet from the source) and readily visible (a flashing red light)
signal upon the emission of an air contaminant of an opacity of 20 percent or
greater.
         (iii)   The smoke alarm must activate an additional signaling device
located at the principal work location of the person supervising the equipment.
If there is no principal work location, the additional signaling device must be
located at an acceptable alternate location outside the boiler room.
         (iv)   The smoke alarm must cause the signaling devices to be
activated in the event that the light source in a photoelectric type detector
fails to operate properly. The signals must continue until the unit is manually
reset.
         (v)   The smoke alarm must be provided with a suitable metal grid or
equivalent, which meets the manufacturer's recommendations, calibrated so that
when placed in the light path of the detector it will cause a response
equivalent to an air contaminant as described in subparagraph (ii) above. This
calibration must be indicated on the grid holder or frame. This grid must be
securely fastened by means of a welded link chain of suitable length to the
body of the detector. Provision must be made to temporarily hang the grid in
front of the sensing element of the detector to facilitate proper adjustment of
the light source and calibration of the instrument.
         (vi)   The installation of the smoke alarm must be such that
            (A)   it is wired to function at all times and
            (B)   it includes means necessary for sealing the breeching to
prevent blowout of combustion products when necessary.
         (vii)   If two or more units of equipment are connected to a single
flue, one air contaminant detector may be used if installed to monitor all of
the units. This arrangement, however, will result in the shut-down of all units
of equipment upon activation of the combustion shutoff.
         (viii)   The combustion shutoff automatically halt the operation of
equipment within two minutes of continuous emission of an air contaminant of a
density which appears as dark or darker than 20 percent opacity, unless the
system is continuously staffed and supervised. The combustion shutoff must be
designed such that once it has been activated, the equipment cannot resume
normal operation without manual reset.
(Amended City Record 3/15/2017, eff. 4/14/2017)
§ 2-12 [Reserved.]
§ 2-13 Determination of Acceptable Location of Chimney Outlet.
Several factors affect the location of the chimney outlet including the need to
avoid a potential or actual nuisance. The following applicable requirements
must be met.
   (a)   For all new installations (new building or new chimney):
      (1)   The chimney must extend above all construction such as roof ridge,
parapet wall, penthouse, roof tank, elevator enclosure, etc., as follows:
         (i)   Chimneys must extend at least 3 feet above said construction
located within 10 feet of the chimney outlet.
      (2)   The chimney outlet must not be located within the minimum radial
distance specified in Table II.
   (b)   For existing installations:
      (1)   The chimney must extend at least as high as all construction such
as roof ridge, parapet wall, penthouse, roof tank, elevator enclosure, etc.,
within 10 feet of the chimney outlet.
      (2)   The chimney outlet must not be located within the minimum radial
distance specified in Table II. Such requirement must apply to receptors which
are at a height equal to or greater than the chimney outlet.
         For receptors located below the chimney outlet, the chimney outlet
must not be located within the minimum radial distance specified in Table II.
         In those instances where the above is applicable, the following
statement must be provided as a plan note in place of the statement required in
15 RCNY §
2-04(c)(2)(iv) - (vi): "The minimum radial distance from the centerline of the
existing chimney to an acceptable receptor location (a) located at a height
equal to or greater than the chimney outlet is ________ ft. and (b) located
below the chimney outlet is ________ ft.," with the distance specified.
   (c)   Whenever a building is erected, enlarged, or increased in height so
that any receptor location in such building is within the minimum radial
distance, as specified in Table II, of any previously constructed chimneys, the
owner of such new or altered building must have the responsibility of altering
such chimneys to make them conform with subdivision (a) of this section above.
This must not apply to chimneys no longer connected to combustion equipment.
   (d)   1) The criteria employed in determining stack heights and chimney
outlet to receptor distance in this section must only apply to off-site
receptors.
      (2)   Receptors, sources and geometry with the following features will be
considered on-site and not subject to 15 RCNY §
2-13.
         (i)   A single boiler stack servicing a single building structure.
         (ii)   Contiguous construction (i.e., attached "row" houses).
         (iii)   Separate entrances with separate addresses all serviced by the
same boiler room.
      (3)   This section will be applied to existing facilities to the maximum
extent possible consistent with good engineering practices. Alternative and
less costly options to altering the stack should be permitted if it can be
shown that this will not cause degradation of boiler performance. Degradation
of boiler performance would increase air pollutant emissions or inhibit
compliance with boiler upgrading criteria.
      (4)   For new and existing chimneys, emission impacts upon sensitive
receptors including, but not limited to, windows, doors that open, people, and
building fresh air intakes must be minimized by employing good air pollution
control engineering practices. Such practices include, without limitation:
         (i)   Avoiding locations that may be subject to downwash of the
exhaust; and
         (ii)   Installing stacks of sufficient height in locations that will
prevent and minimize flue gas impacts upon sensitive receptors.
      (5)   Since this chapter's tables were developed using assumed average
meteorological conditions in New York City, situations being disputed may be
resolved by the submission of individualized computations of pollutant
concentration at the receptor using realistic and applicable factors in
dispersion models recommended and approved by the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation and the federal Environmental Protection Agency. The
modeling must show that National Ambient Air Quality Standards will not be
exceeded at any sensitive receptors, including openable windows and fresh air
intakes. The tests, modeling, analysis and costs for these study(s) must be the
responsibility of the applicant.
(Amended City Record 5/13/2016, eff. 6/12/2016)
§ 2-14 [Reserved.]
§ 2-15 Performance Standards for the Continued Use of #4 Oil and #6 Oil in Heat
and Hot Water Boilers.
   (a)   General Provisions.
      (1)   The commissioner will not issue a work permit or a certificate of
operation or a registration for a boiler and/or burner that uses #4 oil or #6
oil unless (i) the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the
commissioner that the particulate matter and NOx emissions of the #4 oil and/or
#6 oil meets the equivalency standards described in this section, or (ii) the
applicant enters into a compliance agreement with the commissioner as provided
in this section.
      (2)   An owner who holds a certificate of operation or a registration for
a boiler and/or burner that uses #4 oil may file an amendment to convert the
boiler and/or burner to use #2 oil and/or natural gas. An owner who holds a
certificate of operation or a registration for a boiler and/or burner that uses
#6 oil may file such an amendment to convert the boiler and/or burner to use #2
oil, #4 oil and/or natural gas. An amendment pursuant to this paragraph must
not require the replacement of a boiler and/or burner. 
      (3)   The commissioner will not approve any amendment for a previously
issued work permit or certificate of operation or a registration to convert a
boiler and/or burner from using #2 oil, #4 oil and/or natural gas to using #6
oil or from using #2 oil and/or natural gas to using #4 oil.
      (4)   The equivalency levels of particulate matter and NOx as set forth
in this section must be demonstrated through (i) the submission by either a
professional engineer or registered architect licensed under Education Law §§
7202 or 7302 of detailed calculations and supporting documentation to verify
the equivalency levels or (ii) the submission by the applicant of an
equivalency form published by the department that provides for calculations
based on fuel use, energy values and emission factors from AP-42.
      (5)   Notwithstanding any other provision in this section, the
commissioner will not issue a work permit or a certificate of operation or a
registration for a boiler and/or burner that uses #2 oil, #4 oil, #6 oil and/or
natural gas unless the particulate matter and NOx emissions of such boiler or
burner meets any binding emissions standard established by either state or
federal law or regulation.
      (6)   Nothing in this section may be interpreted as requiring the New
York City Department of Housing Preservation and Development, when conducting
an emergency repair in accordance with §§ 27-2125 through 27-2129 of the New
York City Administrative Code, to convert a boiler and/or burner to use
different fuel or to replace a boiler and/or burner with a boiler and/or burner
that uses a different fuel.
   (b)   Existing Boilers (Renewal).
      (1)   The commissioner may issue a renewal of a certificate of operation
or a registration for a boiler and/or burner that uses #2 oil, #4 oil and/or
natural gas in accordance with § 24-122(d) of the New York City Administrative
Code.
      (2)   The commissioner will not issue a renewal of a certificate of
operation or a registration for a boiler and/or burner that uses #6 oil, unless
(i) the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the commissioner that the
particulate matter and NOx emissions of the #6 oil to be used in such boiler
and/or burner will be equivalent to or less than emissions from #4 oil as
provided in paragraph 4 of subdivision (a) of this section, or (ii) the
applicant enters into a compliance agreement with the commissioner in
accordance with subdivision (e) of this section.
      (3)   An owner who holds a certificate of operation or a registration for
a boiler and/or burner that uses #2 oil, #4 oil, #6 oil and/or natural gas, and
who seeks to make an in-kind replacement for use with #2 oil, #4 oil and/or
natural gas is not required to file a new application for a work permit and a
subsequent certificate of operation or a registration. The owner must provide
on a form to be designated by the commissioner the make, model and serial
number of the replacement equipment. The previously issued certificate of
operation or a registration may be renewed with the previously issued
application number assigned by the department upon approval of the amendment by
the department.
      (4)   An owner who holds a certificate of operation or a registration for
a boiler and/or burner and who seeks to replace the boiler and/or burner with
equipment that is not of the same make and model number must file a new
application for a work permit and a subsequent certificate of operation or a
registration as provided in 15 RCNY §§
2-04 and
2-05. The previously issued certificate of operation or a registration for the
previously installed equipment will be cancelled upon receiving the
application. The department will not accept an amendment to the previously
issued certificate of operation or a registration for such replacement of the
equipment.
   (c)   New Installations (Replacement).
      (1)   All applications for a work permit or a registration for a boiler
and/or burner must specify that the equipment uses #2 oil and/or natural gas,
unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the commissioner that
the particulate matter and NOx emissions of the #4 oil and/or #6 oil to be used
in such boiler and/or burner will be equivalent to or less than the emissions
from #2 oil as provided in paragraph 4 of subdivision (a) of this section.
      (2)   In cases where a work permit has been issued before the effective
date of this rule for a boiler and/or burner that uses #4 oil or #6 oil, but
where a certificate of operation or a registration has not yet been issued, the
owner of the equipment must file an amendment specifying the use of #2 oil and/
or natural gas, unless the owner demonstrates to the satisfaction of the
commissioner that the particulate matter and NOx emissions of the #4 oil and/or
#6 oil to be used in such boiler or burner will be equivalent to or less than
the emissions from #2 oil as provided in paragraph 4 of subdivision (a) of this
section.
   (d)   Sunset Provision. Notwithstanding any other provision in this section,
after January 1, 2030, all applications for a certificate of operation or a
registration for a boiler and/or burner must specify that the equipment uses #2
oil and/or natural gas, unless (i) the applicant demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the commissioner that the particulate matter and NOx emissions
of the #4 oil or #6 oil to be used in such boiler and/or burner will be
equivalent to or less than emissions from #2 oil as provided in paragraph 4 of
subdivision a of this section, or, (ii) the applicant is an owner of fifty or
more buildings with boilers or burners that use #4 oil or #6 oil, and enters
into a compliance agreement with the commissioner in accordance with
subdivision (e) of this section.
   (e)   Compliance Agreements.
      (1)   A compliance agreement entered into under subdivisions b and d of
this section must include a schedule agreed to by the commissioner for the
conversion and/or replacement of boilers and/or burners, and/or demonstration
of the required equivalency, until the owner is in full compliance with the
provisions of this section.
      (2)   An owner who applies to enter into a compliance agreement must show
that conversion and/or replacement of the boilers and/or burners, and/or
demonstration of the required equivalency, within the time frames set forth in
subdivisions b or d of this section for an owner of fifty or more buildings
with boilers and/or burners that use #4 or #6 oil, or subdivision b of this
section for an owner of fewer than fifty such buildings, would not be feasible
or would constitute an undue hardship.
      (3)   For purposes of paragraph 2 of this subdivision, the commissioner
will consider several factors in considering whether to enter into the
compliance agreement. These factors include financial hardship, whether the
owner is an equity owner of the buildings, the presence of underground tanks
that must be remediated because of the conversion in subdivision (b) of this
section, prior good faith efforts to comply, the scale and timing of
commitments to convert to the cleanest fuels, the levels of particulate matter
and NOx emitted by the boilers, whether the boilers are located in
neighborhoods with high densities of boilers that use #4 oil or #6 oil, and the
public health consequences of delayed compliance with this section.
      (4)   An application to enter into an agreement to comply with
subdivision (d) of this section must be filed by January 1, 2020.
      (5)   An application filed according to this subdivision must be sent to:
         Director of the Division of Air and Noise Programs, Enforcement and
Policy Bureau of Environmental Compliance
         New York City Department of Environmental Protection
         59-17 Junction Blvd.
         Flushing, NY 11373
      (6)   The commissioner will publish in the City Record a written opinion
no later than seven days after entering into a compliance agreement, stating
the facts and reasons leading to his or her decision, as well as a copy of the
compliance agreement.
      (7)   By December 31, 2014, and every year thereafter, the commissioner
will publish a report summarizing the number of compliance agreements applied
for and granted. The report will also summarize the environmental impacts of
such compliance agreements and the overall program on tons of particulate
matter and NOx in the air.
      (8)   Notwithstanding this specific compliance provision, § 24-110 of the
New York City Administrative Code may apply.
(Amended City Record 5/13/2016, eff. 6/12/2016)
* APPENDIX A *
Table I. ΔDr/H Values for Temperature Range of 1°F to 94°F
TEMP (°F)Dr/H TEMP (°F)Dr/H TEMP (°F)�Dr/H TEMP (°F)Dr/H 
TEMP (°F)Dr/H    TEMP (°F)Dr/H    TEMP (°F)�Dr/H     TEMP (°F)Dr/H 
1         0.00284 26        0.00192 51         0.00114  76        0.00044
2         0.0028  27        0.0019  52         0.00112  77        0.000423
3         0.0027  28        0.00184 53         0.00108  78        0.0004
4         0.00266 29        0.00182 54         0.00105  79        0.00036
5         0.00263 30        0.00178 55         0.00102  80        0.00034
6         0.0026  31        0.00176 56         0.001    81        0.00032
7         0.00256 32        0.00172 57         0.00096  82        0.0003
8         0.0025  33        0.0017  58         0.00094  83        0.00026
9         0.00248 34        0.00166 59         0.00091  84        0.00024
10        0.00244 35        0.00162 60         0.0009   85        0.00021
11        0.00242 36        0.0016  61         0.00086  86        0.0002
12        0.0024  37        0.00156 62         0.000882 87        0.00018
13        0.00234 38        0.00154 63         0.0008   88        0.00012
14        0.0023  39        0.0015  64         0.00076  89        0.0001
15        0.00226 40        0.00148 65         0.00075  90        0.00009
16        0.00222 41        0.00146 66         0.0007   91        0.00006
17        0.0022  42        0.00142 67         0.00068  92        0.00004
18        0.00216 43        0.00138 68         0.00066  93        0.00002
19        0.00214 44        0.00136 69         0.00062  94        0
20        0.00212 45        0.00132 70         0.0006
21        0.00208 46        0.0013  71         0.00058
22        0.00204 47        0.00126 72         0.00054
23        0.002   48        0.00122 73         0.00052
24        0.00196 49        0.0012  74         0.0005
25        0.00194 50        0.00118 75         0.00046
 
Table II. Minimum Radial Distance Based Upon Chimney Diameter
                    Existing #2 Oil                Chimney  Existing #2 Oil
                    and Natural Gas   New Chimney3 Diameter and Natural Gas   New Chimney
Chimney Diameter1  Chimney                                 Chimney
(in)                Existing Existing #2   Natural          Existing Existing #2    Natural
                    Above    Below    Oil  Gas     (in)     Above    Below    Oil   Gas (ft) 
                    (ft)     (ft)     (ft) (ft)             (ft)     (ft)     (ft)
6                   7.9      5.8      13.3 10.6    29       44.4     32.8     64.3  51.4
7                   9.4      6.9      15.5 12.4    30       46.1     34.0     66.5  53.2
8                   10.8     8.0      17.7 14.2    31       47.8     35.3     68.7  55.0
9                   12.3     9.1      19.9 16.0    32       49.4     36.5     70.9  56.7
10                  13.8     10.2     22.2 17.8    33       51.1     37.8     73.1  58.5
11                  15.3     11.3     24.4 19.5    34       52.9     39.1     75.3  60.3
12                  16.8     12.4     26.6 21.3    35       54.5     40.3     77.5  62.1
13                  18.4     13.6     28.8 23.0    36       56.2     41.6     79.8  63.8
14                  20.0     14.8     31.0 24.8    37       57.9     42.8     82.0  65.6
15                  21.6     15.9     33.2 26.6    38       59.7     44.1     84.2  67.4
16                  23.2     17.1     35.4 28.3    39       61.4     45.4     86.4  69.1
17                  24.7     18.3     37.7 30.1    40       63.1     46.7     88.6  70.9
18                  26.3     19.5     39.9 31.9    41       64.7     47.8     90.8  72.7
19                  27.9     20.6     42.1 33.6    42       66.6     49.2     93.1  74.5
20                  29.5     21.8     44.3 35.4    43       68.4     50.5     95.3  76.2
21                  31.2     23.0     46.5 37.2    44       70.1     51.8     97.5  78.0
22                  32.8     24.2     48.7 38.9    45       71.8     53.1     99.7  79.8
23                  34.4     25.4     51.0 40.7    46       73.6     54.4     101.9 81.6
24                  36.1     26.7     53.2 42.5    47       75.3     55.7     104.1 83.3
25                  37.7     27.9     55.4 44.3    48       77.1     57.0     106.3 85.1
26                  39.4     29.1     57.6 46.1    49       78.9     58.3     108.6 86.9
27                  41.0     30.3     59.8 47.9    50 2    80.6     59.6     110.8 88.7
28                  42.7     31.5     62.0 49.6
 
1 The diameter must be taken as the diameter or equivalent diameter at the
outlet of the chimney. The term "equivalent diameter" means the equivalent
diameter of a square or rectangular section based on equal area.
2 For diameters larger than 50 inches, the minimum radial distance will be
provided by the department upon request.
3 The minimum radial distance in feet for new #2 oil chimneys and natural gas
chimneys was determined using the formula d = F × √A, where F is 2.5 for #2 oil
and 2 for natural gas and A is the cross sectional area of the chimney outlet
in square inches.
Chapter 3: Cessation of Operation and Removal and Sealing of Refuse Burning
Equipment
§ 3-01 Cessation of Operation and Removal and Sealing of Refuse Burning
Equipment.
   (a)   Prohibition.
      (1)   Pursuant to Local Law 39 of 1989, effective June 28, 1993, all
owners of refuse burning equipment shall cease the operation of and remove and
seal such refuse burning equipment.
      (2)   Compliance with prohibition. All such owners shall comply with the
prohibition set forth in subdivision (a)(1) by either removal of all auxiliary
burners and sealing of all doors to refuse burning equipment, or by conversion
of the charging chute for such refuse burning equipment to a refuse chute in
accordance with all applicable Department of Buildings laws and rules. For the
purposes of this paragraph "sealing" means the removal of incinerator grates
and compliance with subdivision (e) of 1 RCNY §
24-01 of Chapter 24 of the Rules of Department of Buildings of the City of New
York governing fireproofing.
      (3)   Unless otherwise required by law, no owner of refuse burning
equipment shall be required to install a refuse compacting system upon the
cessation of operation and the removal and sealing of such refuse burning
equipment.
   (b)   Request for change in Department of Sanitation collection service.
      (1)   If, as a result of the cessation of operation and removal and
sealing of refuse burning equipment, the owner of a residential building which
contains such equipment and currently receives Department of Sanitation
collection service determines that a change from its existing form of
collection service (e.g., curbside or containerized collection) is necessary,
he/she shall notify the Department of Sanitation in writing no later than June
28, 1993. Such notice shall be addressed to the New York City Department of
Sanitation, Office of Collection and Containerization, 125 Worth Street, Room
821A, New York, New York 10013, and shall provide:
         (i)   The type of collection service the building is presently
receiving (i.e., curbside or containerized). Curbside collection service means
placing garbage receptacles at the curb which are then manually serviced by
Department of Sanitation personnel. Containerized collection service means
placing garbage bags/refuse into a container(s) in an area accessible to a
Department of Sanitation mechanized collection vehicle. The owner of the
building currently receiving Department of Sanitation collection service shall
state whether he/she request: (A) continuation of containerized collection
service, or eligibility to receive containerized service; or (B) continuation
of curbside collection service, all requests are subject to Department of
Sanitation approval based on availability of collection equipment, facilities,
necessary support resources and operational feasibility; and
         (ii)   Proof of Legal Authorization and Occupancy for Building. The
owner of a building currently receiving Department of Sanitation collection
shall submit a copy of the Certificate of Occupancy for such building, or, if
such building is not legally required to operate pursuant to a Certificate of
Occupancy, a notarized statement from the building owner stating the number of
stories the building contains and the number of families authorized by law to
occupy the building.
      (2)   Upon the Department of Sanitation's receipt of the information set
forth in subdivision (1) of this section, a Department of Sanitation
representative shall visit the subject residential building and determine
whether the request for change in collection service should be granted.
      (3)   Owners of commercial incinerators which cease to operate and are
removed and sealed are required by law to arrange with their private carter for
collection of the solid waste which they generate.
   (c)   Department of Buildings requirements for renovation and alteration of
refuse and/or chute rooms.
      (1)   If an owner of a building containing refuse burning equipment
subject to cessation of operation and removal and sealing pursuant to Local Law
39 of 1989, renovates or alters the refuse and/or chute room, by, a method
which includes, but is not limited to, the installation of a refuse chute or
compactor, such owner shall comply with §§ 27-836, 27-837 and/or 27-875 of the
Administrative Code of the City of New York and Department of Buildings Rules
governing the construction and maintenance of refuse chutes and refuse rooms.
      (2)   Such owner shall obtain authorization from the borough office of
the Department of Buildings in which his/her building is located in the form of
an alteration application/permit, as required by Articles 4, 9, 10 and 12 of
Subchapter 1 of Chapter 1 of Title 27 of the Administrative Code of the City of
New York.
      (3)   Such owner shall mail a copy of the approved alteration
application/permit and a notarized statement that the owner has complied with
all applicable rules and laws of the Department of Buildings to: Department of
Environmental Protection, Records Control Unit, 59-17 Junction Boulevard,
Elmhurst, New York 11373-5107.
   (d)   Department of Environmental Protection requirements for notice of
cessation and removal and sealing of refuse burning equipment. All owners of a
building containing refuse burning equipment subject to cessation of operation
and removal and sealing pursuant to Local Law 39 of 1989 shall notify the
Department of Environmental Protection in writing of such cessation and removal
and sealing in accordance with Subdivision (f) of § 24-122 of the
Administrative Code of the City of New York, and mail such notice to: John
Penn, Department of Environmental Protection, Records Control Unit, 59-17
Junction Boulevard, Elmhurst, New York 11373-5107.
Chapter 4: Certification of Gasoline Dispensing Sites and Transport Vehicles
§ 4-01 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply:
   Annual throughput. "Annual throughput" shall mean the amount of petroleum
liquid transferred into or dispensed from a defined source or facility during
twelve consecutive months.
   Commissioner. "Commissioner" shall mean the Commissioner of the New York
City Department of Environmental Protection.
   Equivalent control. "Equivalent control" shall mean the use of alternate
operational and/or equipment controls for the reduction of gasoline vapor
emissions, that have been approved by the Commissioner, such that the aggregate
emissions of gasoline vapor from the facility do not exceed those from the
application of defined reasonably available control technology.
   Gasoline. "Gasoline" means any petroleum distillate having a Reid Vapor
Pressure of 4 pounds per square inch (28 kilopascals) or more used as a motor
fuel.
   Gasoline dispensing site. "Gasoline dispensing site" shall mean any site
where gasoline is dispensed into vehicle fuel tanks or into portable containers
used to fuel any motor from any stationary storage container(s) larger than 250
gallons.
   Gasoline transport vehicle. "Gasoline transport vehicle" shall mean any tank
truck, trailer, or railroad tank car, with a capacity of 300 gallons or more,
used for the transportation of gasoline.
   NYSDEC. "NYSDEC" shall mean New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
   Stage 1 vapor collection system. "Stage 1 vapor collection system" shall
mean a system where gasoline vapors are forced from a tank into a vapor-tight
holding system or vapor control system through direct displacement by the
gasoline being loaded.
   Submerged filling. "Submerged filling" shall mean the use of a fill pipe or
drop tube whose discharge opening is entirely submerged when the liquid is six
inches above the bottom of the container. For containers loaded from the side,
submerged filling is defined as the use of a fill pipe whose discharge is
entirely submerged when the liquid level is 18 inches, or twice the diameter of
the fill pipe, whichever is greater, above the bottom of the container.
   Vapor control system. "Vapor control system" shall mean a system that
prevents emissions to the outdoor atmosphere from exceeding 4.7 grains per
gallon (80 grams per 1,000 liters) of gasoline loaded.
§ 4-02 Applicability.
   (a)   This chapter applies to the transfer of gasoline into underground
storage tanks located at gasoline dispensing sites.
   (b)   This chapter also applies to owners and operators of all gasoline
transport vehicles within the City of New York which:
      (1)   Deliver gasoline to any gasoline dispensing site required to be
equipped with a stage 1 vapor collection system or equivalent (including such
gasoline dispensing sites located in other counties or in states adjacent to
New York State); or
      (2)   Convey gasoline either to or from any gasoline loading terminal or
gasoline bulk plant.
§ 4-03 Gasoline Dispensing Sites.
   (a)   Prohibitions and requirements.
      (1)   No person shall transfer or allow the transfer of gasoline into
storage tanks at gasoline dispensing sites located in New York City whose
annual throughput exceeds 120,000 gallons, unless the storage tank is equipped
with:
         (i)   A stage 1 vapor collection system consisting of a vapor-tight
return line from the storage tank, or its vent, to the gasoline transport
vehicle and a system that will ensure that the vapor line is connected before
gasoline can be transferred into the tank; or
         (ii)   A properly installed on-site vapor control system connected to
a vapor collection system; or
         (iii)   An equivalent control system approved by the Commissioner.
      (2)   Owners and/or operators of gasoline storage tanks subject to stage
1 vapor collection or vapor control system requirements shall:
         (i)   Install all required stage 1 vapor collection and control
systems, and make any modifications necessary to comply with the requirements;
         (ii)   Provide adequate training and written instructions to the
operator(s) of the affected gasoline dispensing site;
         (iii)   Replace, repair, or modify any worn or ineffective component
or design element to ensure the vapor-tight integrity and efficiency of the
stage 1 vapor collection and vapor control systems; and
         (iv)   Connect and properly operate the stage 1 vapor collection and
control systems whenever gasoline is being loaded or unloaded.
      (3)   Each stationary storage tank with a capacity of at least 250
gallons installed or modified after January 1, 1979 at any gasoline dispensing
site in New York City area shall have a stage 1 vapor collection or vapor
control system.
      (4)   No person shall install, alter, test or repair underground
equipment for storage, underground storage systems, underground tanks and
underground piping and valves for gasoline except by or under direct
supervision of a person who has first secured from the Commissioner of the Fire
Department of the City of New York a Certificate of License to make such
installation, alteration, test or repair. A written application for alteration
to any part of existing underground equipment and/or underground storage
systems shall be made to the Fire Department according to the requirements of §
27-4062(d) of the Administrative Code of the City of New York.
   (b)   Certificate of Registration. Owners and/or operators of gasoline
dispensing sites who are required to comply under 15 RCNY §
4-03(a) shall apply for a Certificate of Registration and pay a fee for each
registration or renewal thereof according to § 24-140(c) of the New York City
Administrative Code within 10 days of the effective date of this regulation.
   (c)   Exemptions.
      (1)   A stage 1 vapor collection system and submerged filling are not
required for any storage tanks with a capacity less than 2,000 gallons which
were installed prior to January 1, 1970, at any gasoline dispensing sites, even
if the annual gasoline throughput exceeds 120,000 gallons for the dispensing
sites.
      (2)   Stage 1 vapor collection systems are not required for gasoline
dispensing sites used exclusively for:
         (i)   farm-type tractors used only for agricultural purposes or snow
plowing (other than for hire),
         (ii)   farm equipment including self propelled machines used in
growing, harvesting or handling farm produce, and
         (iii)   self propelled caterpillar or crawler-type equipment being
operated on a contract site, but must be equipped for submerged filling.
§ 4-04 Gasoline Transport Vehicles.
   (a)   No person shall allow a gasoline transport vehicle subject to this
chapter to be filled or emptied unless the gasoline transport vehicle:
      (1)   Sustains a pressure change of not more than 3 inches of water (6
millimeters of mercury) in five minutes when pressurized to a gauge pressure of
18 inches of water (34 millimeters of mercury) and evacuated to a gauge
pressure of 6 inches of water (11 millimeters of mercury);
      (2)   Is repaired by the owner or operator within 15 days after failing
to meet the pressure change standard required by this section; and
      (3)   Displays a marking near the U.S. Department of Transportation
certificate plate, in letters and numerals at least 2 inches high, which reads:
NYSDEC and the date on which the gasoline transport vehicle was last tested for
any other equivalent display approved by NYSDEC.
   (b)   No person shall allow a gasoline transport vehicle subject to this
chapter to be loaded under a pressure exceeding 18 inches of water (34
millimeters of mercury) gauge, or to be unloaded under a vacuum exceeding 6
inches of water (11 millimeters of mercury) gauge.
   (c)   Dome covers on gasoline transport vehicles subject to this chapter
shall be closed while the transport vehicle is being loaded, unloaded, or in
motion except when gasoline transport vehicles are hatch loaded in conformance
with paragraph 229.6(c)(2) or 229.7(a)(2) of Title 6 of the New York State Code
of Rules and Regulations (6 NYCRR).
   (d)   Owners and/or operators of gasoline transport vehicles subject to
stage 1 vapor collection or vapor control system requirements shall:
      (1)   Install all required stage 1 vapor collection and control systems,
and make any modifications necessary to comply with the requirements;
      (2)   Provide adequate training and written instructions to the operator
(s) of the affected gasoline transport vehicle;
      (3)   Replace, repair, or modify any worn or ineffective component or
design element to ensure the vapor-tight integrity and efficiency of the stage
1 vapor collection and vapor control systems; and
      (4)   Connect and properly operate the stage 1 vapor collection and
control systems whenever gasoline is being loaded or unloaded.
§ 4-05 Leakage.
During the loading or unloading of a gasoline transport vehicle subject to this
chapter, leakage from any component of the gasoline transport vehicle or the
vapor collection or control systems shall not equal or exceed 20 percent of the
lower explosive limit (LEL measured as propane) when measured at a distance of
one inch with a combustible gas detector. There shall be no avoidable visible
liquid leak from such components. Components of the transport vehicle or vapor
collection or control systems include all piping, seals, hoses, connections,
pressure-vacuum seals, and other possible leak sources. The combustible gas
detector used for determining compliance with this standard shall have a
minimum range of 0 - 100 percent of the LEL as propane, a probe with an
internal diameter of 1/4 inch (0.625 cm), and a response time less than 8
seconds with sampling line and probe attached. The combustible gas detector
must be properly calibrated prior to testing.
§ 4-06 Testing.
Vehicles subject to this chapter shall undergo a pressure vacuum test within
one year after the effective date of this chapter, and annually thereafter.
These tests shall be performed by the owner or his agent using test methods
acceptable to the Commissioner of NYSDEC. [Test method 27 described in appendix
A of Part 60 of Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations (40 C.F.R. Part 60)
is considered to be acceptable]. If the results of the pressure vacuum test do
not show compliance with the pressure change standard, the gasoline transport
vehicle shall be repaired to make the tank vapor-tight and retested within 15
days.
§ 4-07 Record Keeping.
   (a)   The owner of any gasoline transport vehicle subject to this chapter
shall maintain written records of pressure-vacuum testing and repairs. The
records include the vehicle identification number of the gasoline transport
vehicle, the date of tests, the results of the testing, the nature of necessary
repairs and the date of retests.
   (b)   A copy of the most recent pressure-vacuum test results, in a form
acceptable to the Commissioner, shall be kept with the gasoline transport
vehicle.
   (c)   Written records required by this section shall be maintained by owner
and/or operator and shall be retained for two years after the testing occurred.
The record must be made available to the Commissioner or his representative
upon request at any reasonable time.
§ 4-08 Reciprocity.
Consistent with the decision of NYSDEC the requirements for testing and marking
gasoline transport vehicles subject to this chapter may be satisfied if the
vehicle undergoes equivalent certification in another state.
§ 4-09 Compliance Schedules for Gasoline Dispensing Sites.
Any owner or operator of a gasoline dispensing site subject to the requirements
of this chapter shall submit a proposed schedule to the Commissioner which
includes specific steps and dates necessary to comply with the provisions of
this part within 10 days of the effective date of this chapter. Owners of
gasoline dispensing sites subject to this chapter shall be in compliance with
all requirements within 10 days of the effective date of this chapter or shall
have submitted an approved compliance schedule.
§ 4-10 Fire Department Regulations.
Nothing in this chapter shall effect or substitute for New York City Fire
Department or other regulations of the New York City Administrative Code.
§ 4-11 Variances.
The Commissioner may grant variances from the requirements of this chapter to
gasoline dispensing sites or gasoline transport vehicles in accordance with the
procedures, standards and time limits provided in § 24-110 of the
Administrative Code of the City of New York.
§ 4-12 Penalties and Sanctions.
Any person who is in violation of, or fails to comply with any provision of any
section of these regulations or any determination issued pursuant to these
regulations shall be subject to issuance of a notice of violation answerable to
the Environmental Control Board as provided in § 24-178 of the Administrative
Code of the City of New York.
Chapter 5: Criteria Used For Upgrading Existing Apartment House Incinerators
§ 5-01 Filing Applications and Plans, Amendments, Fees.
   (a)   All applications and plans for incinerator upgradings must be approved
by the Bureau of Air Resources.
   (b)   Incinerators which have a valid Certificate of Operation. The
apartment house owner must submit a new application. No additional fee is
necessary.
   (c)   A fee in accordance with Schedule B of Administrative Code § 24-136(c)
(2) must accompany each application.
   (d)   Applications and amendments shall include design data and plans
showing the existing incinerator and the upgrading proposed.
   (e)   All plans must be drawn to scale and shall be filed in triplicate. One
set of plans, if approved, will be returned with a Notice of Approval for an
installation or alteration permit. This Notice of Approval signifies compliance
with this Department's plan filing requirements and does not infer prior
approval by other city agencies.
   (f)   Plot plan must show the building location and dimensions, the flue
discharge point, and the location, distances, and heights of all buildings
within a reasonable distance. Layouts shall include plan and elevation of
incinerator room clearly showing the incinerator, the location and size of
fixed ventilation to the outer air. Drawings shall also include a roof plan and
elevation showing the flue, and other roof structures such as water tanks,
penthouses, etc. The furnace, gas burner, automatic draft controls, flues,
etc., shall be shown by plan and elevation cross-sections.
   (g)   Section 24-124(a) and (b) of the New York City Air Pollution Control
Code requires that a Professional Engineer or Registered Architect certify that
the application is accurate and that the equipment covered will comply with the
requirements of the law. The application and appurtenant drawings,
specification sheets and amendments, must also be impressed with the seal of
the certifier.
   (h)   A separate application is required for each unit of equipment or
control apparatus, unless identical units of equipment or control apparatus are
to be installed, altered, or operated in an identical manner in the same
building.
   (i)   If any structural changes to flues or additional flues are to be
provided, or additions or changes to gas piping or water supply piping are to
be made, application should be made to other departments having jurisdiction in
these matters, e.g., Department of Buildings, Department of Water Supply, Gas
and Electricity, Fire Department, etc.
§ 5-02 Requirements.
   (a)   General. These criteria apply to existing incinerators in multiple
dwellings. Other designs will be considered if it can be demonstrated that the
emission performance requirements of the New York City Air Pollution Control
Code can be met, and if such designs comply with the applicable provisions of
the Administrative Code.
   (b)   Minimum requirements and performance for upgrading.
      (1)   Incinerator capacity, where feasible, should be adequate to
accommodate refuse load based on four burns per day. (See: Table 1 and figure
1.) Grates and brickwork in incinerator and flue must be in good repair.
         (i)   grate area shall be at least 50 percent of total burning area,
where the existing conditions permit.
         (ii)   hearths under the charging flue shall be pitched at a 60° angle
from the horizontal so that refuse will slide down on to grate.
      (2)   Auxiliary burner(s) with spark ignited gas pilot, flame failure
shutoff (100%), temperature control, temperature indicator, furnace draft and
closed damper interlocks shall be installed to provide for ignition of the
refuse and maintenance of furnace temperature between 1,400F and 1,600F. (See:
Table 1 for gas burner(s) capacity.)
      (3)   Overfire air fan manifold and nozzles for 25 percent of combustion
air requirement shall be installed to assure adequate turbulence and burnout of
refuse. Manifold may be located outside furnace as space permits.
      (4)   Programming electric clock with 24 hour dial, having 15 minute
adjustable contact pins, to permit automatic starting and stopping of burner(s)
and fans.
      (5)   Enclosed steel cabinet with locked cover, dust and splash-proof,
for housing all control equipment. Located in basement, on wall or steel stand,
at least 2 feet from incinerator wall to avoid over-heating. Cabinet shall be
prewired.
      (6)   By-pass damper shall remain closed when the scrubber is in use, but
shall be opened automatically when the scrubber is shut down.
      (7)   Furnace draft, to assure optimum conditions for control of
combustion air, shall be maintained at all times at approximately 0.10 in. of
water by automatic control of the ID fan damper.
      (8)   Hopper door locks, if any, shall be synchronized with incinerator
operations.
      (9)   Overtime burning. If the furnace is too small to hold the refuse
accumulated overnight between 5p.m. and 7a.m, and the furnace cannot be
enlarged, permission for overtime burning, between 6a.m. and 11p.m., may be
granted. The hours for burning shall be shown on the Certificate of Operation.
      (10)   Every incinerator must meet the particulate emission performance
requirements set forth in the New York City Air Pollution Control Code. This
may be accomplished by the installation of a scrubber or other control device
capable of reducing the uncontrolled particulate emission to a level not
exceeding the allowable particulate emission rate. Materials of construction
for air cleaners shall provide suitable corrosion and erosion resistance.
   (c)   Incinerator and flue design. The following are four examples of
existing incinerators requiring upgrading:
      (1)   Single flue, single combustion chamber (Figure 2)
      (2)   Refuse chute and direct fed multiple chamber (Figure 3)
      (3)   Single flue, multiple chamber (Figure 4) with bypass flue in
basement or at first or second floor.
      (4)   Double flue, multiple chamber (Figure 5) with one flue extending
through roof.
   (d)   Conversion of single flue incinerators to double flue or separate gas
flue incinerators. With scrubber or equivalent air cleaner installed, a
separate gas flue may be provided by one of the following designs.
      (1)   Refractory flue (Figure 6) built alongside charging flue, extending
through roof of building.
      (2)   Use of boiler flue (Figure 7) provided size and combustion
controls, etc., are in accordance with following:
         (i)   Boiler flue must provide sufficient draft under maximum load
conditions for natural draft installations.
         (ii)   Both boilers and incinerators are provided with required
combustion controls.
         (iii)   Dampers are provided in boiler and incinerator flues to
prevent excessive gas cooling during cleaning or shut-down periods.
         (iv)   Connecting flues from oil fired boilers and incinerators are
relatively short and are provided with cleanout doors.
   (e)   Operating cycles. 
      (1)   Single flue, single combustion chamber with air cleaner.
         (i)   Burning cycle.
            (A)   Lock hopper doors, if included.
            (B)   Start air cleaner and automatic draft controller.
            (C)   Start auxiliary burner to ignite refuse.
            (D)   Start over fire air fan.
            (E)   Burn for preset interval, usually 30 to 60 minutes.
         (ii)   At end of burning cycle.
            (A)   Stop auxiliary burner.
            (B)   Stop overfire air fan.
            (C)   Stop air cleaner, close automatic draft controller and open
automatic by-pass damper.
            (D)   Unlock hopper door locks, if included.
            (E)   Remove accumulated residue and siftings from grate and ash
pit at least once each day or more frequently.
      (2)   Refuse chute and direct fed multiple chamber with air cleaner.
         (i)   Burning cycle.
            (A)   Charge refuse from charging chute into furnace at set
intervals to avoid excess pileup of refuse in chute hopper.
            (B)   Start air cleaner and automatic draft controller.
            (C)   Start auxiliary burner and overfire air fan.
            (D)   Burn down refuse under supervision of operator or by
automatic controls.
         (ii)   At end of burning cycle.
            (A)   Stop auxiliary burner and overfire air fan.
            (B)   Stop air cleaner, close automatic draft controller and open
automatic by-pass damper.
            (C)   Remove accumulated residue at least once a day.
      (3)   Single flue, multiple chamber with by-pass flue at first or second
floor.
         (i)   Burning cycle.
            (A)   Lock hopper doors, if included.
            (B)   Close charging flue gate.
            (C)   Start air cleaner and automatic draft controller.
            (D)   Start auxiliary burner and overfire air fan.
            (E)   Burn for preset interval.
         (ii)   At end of burning cycle.
            (A)   Stop auxiliary burner and over fire air fan.
            (B)   Stop air cleaner, close automatic draft controller and open
automatic by-pass damper.
            (C)   Unlock hopper doors, if included.
            (D)   Open charging flue gate briefly to discharge accumulated
refuse into furnace. This gate is normally closed.
            (E)   Clean grate and ash pit daily.
      (4)   Double flue, multiple chamber, with one flue extending through
roof.
         (i)   Between burns. Charging flue gate shall remain closed except for
opening briefly at 15 to 30 minute intervals to discharge accumulated refuse.
Opening and closing cycle shall continue 24 hours per day.
         (ii)   Burning cycle.
            (A)   Open and close charging flue gate.
            (B)   Start air cleaner and automatic draft controller.
            (C)   Start auxiliary burning and overfire air fan.
            (D)   Burn for preset period.
         (iii)   At end of burning cycle.
            (A)   Stop auxiliary burner and overfire air fan.
            (B)   Stop air cleaner, close automatic draft controller and open
automatic by-pass damper.
   (f)   Air for incineration. Adequate provisions for admission of air to
incinerator room shall be provided. (Figure 8.)
   (g)   Operating instructions. The following precautions should be taken:
      (1)   During alteration.
         (i)   Do not use incinerator for burning construction or other waste.
Excessive temperatures may damage the furnace, flues, and other parts.
         (ii)   Be sure that chambers, passages and flues are cleaned of
building debris before sealing.
         (iii)   Install controls last to minimize damage during construction.
      (2)   Placing in service.
         (i)   Unseal incinerator and clean out combustion chamber, ash pit,
separation chambers, flues, etc.
         (ii)   Test burners, fans, flue gate, scrubber, dampers, hopper doors,
etc., to insure that they work properly.
         (iii)   Start a slow fire to dry out gradually the refractory in the
furnace and flues.
         (iv)   Set controls for the operation cycle.
         (v)   Set the timing mechanism for 4 or more burns per day: For
example: 6 - 7 a.m., 2 - 3 p.m., 7 - 8 p.m., 10 - 11 p.m.
         (vi)   It may be necessary to make seasonal adjustments in the choice
of operating periods.
   (h)   Maintenance instructions.
      (1)   Daily.
         (i)   Remove residue and siftings from primary and secondary chambers
as well as ash pit.
         (ii)   Inspect for proper operation: gas burner and controls; grates;
flue gate; overfire air fan system; air cleaner and pump; cycling clock.
         (iii)   Check all cleanout doors.
      (2)   Weekly.
         (i)   Remove accumulated fly ash from flues.
         (ii)   Inspect hopper doors for tightness of fit.
         (iii)   Inspect spark arrester for cleanliness and repair.
         (iv)   Remove accumulated fly ash in secondary chambers.
         (v)   Remove sludge from scrubber sump.
         (vi)   Inspect refractory and repair or replace defective brick.
Note: Report immediately any malfunctioning or deterioration to owner or agent.
Table 1. Flue Fed Incinerators – 100 to 1,000 Rooms – Manual Grates
No. of Rooms or population per            100     200       300       400       600       800       1,000
incinerator
Refuse per day at 1.44 lbs per room   lbs  144     288       432       576       865       1,152     1,440
Volume of refuse per day at 4.1 lbs/  cu   35.1    70        105       141       211       282       351
cu ft.                                ft
Heat input per day at 6,000 Btu/lb    Btu  864,000 1,728,000 2,590,000 3,460,000 5,180,000 6,912,000 8,640,000
Refuse per hourly burn at 25% 4 burns lbs/ 36      72        108       144       216       288       360
per day                               hr
Volume of refuse per hourly burn at   cu
4.1 lbs/cu ft.                        ft/  8.8     17.6      26.3      35.2      52.7      70.2      87.8
                                      hr
Heat input per hourly burn at 6,000   Btu/ 216,000 432,000   648,000   865,000   1,300,000 1,730,000 2,160,000
Btu/lb                                hr
                                      Btu/
Furnace heat release rate             cu   2,800   4,800     6,270     7,600     9,680     10,500    11,400
                                      ft/
                                      hr
Gas weight leaving furnace at 200%    lbs/ 440     880       1,323     1,760     2,650     3,520     4,415
excess air                            hr
Gas volume leaving furnace at 1,600F  CFM  379     758       1,138     1,515     2,280     3,030     3,900
Combustion air weight                 lbs/ 405     810       1,215     1,620     2,440     3,240     4,050
                                      hr
Combustion air volume at 80F          CFM  90      180       276       367       554       735       920
Underfire air – 50% of total – at CFM  45      90        138       183       277       367       460
                                      Min.
Adjustable air port area              sq   50      100       153       200       310       420       510
                                      in
Overfire air fan at 25% of total at   CFM  22.5    45        69        92        139       184       230
1" S.P.
Overfire air duct and manifold area   sq   1.62    3.24      4.97      6.62      10.0      13.25     16.5
at 2,000 FPM                          in
Equivalent schedule 40 pipe size      in   2       2         3         3         4         4         6
No. of 1" pipe nozzles for O.F. air   No.  4       4         5         5         6         7         9
                                      Min.
Gas flue and fresh air inlet          sq   1.0     1.37      1.86      2.36      3.29      4.05      4.86
                                      ft
Auxiliary burner capacity per hourly  Min.
burn                                  Btu/ 72,000  144,000   216,000   288,000   433,000   577,000   720,000
                                      hr
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-154.gif]
Editor's note: the image displayed above is the highest quality available to
the publisher.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-157.gif]
Editor's note: the image displayed above is the highest quality available to
the publisher.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-160.jpg]
Editor's note: the image displayed above is the highest quality available to
the publisher.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-162.jpg]
Editor's note: the image displayed above is the highest quality available to
the publisher.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-164.jpg]
Editor's note: the image displayed above is the highest quality available to
the publisher.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-166.jpg]
Editor's note: the image displayed above is the highest quality available to
the publisher.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-168.jpg]
Editor's note: the image displayed above is the highest quality available to
the publisher.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-170.jpg]
Editor's note: the image displayed above is the highest quality available to
the publisher.
Chapter 6: Interpolation of Allowable Sound Levels For Motor Vehicles
§ 6-01 Introduction.
Figure 1 and Figure 2 set forth below relate to allowable sound levels for
motor vehicles as specified in § 24-232(a) of the Administrative Code (Noise
Control Code). These figures shall be used for the interpolation between Column
I and Column II of Table I of said section to determine the allowable sound
levels for motor vehicles operated at speeds of 35 miles per hour or less and
speeds of more than 35 miles per hour, respectively, at distances between
twenty-five and fifty feet from the center of the lane of the public highway in
which the motor vehicle is idling or is traveling.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-172.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-174.gif]
Chapter 7: Tunneling
§ 7-01 Tunneling Permits.
Tunneling permits shall not be required for activities carried out solely
between the hours of 7 a.m. to 6 p.m. during weekdays. "Tunneling" shall be
defined as any activity to construct a tunnel carried out by tunneling methods,
i.e., mining, boring, jacking, lining, shielding, and where the above methods
are not practical, cut and cover shall also be considered a tunneling method.
Tunneling does not include cut and cover operations for the installation of
minor utility lines by cut and cover methods. In order to obtain a permit for
shaft and tunnel construction the applicant shall submit an application to the
Division of Noise Abatement for use in determining after completion the
conditions necessary to conform to the New York City Noise Control Code. The
tunnel permit shall be issued for each shaft site to cover the operation and
hours of use of all equipment. The applicant will be required to submit an
application completed in full. It is intended that the permit will be
applicable for the site and equipment therein designated. Should there by any
change of conditions, location or equipment substitution, the Division of Noise
Abatement must be notified and the appropriate specifications of the permit
modified.
Chapter 8: Industrial Equipment
§ 8-01 Submission of Environmental Rating Reports from Industrial Sources.
Environmental Rating Reports are required for every industrial process capable
of emitting solid, liquid or gaseous contaminants to the open air, and are
required regardless of when the equipment became operational. The Department
requires that all operational industrial equipment, as defined in § 24-104(25)
of the Administrative Code, in New York City submit an Environmental Rating
Report pursuant to § 24-154 of the Code. The Environmental Rating Report is
required to contain substantive information showing that the equipment is being
operated in compliance with § 24-153 of the Code. The Environmental Rating
Reports must be filed with the Bureau of Air Resources when specifically
requested by the Bureau, and/or upon application for renewal of a Certificate
of Operation if an Environmental Rating Report was not previously submitted. In
accordance with § 24-138 of the Code an administrative fee must be submitted
with the Environmental Rating Report. No fee is required if the Report is filed
in support of an application for an operating certificate. Environmental Rating
Reports are not required for oil or gas burners and boilers, unit space
heaters, and exhausts used for comfort heating, ventilating and air
conditioning systems. Any owner or operator who is unsure whether an
Environmental Rating Report should be filed should complete and submit Form AR
510 to the Bureau of Air Resources. No fee is required when filing Form AR 510.
The Bureau of Air Resources will notify the owner or operator within 60 days of
filing Form AR 510 if an Environmental Rating Report must be submitted.
Chapter 9: Gas Fired Burner Installations
§ 9-01 Installation of and Conversion to Gas or Gas/Oil Fired Burners.
   (a)   For those installations where it is necessary to install a new gas or
gas/oil burner then a complete new filing will be required.
   (b)   For those installations for which the Department of Environmental
Protection has an application to use oil as a fuel and a decision is made to
convert to straight gas, an amendment to the filing is required which must show
compliance with subdivision (e) of this section.
   (c)   For those installations for which the Department has an application to
use oil as a fuel and a decision is made to convert to a combination of oil and
gas, and amendment to the active filing is all that is required provided the
burner is accepted for both gas and oil firing. It should be understood that
the installation will be required to meet the Engineering Criteria for Oil
Burning Equipment for the grade of oil being used.
   (d)   For those installations which have a valid Certificate of Operation
under current criteria for fuel oil and a decision is made to convert to
straight gas or gas and oil and the burner for which the Certificate of
Operation was issued is accepted for burning gas or gas and oil, than an
amendment to the original application will suffice to document the change in
the grade of fuel. It should be noted however, that in those cases where oil is
burned in combination with gas, that the grade of oil must be the same or a
lighter grade than that for which the Certificate of Operation was issued.
   (e)   In all of the above cases, it will be the responsibility of the filing
engineer to advise the owner that an appropriate filing is required in the
Department of Buildings. A copy of the Letter of Completion from the Building
Department must be submitted. Same will be accepted in lieu of burner labeling
by Underwriters Laboratories and will not require inspection by the Bureau of
Air Resources with reference to modification on burner, but we may require
inspection on the boiler for compliance with Chapter 2 of these Rules. There
will be no requirement to update the UL label to indicate oil/gas operation.
   (f)   Whenever an application is filed for natural gas, the application will
be required to meet the criteria in effect on June 30, 1973 (Chapter 2 of these
Rules). Where this criteria refers to natural gas, the specific requirements
for natural gas will be used, in all other cases, the requirements for number 2
fuel oil will be used on an equivalent BTU basis as has been the policy in the
past.
Chapter 10: Air Pollution Control Instruction in Fuel Burning Equipment Using
Residual Fuel Oil and Refuse Burning Equipment
§ 10-01 Scope.
The following school, instructor and course completion certification procedures
shall apply to all educational institutions, industry and labor organizations
offering a course of instruction in accordance with § 24-161 of the
Administrative Code of the City of New York.
§ 10-02 Definitions.
Approved school. "Approved school" shall mean an educational institution,
industry organization or labor organization which has been certified by the
Department to conduct a course in air pollution control.
Certificate of Course Completion. "Certificate of Course Completion" shall mean
the certificate issued by the Department indicating that an individual has
passed the air pollution control course of instruction in accordance with the
provisions of these rules.
Commissioner. "Commissioner" shall mean the Commissioner of the New York City
Department of Environmental Protection.
Curriculum. "Curriculum" shall mean a sequence of topics to be covered which
together comprise a program of instruction.
Department. "Department" shall mean the New York City Department of
Environmental Protection.
Enrollment Card. "Enrollment Card" shall mean a registration card issued by an
approved school offering air pollution control course of instruction to a
current student.
Instructional Hour. "Instructional Hour" shall mean an instructional unit of
time consisting of a minimum of fifty minutes.
Teaching Certificate. "Teaching Certificate" shall mean the certificate issued
by the Department indicating that an educational institution, industry
organization or labor organization has received approval to conduct a course in
air pollution control.
Tuition. "Tuition" shall mean the charge for instruction at an approved school,
and shall not include such charges as enrollment or registration fees, or fees
for equipment and materials, including but not limited to kits, tools, supplies
and books.
§ 10-03 Requirements for Approval of an Air Pollution Control Course of
Instruction.
   (a)   No educational institution, industry organization or labor
organization shall offer a course of instruction in air pollution control
involving the use of fuel or refuse burning equipment, in conformance with §
24-161 of the Administrative Code of the City of New York, prior to receiving
written approval of such course by the Department.
   (b)   Educational institutions, industry and labor organizations seeking the
Department's approval of a course of instruction shall submit to the Department
a completed application in a form prescribed by the Department, containing a
description of the course to be offered. Such application shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   Name and address of the entity planning to conduct the air
pollution control course, and one name and telephone number of a contact
person.
      (2)   The course location and course schedule (dates and times.)
      (3)   A copy of the course curriculum and the amount of time allotted for
each topic.
      (4)   A description of the teaching methods to be used to present each
topic (e.g., lectures, discussions, hands-on demonstrations, audio-visual
materials).
      (5)   Copies of all written materials to be distributed, including
typical examinations.
   (c)   Upon obtaining approval from the Department, the educational
institution, industry organization or labor organization shall receive a
teaching certificate which will be valid for (5) five years. A teaching
certificate may be renewed upon submission of a renewal application.
§ 10-04 Requirements for Course Content.
   (a)   A course of instruction in air pollution control involving the use of
fuel burning equipment using residual fuel oil or refuse burning equipment
shall provide the following:
      (1)   A minimum of twelve hours of instructions;
      (2)   Class instruction wherein the ratio of students to instructor in
the classroom shall not exceed 25 to 1, and during hands-on demonstration
sessions it shall not exceed 10 to 1; and
      (3)   A curriculum of teaching materials which shall include, at a
minimum, the New York City Board of Education/DEP workbook "Air Pollution
Control".
   (b)   Notification of course modification
      (1)   At least ten days prior to revising a course, an approved school
shall in writing notify the Department and request written department approval
of any of the following modifications:
         (i)   personnel changes
         (ii)   course schedule (dates and locations)
         (iii)   course curriculum
         (iv)   teaching materials
      (2)   Conditional written approval may be granted pending evaluation of
the proposed changes.
§ 10-05 Experience Requirements for Instructors.
   (a)   The resumes of persons applying for instructor positions shall detail,
at minimum, the most recent five (5) years experience with residual oil burning
or refuse burning equipment and shall include the following:
      (1)   List of jobs the applicant has held and the duration of each; and
      (2)   Name and address of each employer; and
      (3)   Description of the work performed in each position.
   (b)   Educational institutions, industry and labor organizations shall only
employ instructors experienced in teaching the operation and supervision of
residual fuel oil burning or refuse burning equipment.
   (c)   A copy of each instructor's resume which demonstrates the experience
required in 15 RCNY §
10-05(a) and a letter from the training institution attesting to the
instructor's competence to teach the course shall be submitted to the
department prior to commencement of the course.
§ 10-06 Procedures for Obtaining Certificate of Course Completion.
   (a)   No person or entity shall employ an operator or supervisor of fuel
burning equipment using residual fuel oil or of refuse burning equipment who is
not certified by the Department or who does not have an enrollment card for a
course of instruction.
   (b)   Educational institutions, industry and labor organizations shall then
promptly submit to the Department a list of all enrolled students, evidence of
their completing a course of instruction in air pollution control and final
test score.
   (c)   The Department shall issue a certificate of course completion to
individuals who successfully have completed a course of instruction at an
approved school with a passing score of 70 percent on the air pollution control
course examination within (60) sixty days of the completion of the course upon
payment of the fee specified in subdivision (e).
   (d)   Stationary and marine engineer shall not be required to complete the
course of instruction, but they must pass the air pollution control course
examination with a score of at least 70 percent.
   (e)   An individual who has passed the course of air pollution control
instruction and seeks a certificate of course completion shall pay a fee of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to the Department of Environmental Protection,
Bureau of Air Resources.
§ 10-07 Teaching Suspension or Revocation.
The Commissioner shall suspend for a period of up to (3) three years or revoke
for a period of up to (5) five years an approved school's teaching certificate,
after giving written notice and an opportunity to be heard, upon the
determination that any one of the following has occurred:
   (a)   Submission of false information on any application;
   (b)   Failure to submit written notification to the Department of any
material change(s) in the conduct of the course; and
   (c)   Failure to allow a department representative to audit any phase of the
course.
Chapter 11: Hazardous Substances Emergency Response
§ 11-01 [Reserved.]
§ 11-02 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to the Hazardous Substances Emergency
Response Regulations, 15 RCNY §§
11-01 et seq., unless the context specifically indicates otherwise.
   C.F.R. "C.F.R." shall mean the Code of Federal Regulations.
   Commissioner. "Commissioner" shall mean the Commissioner of the New York
City Department of Environmental Protection or his/her designee.
   Department. "Department" shall mean the Department of Environmental
Protection.
   Disposal. "Disposal" shall mean the placing of any hazardous substance(s)
into or on any land or water so that such hazardous substance(s) or any
constituent thereof may be released into the environment.
   Hazardous substance. "Hazardous Substance" shall mean each listed hazardous
substance or any other chemical substance which when released into the
environment may present a substantial danger to the public health or welfare or
the environment.
   Listed hazardous substance. "Listed hazardous substance" shall mean any
substance listed in accordance with § 24-609 of the New York City hazardous
substances emergency response law (15 RCNY §
11-04).
   Person. "Person" shall mean any individual, trust, firm, corporation, joint
stock company, association, partnership, consortium, joint venture, commercial
entity or governmental entity.
   Release. "Release" shall mean any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring,
emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping or
disposing into the environment.
   Reportable quantity. "Reportable quantity" shall mean the minimum quantity
of a listed hazardous substance which when released will require notification
to the Commissioner by any responsible person who knows or has reason to know
of such release. These quantities are listed in 15 RCNY §
11-04.
   Response measures. "Response measures" shall include actions taken by a city
agency or ordered to be taken by a city agency:
      (1)   to prevent, minimize or mitigate the release of hazardous
substances so that they do not migrate to, or in any other manner, cause or
threaten to cause substantial danger to the public health or welfare or the
environment,
      (2)   to clean up or remove released hazardous substances from the
environment, and
      (3)   which are necessary and appropriate to protect the public health or
welfare or the environment from an immediate and substantial danger caused by a
release or a substantial threat of a release of a hazardous substance into the
environment, including but not limited to security measures to protect the
public.
   Responsible person. "Responsible person" shall mean:
      (1)   any owner, operator, lessee, occupant or tenant, other than a
residential lessee, occupant or tenant, of property at the time there is a
release, or a substantial threat of a release, of a hazardous substance from
such property into the environment or at the time of any response measures
implemented in connection with any emergency involving such release or threat
of release, provided that if such property is comprised of an owner occupied
residential building consisting of six or fewer dwelling units used exclusively
for residential purposes, an owner of such property shall be deemed to be a
"responsible person" for purposes of this paragraph, only if the willful,
knowing, reckless or negligent acts or omissions of such owner caused or
substantially contributed to such release or threat of release, and further
provided that a federal or state chartered and regulated financial institution
which has received title to the property through abandonment, foreclosure, a
deed in lieu of foreclosure, or through a judicial or bankruptcy order shall
not be deemed to be a "responsible person" for purposes of this paragraph,
unless
         (i)   willful, knowing reckless or negligent acts or omissions of such
person caused or substantially contributed to such release or threat of
release, or
         (ii)   the title was received in order to secure the underlying credit
extension which had been entered into for the purpose of assisting a
responsible person in avoidance of the provisions of this chapter, or
      (2)   any person whose acts or omissions caused or substantially
contributed to a release, or a substantial threat of a release, of a hazardous
substance into the environment, provide that where there is a release, or a
substantial threat of a release, of a hazardous substance into the environment
from property used for residential purposes, a person using such property as a
residence and any invitee or licensee of such person who enters such property,
other than an invitee or licensee engaged in a business involving the use or
transport of any hazardous substance, shall be deemed to be a "responsible
person" for purposes of this paragraph, only if the willful, knowing, reckless
or negligent acts or omissions of such person or invitee caused or
substantially contributed to such release or threat of release, or
      (3)   any owner, operator, lessee, occupant or tenant of the property at
the time of disposal of any hazardous substance thereon, who had caused,
authorized or permitted such hazardous substance to be so disposed, where there
is a release, or a substantial threat of a release, of such hazardous substance
into the environment, or
      (4)   any person who, pursuant to contractual arrangement, accepts or has
accepted any hazardous substance for transport, transports such hazardous
substance and there is a release, or a substantial threat of a release, of such
hazardous substance into the environment, or
      (5)   any person who by contract, agreement, or otherwise arranged for
disposal or treatment or arranged with a transporter for transport for disposal
or treatment of a hazardous substance owned or possessed by such person, and
there is a release, or a substantial threat of a release, of such hazardous
substance into the environment; provided, however, that no person, who is an
entity independent from an otherwise responsible person, authorized by the
Commissioner of Environmental Protection to implement response measures at the
site of a release, or a threat of a release, of a hazardous substance into the
environment, shall be deemed to be a "responsible person" solely on the basis
of any authorized response measures attempted or implemented by such person at
such site, unless such person's willful, knowing, reckless or negligent acts or
omissions caused or substantially contributed to a release, or a substantial
threat of a release, of a hazardous substance into the environment.
   Treatment. "Treatment" shall mean any method, technique, or process,
including neutralization, designed to change the physical, chemical, or
biological character or composition of any hazardous substance so as to
neutralize such substance or so as to render such substance nonhazardous, safer
for transport, amenable for recovery, amenable for storage, or reduced in
volume. Such term includes any activity or processing designed to change the
physical form or chemical composition of a hazardous substance so as to render
it nonhazardous.
(Amended City Record 3/15/2017, eff. 4/14/2017)
§ 11-03 Notification.
Note: The regulations in this section detail the requirement to notify the
Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection in the event of a
release of a listed hazardous substance. This notification is intended to
supplement, not replace, other required emergency notifications. Therefore, in
addition to any notification required under this section, Police Emergency at
911 should be notified in the event of a significant incident involving a
hazardous substance which presents a danger to the public. This alerts the
City's Emergency Warning system and assures comprehensive City agency response
to such an incident.
   (a)   Notification requirement.
      (1)   Any responsible person who knows or has reason to know of any
release of any listed hazardous substance in an amount which equals or exceeds
the reportable quantity of such substance shall immediately notify the
Commissioner pursuant to 15 RCNY §
11-03(b), and shall notify the Commissioner in writing pursuant to 15 RCNY §
11-03(c).
         (i)   Listed hazardous substances and reportable quantities are
specified in 15 RCNY §
11-04.
         (ii)   Notification shall not be required when a listed hazardous
substance is released in an amount authorized pursuant to the provisions of a
federal, state, or local permit or order, or court order.
      (2)   Notification shall be made to the Commissioner by telephoning the
Department at 718-595-4646 on business days from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Notification
at all other times shall be made to the Department Communications Center at
DEP-HELP or 718-337-4357.
   (b)   Telephone notification. Telephone notification shall include the
following information:
      (1)   Hazardous substance(s) released, quantity or estimated quantity
released, and hazardous properties; and
      (2)   Description of the incident including the cause, effect (e.g.,
illness or injuries), and status.
   (c)   Written notification.
      (1)   Written notification shall be made to the Department within one
week of the release by certified mail to the following address:

         New York City Department of Environmental Protection
         59-17 Junction Boulevard
         Corona, New York 11368-5107
         Attn: Hazardous Substances Emergency Response Officer.
      (2)   Written notification shall include the following information:
         (i)   The name(s) of the responsible person(s) and contact number(s);
the name(s) of the owner(s) of the site; the location of the release; the time
of the release; the chemical name and any trade names of the substance
released; the hazardous characteristics of the chemical (e.g., toxic,
flammable, corrosive, etc.); the estimated quantity of any subsequent or
continuing release; a description of areas affected by the release, such as
public rights-of-way, residues in the area, sewers, catch basins, equipment and
structures, and the geographic extent of the affected areas; and
         (ii)   The nature of the process(es) which take place at the site
including, but not limited to, any processes involved in the actual release and
any processes which might contribute to a hazardous situation or in any way
impede response measures; and
         (iii)   All climatological conditions which in any way contributed to
the hazard of a release; and
         (iv)   Any available information regarding injuries at the site,
adjacent to the site, and elsewhere which may be a result of the release; and
         (v)   Details regarding abatement and/or cleanup measures taken by
responsible person(s) or his/her designee(s), or any other person(s); and
         (vi)   Any additional details requested by the Department at the time
of telephone notification.
      (3)   Additional written notification requirements, including weekly
written status reports for longer term remediation, may be included in
Departmental orders issued pursuant to §§ 24-608 and 24-610 of the
Administrative Code.
§ 11-04 Listed Hazardous Substances.
   (a)   Definitions. The following substance categories which appear on the
hazardous substances list shall have the following meanings:
      Combustible substance. "Combustible substance" shall mean any liquid
which has a flash point at or above 100°F (37.8°C) and below 300°F (148.9°C).
      Corrosive substance. "Corrosive substance" shall mean:
         (i)   any liquid or solid that causes visible destruction or
irreversible alterations in human skin tissue at the site of contact; or
         (ii)   any aqueous solution with a pH less than or equal to 2, or
greater than or equal to 12.5, as determined by a pH meter, or equivalent
methods; or
         (iii)   any liquid that corrodes steel (SAE 1020) at a rate greater
than 5.35 mm (0.250 inch) per year at a test temperature of 130°F (55°C).
      Flammable substance. "Flammable substance" shall mean any liquid having a
flash point below 100°F (37.8°C).
      Ignitable substance. "Ignitable substance" shall mean any substance which
has any of the following properties:
         (i)   It is a solid which is capable under standard temperature and
pressure of causing fire through friction, absorption of moisture, or
spontaneous chemical changes; and which, when ignited, burns so vigorously and
persistently that it creates a hazard; or
         (ii)   It is flammable compressed gas, as defined in 49 C.F.R. §
173.300, and as determined by the test methods described in that regulation; or
         (iii)   It is an oxidizer as defined in 49 C.F.R. § 173.151.
      Reactive substance. "Reactive substance" shall mean any substance which
has any of the following properties:
         (i)   It is normally unstable and readily undergoes violent change
without detonating; or
         (ii)   It reacts violently with water; or
         (iii)   It forms potentially explosive mixtures with water; or
         (iv)   When mixed with water it generates toxic gases, vapors or fumes
in a quantity sufficient to present a danger to human health or the
environment; or
         (v)   It is a cyanide or sulfur bearing substance which, when exposed
to pH conditions between 2 and 12.5, can generate gases, vapors or fumes in a
quantity sufficient to present a danger to human health or the environment; or
         (vi)   It is capable of detonation or explosive reaction if it is
subjected to a strong initiating source or if heated under confinement; or
         (vii)   It is readily capable of detonation or explosive decomposition
or reaction at standard temperature and pressure; or
         (viii)   It is a forbidden explosive as defined in 49 C.F.R. § 173.51,
or a Class A explosive as defined in 49 C.F.R. § 173.53, or a Class B explosive
as defined in 49 C.F.R. § 173.88.
   (b)   Definitions. 
      Flash point. For the purposes of these subdivision (a) and (b), "flash
point" shall mean the minimum temperature at which a liquid gives off vapor in
a test vessel of sufficient concentration to form an ignitable mixture with air
near the surface of the liquid. Such temperature shall be determined:
         (i)   by a Pensky-Martens Closed Cup Tester using the test method
specified in ASTM Standard D 93-79 or D 93-80; or
         (ii)   by a Setaflash Closed Cup Tester using the test method
specified in ASTM Standard D 3278-78; or
         (iii)   by a Tag Closed Cup Tester, using the test method specified
ASTM D 56-79.
   (c)   Reportable quantities.
      (1)   Following is a list of hazardous substances and reportable
quantities. Any responsible person who knows or has reason to know of a release
of any listed hazardous substance in an amount which equals or exceeds the
reportable quantity shall notify the Department as specified in § 11-03, except
that no notification shall be required when such release occurs in an amount
authorized pursuant to the provisions of a federal, state, or local permit or
order, or court order.
      (2)   There may be circumstances in which a release of a hazardous
substance or mixture of substances in an amount less than a reportable quantity
creates a risk or danger to the public health, welfare, or the environment. In
the event that a release of any amount of a listed hazardous substance combines
with other variables to produce such a hazard, any responsible person who knows
or has reason to know of such release should notify the Commissioner of any
such release.
   (d)   List of Hazardous Substances and Reportable Quantities (RQ).  
Hazardous substance Cas. No. Trade Names and Synonyms Amb. Phy. State RQ (lbs)
                                                                        Cas.                                   Amb.  RQ
Hazardous substance                                                     No.    Trade Names and Synonyms        Phy.  (lbs)
                                                                                                               State
Acetaldehyde                                                            75-07- Ethyl aldehyde                  L     100
                                                                        0
Acetaldehyde, trichloro                                                 75-87- Chloral, 2,2,2-                 L     1
                                                                        6      Trichloroacetaldeyde
Acetic acid                                                             64-19- Ethanoic Acid, glacial acetic   L     100
                                                                        7      acid
Acetone                                                                 67-64- 2-Propanone                     L     100
                                                                        1
Acetone cyanohydrin                                                     75-86- Lactonitrile, 2-cyano-2-        L     10
                                                                        5      Propanol
Acetone thiosemicarbazide                                               1752-  Hydrazinecarbothioamide         S     1
                                                                        30-3
Acetophenone                                                            98-86- 1-Phenyl-2-ethanone, Methyl     L     100
                                                                        2      Phenyl ketone
Acrolein                                                                107-   Acraldehyde, Acrylic Aldehyde   L     100
                                                                        02-8
Acrylamide                                                              79-06- Acrylic amide, Propenamide      S     1,000
                                                                        1
Acrylonitrile                                                           107-   Fumigrain, Acrylon, 2-          L     100
                                                                        13-1   Propenenitrile
Acrylyl chloride                                                        814-   Acryloyl chloride, 2-Propenoyl  L     1
                                                                        68-6   chloride
                                                                        111-   Hexanedinitrile,
Adiponitrile                                                            69-3   Adipodinitrile, 1,4-            L     1
                                                                               Dicyanobutane
Aldicarb                                                                116-   Carbamyl, Carbanolate, Temik    S     1
                                                                        06-3
Aldrin                                                                  309-   Aldrex, Aldrite, Aldrosol,      S     1
                                                                        00-2   Drinox, Octalene, Seedrin
Allyl alcohol                                                           107-   Weed Drench, 2-Propenyl         L     100
                                                                        18-6   Alcohol, Vinylcarbinol
Allyl chloride                                                          107-   Ethanoyl chloride, 3-Chloro-1-  L     100
                                                                        05-1   propane
Allylamine                                                              107-   2-Propenylamine, 3-Aminopropene L     1
                                                                        11-9
Aluminum phosphide                                                      20859- AIP, Celphos, Delicia, Detia,   S     100
                                                                        73-8   Phostoxin Al-Phos
Aminopterin                                                             54-62- 4-Amino-PGA, Aminopteridine, 4- S     1
                                                                        6      Aminofolic Acid
Amiton                                                                  78-53- Metramak, Tetram, Inferno,      L     1
                                                                        5      Citram
Amiton oxalate                                                          3734-  Tetram 75, Monooxalate, Chipman S     1
                                                                        97-2   6199
Ammonia                                                                 7664-  Anhydrous Ammonia               G     100
                                                                        41-7
Ammonium chloroplatinate                                                16919- Platinic Ammonium Chloride      S     1
                                                                        58-7
Ammonium hydroxide                                                      1336-  Aqua ammonia, Ammonia water     L     100
                                                                        21-6
Ammonium sulfide                                                        12135- Ammonium polysulfide            S     100
                                                                        76-1
Ammonium thiocyanate                                                    1762-  Ammonium sulfacyanate           S     1,000
                                                                        95-4
Amphetamine                                                             300-   Benzedrine, Phenedrine,         L     1
                                                                        62-9   Rhinalator. Sympamine
Aniline                                                                 62-53- Aminobenzene, Benzidam, Blue    L     100
                                                                        3      Oil, Cyanol, Phenylamine
Aniline,2,4,6-trimethyl                                                 88-05- Mesidine, 2-Aminomesitylene     L     1
                                                                        1
Antimony pentachloride                                                  7647-  Antimony perchloride            L     100
                                                                        18-9
Antimony pentafluoride                                                  7783-  Antimony Fluoride               L     1
                                                                        70-2
Antimony trichloride                                                    10025- Antimony chloride               S&L   100
                                                                        91-9
Antimony trifluoride                                                    7782-  Antimony fluoride               S     100
                                                                        56-4
Antimony trioxide                                                       1309-  —                             S     100
                                                                        64-4
Antimycin A                                                             1397-  Virosin, Antipiricullin         S     1
                                                                        94-0
                                                                               Rat-tu, Rattrack, Dirax,
Antu                                                                    86-88- Krysid, trichloride,            S     100
                                                                        4      trichlormethylbenzene,
                                                                               Chloromethylbenzene
Arsenic pentoxide                                                       1303-  Zotox, Orthoarsenic Acid,       S     1,000
                                                                        28-2   Arsenic
Arsenous oxide                                                          1327-  Arsenic Trioxide, Arsenite,     S     1,000
                                                                        53-3   White
Arsenous Trichloride                                                    7784-  Arsenic Butter, Caustic Oil of  L     100
                                                                        34-1   Arsenic, Trichloroarsine
Arsine                                                                  7784-  Arsenic Trihydride, Hydrogen    G     1
                                                                        42-1   Arsenide
Asbestos                                                                1332-  —                             S     1
                                                                        21-4
Asbestos, anthophylite                                                  77536- —                             S     1
                                                                        67-5
Asbestos, chrysotile                                                    12001- —                             S     1
                                                                        29-5
Asbestos, crocodolite                                                   12001- —                             S     1
                                                                        28-4
Asbestos, tremolite                                                     7753-  —                             S     1
                                                                        68-6
Asbestos, actinolite                                                    77536- —                             S     1
                                                                        66-4
Asbestos, amosite                                                       12172- —                             S     1
                                                                        73-5
Azinphos-ethyl                                                          2642-  Ethyl Gusathion, Crysthion,     S     1
                                                                        71-9   Ethyl Guthioci
Azinphos-methyl                                                         86-50- Methyl Guthion, Carfene,        S     1
                                                                        0      Cotnion, Crysthyon
Bacitracin                                                              1405-  Ayfivin, Baciguent, Parentracin S     1
                                                                        87-4
Barium cyanide                                                          542-   Barium dicyanide                S     10
                                                                        62-1
Benzyl chloride                                                         98-87- Benzyl Dichloride, Benzylidine  L     100
                                                                        3      Chloride
Benzenamine,3-(tri-fluoromethyl)                                        98-16- m-(Trifluoromethyl)aniline, m-  L     1
                                                                        8      toluidine
Benzene                                                                 71-43- Benzol                          L     100
                                                                        2
Benzene, 1(chloromethyI)-4-Nitro                                        100-   p-Nitrobenzyl chloride, alpha-  S     1
                                                                        14-1   Chloro-p-nitrotoluene
Benzenearsonic acid                                                     98-05- Phenyl Arsenic Acid,            S     1
                                                                        5      Phenylarsonic Acid
1,3-Benzenediol                                                         108-   Resorcinol                      S     100
                                                                        46-3
Benzenesulfonyl chloride                                                98-09- Benzene sulfonic chloride,      L     100
                                                                        9      Phenylsulfonyl chloride
Benzoyl chloride                                                        98-88- Benzyl carbonyl chloride        L     100
                                                                        4
                                                                        98-07- Benzyl trichloride, Toluene
Benzotrichloride                                                        7      trichloride,                    L     1
                                                                               trichloromethylbenzene
Benzyl chloride                                                         100-   alpha Chlorotoluene, Toly       L     100
                                                                        44-7   chloride, chloromethyl benzene
Benzyl cyanide                                                          140-   2-Phenylacetonitrile,           L     1
                                                                        29-4   Cyanotoluene
Bicyclo[2.2.1]heptane-2-carbonitrile, 5-chloro-6- (((                   15271- Tranid                          S     1
(methylamino)carbony l)oxy)lmino)                                       41-7
Bis(chloromethyl)ketone                                                 534-   1,3-Dichloroacetone, 1,3-       S     1
                                                                        07-6   Dichloro-2-Propanone
Bitoscanate                                                             4044-  Biscomate, Jonit, Phenylene-1,  S     1
                                                                        65-9   4-Diisothiocyanate
Boron tricholoride compound with methyl ether (1:1)                     10294- Trichlorborane, Boron chloride  L     1
                                                                        34-5
Boron trifluoride                                                       353-   Boron trifluoride dimethyl      L     1
                                                                        42-4   etherate
Boron trifluoride                                                       7637-  Boron fluoride, Trifluoroborane G     1
                                                                        07-2
Bromadiolone                                                            28772- Maki, Ratimus, Bromone,         S     1
                                                                        56-7   Contrac, Termus
Bromine                                                                 7726-  —                             L     1
                                                                        95-6
Bromoacetone                                                            598-   2-Propanone, 1-bromo-           L     100
                                                                        31-2
Bromoform                                                               75-25- Tribromomethane                 L     100
                                                                        2
Butadiene                                                               106-   Vinylethylene, Divinyl,         L     1
                                                                        99-0   Erythrene
Butanol                                                                 71-36- Butyl alcohol, n-Butyl alcohol  L     100
                                                                        3
Butyl isovalerate                                                       109-   n-Butyl isopentanoate, Butyl 3- L     1
                                                                        19-3   methybutyrate
Butyl vinyl ether                                                       111-   Butoxyethene                    L     1
                                                                        34-2
Butyric acid                                                            107-   Butanoic acid-propenyl alcohol, L     100
                                                                        92-6   vinyl carbinol
C.I. basic green 1                                                      633-   Brilliant Green, Aniline Green, S     1
                                                                        03-4   Ethyl Green
Cadmium bromide                                                         7789-  —                             S     100
                                                                        42-6
Cadmium oxide                                                           1306-  Cadmium fume                    S     1
                                                                        19-0
Cadmium stearate                                                        2223-  Alaixol 11, Cadmium             S     I
                                                                        93-0   octadecanoate
Calcium arsenate                                                        7778-  Pencal, Spracal                 S     1,000
                                                                        44-1
Calcium cyanide                                                         592-   Cyanogas                        S     10
                                                                        01-8
Calcium hypochlorite                                                    7778-  Bleaching Powder                S     10
                                                                        54-3
Camphechlor                                                             8001-  Toxaphene, Alltex, Estonox,     S     1
                                                                        35-2   Melipax
Cantharidin                                                             56-25- Cantharone, Spanish Fly         S     1
                                                                        7
Carbachol chloride                                                      51-83- Carbanoylcholine chloride       S     1
                                                                        2
Carbamic acid, methyl 0-(2,4-Dimethyl-1,3- Dithiolan-2-yl)              26419- Tirpate                         S     1
                                                                        73-8
Carbon disulfide                                                        75-15- Weeviltox, Carbon Bisulfide     L     100
                                                                        0
Carbon tetrachloride                                                    56-23- Tetrachloromethane              L     100
                                                                        5
Carbonyl fluoride                                                       353-   Carbon oxyfluoride              G     100
                                                                        50-4
Carbophenothion                                                         786-   Acarithion, Dagadip, Endyl,     L     1
                                                                        19-6   Garrathion, Trithion
Chlordane                                                               57-74- Dowchlor, Toxichlor, Ortho-     L     1
                                                                        9      klor, Niran, Synklor
Chlorfenvinfos                                                          470-   Birlan, Dermaton, Sapecron,     L     1
                                                                        90-6   Supone, Vinyphate
Chlorine                                                                7782-  Berltholite                     G     10
                                                                        50-5
Chlormephos                                                             24934- Dotan                           L     1
                                                                        91-6
Chlormequat chloride                                                    999-   Chlorocholine Chloride,         S     1
                                                                        81-5   Retacel, stabilan
Chlormethyl methyl ether                                                107-   Methoxy chloromethane,          L     1
                                                                        30-2   Chlorodimethyl Ether
Chloroacetaldehyde                                                      107-   2-Chloro-1-ethanal,             L     100
                                                                        20-0   Chloroaldehyde
Chloroacetic acid                                                       79-11- Chloroethanoic Acid             S     1
                                                                        8
Chloroaniline                                                           106-   Chlorobenzeneamine              L     100
                                                                        47-8
Chlorobenzene                                                           108-   Phenyl chloride                 L     100
                                                                        90-7
Chloroethanol                                                           107-   Ethylchlorohydrin,              L     1
                                                                        07-3   Glycomonochlorohydrin
Chloroethyl chloroformate                                               627-   2-chloroethyl chlorocarbonate   L     1
                                                                        11-2
Chloroform                                                              67-66- Freon 20, Trichlormethane       L     10
                                                                        3
Chloromethyl ether                                                      542-   Bis(chloromethyl)ether,1,1'-    —   —
                                                                        88-1   dichlorodimethyl Ether
Chlorophenol                                                            95-57- —                             S     100
                                                                        8
Chloroxuron                                                             1982-  Chloroxifenidim, Norex, Tenoran S     1
                                                                        47-4
Chlorphacinone                                                          3691-  Drat, Liphadione, Quick,        S     1
                                                                        35-8   Raviac, Rozol, Delta, Ranal
Chlorthiophos                                                           21923- Celathion                       L     1
                                                                        23-9
Chromic acid                                                            11115- Chromium Oxide Solution         L     100
                                                                        74-5
Cobalt                                                                  7440-  —                             S     1
                                                                        48-4
Cobalt carbonyl                                                         10210- Cobalt Tetracarbonyl, Dicobalt  S     1
                                                                        68-1   Carbonyl
Cobalt, 2,2'-                                                           62207- Fluomine                        S     1
                                                                        76-5
Colchicine                                                              64-86- Colsin, Colsaloid, Condylon,    S     1
                                                                        8      Colchisol
Combustible substances                                                  —    —                             L     100
Copper cyanide                                                          544-   Cupric cyanide                  S     10
                                                                        92-3
Corrosive substances                                                    —    —                             L,S   100
Coumafuryl                                                              117-   Fumarin, Krumkil, Lurat,        S     1
                                                                        52-2   Rathafin, Rat-A-Way, Tomarin
Coumaphos                                                               56-72- Colsin, Colsaloid, Condylon,    S     10
                                                                        4      Colchisol
Coumatetralyl                                                           5836-  Endox, Endrocide, Racumin       S     1
                                                                        29-3
Cresol,o-                                                               95-48- Cresylic Acid, o-toluol,2-      S     100
                                                                        7      Methylphenol
Crimidine                                                               535-   Castrix                         S     1
                                                                        89-7
Crotonaldehyde                                                          4170-  2-Butenal, Crotonal,            L     100
                                                                        30-3   Crotylaldehyde
Crotonaldehyde. (E)-                                                    123-   Trans-2-Butenal, Topanel        L     100
                                                                        73-9
Cyanogen bromide                                                        506-   Campilit, Bromine Cyanide,      S     100
                                                                        68-3   Bromocyan
Cyanogen iodide                                                         506-   Iodine Cyanide, Jodcyan         S     1
                                                                        78-5
Cyanophos                                                               2636-  Ciafos, Cyanox, Cyap            L     1
                                                                        26-2
Cyanuric fluoride                                                       675-   2,1,6-Trifluoro-s-Triazine      L     1
                                                                        14-9
Cychlohexane                                                            110-   Hexamethylene                   L     100
                                                                        82-7
Cychloheximide                                                          66-81- Acti-Aid, Actidion, Hizarocin,  S     1
                                                                        0      Kaken, Naramycin
Cyclohexylamine                                                         108-   Hexahydroaniline,               L     1
                                                                        91-8   Hexahydrobenzeamine
Cyclopentane                                                            287-   Penatmethylene                  L     1
                                                                        92-3
Decaborane (14)                                                         17702- Decarboron                      S     1
                                                                        41-9
Demeton                                                                 8065-  Systox, Isosystox,              L     1
                                                                        48-3   Thioldemeton, Mercaptofos
Demeton-s-methyl                                                        919-   Isometasystox, Metaisoseptox,   L     1
                                                                        86-8   Teolovy
Dialifos                                                                10311- Dialifor, Torak                 S     1
                                                                        84-9
Diborane                                                                19287- Boron Hydride, Boroethane       G     1
                                                                        45-7
Dibutyl phthalate                                                       84-74- Elaol, Celluflex DPB            L     10
                                                                        2
Dichlorbenzalkonium chloride                                            8023-  Tetrosan                        S     1
                                                                        53-8
1,2-Dichlorbenzene                                                      95-50- o-Dichlorobenzene               L     100
                                                                        1
1,3-Dichlorbenzene                                                      41-73- m-Dichlorobenzene               L     100
                                                                        1
1,4-Dichlorbenzene                                                      106-   p-Dichlorobenzene               L     100
                                                                        46-7
1,1-Dichloroethane                                                      75-34- Ethylidene dichloride           L     100
                                                                        3
1,2-Dichloroethane                                                      107-   Ethylene dichloride             L     100
                                                                        06-2
1,1-Dichloroethylene                                                    75-35- Vinylidene chloride             L     100
                                                                        4
Dichloroethyl ether                                                     111-   Bis(2-chloroethyl)Ether,        L     1
                                                                        44-4   Chlorex
Dichloromethyphenylsilane                                               149-   Phenylmethyldichlorosilane      L     1
                                                                        74-6
2,4-Dichlorophenol                                                      120-   —                             S     100
                                                                        83-2
2,6-Dichlorophenol                                                      87-65- —                             S     100
                                                                        0
2,4-Dichlorophenoxy acetic acid, esters, salts                          94-75- 2,4-D                           S     100
                                                                        7
2,2-Dichloropropionic acid                                              75-99- Dalapan                         L     100
                                                                        0
1,3-Dichloropropene                                                     542-   —                             L     100
                                                                        75-6
Dichlorvos                                                              62-73- Marvex, Phosvit, Vapona,        L     10
                                                                        7      Atgard, Nuvan, Tenac
Dicrotophos                                                             141-   Bidrin, Oleobidrin, Carbicron,  L     1
                                                                        66-2   Carbomicron
Diepoxybutane                                                           1464-  Bioxiran, Butadiene Dioxide     L     1
                                                                        53-5
Diethyl chlorophosphate                                                 814-   Diethoxyphosphorous Oxychloride L     1
                                                                        49-3
Diethyl-p-phenylene diamine                                             93-05- N,N,-Diethyl-1,4-Benzenediamine L     1
                                                                        0
Diethylcarbamazine citrate                                              1642-  Cypip, Banocide, Dicarocide,    S     1
                                                                        54-2   Ditrizine, Franocide
Digitoxin                                                               71-63- Acedoxin, Digitalin,            S     1
                                                                        6      Glucodigin, Purpurid
Diglycidyl ether                                                        2238-  Bis(2,3-Epoxypropyl)ether       L     1
                                                                        07-5
Digoxin chloride                                                        20830- Acygoxin, Lanicor, Digacin,     S     1
                                                                        75-5   Lanoxin, Rougoxin
Dimefox                                                                 115-   Hanane, Pestox 14, Terrasystum, L     1
                                                                        26-4   Tetrasystam
Dimethoate                                                              60-51- Crygon. Daphene, Dimethon,      S     10
                                                                        5      Perfecthion, Phosphamide
2,4-Dimethylphenol                                                      105-   —                             S     100
                                                                        67-9
Dimethyl phosphoro-chloridothioate                                      2524-  Chlorodimethoxyphosphine        L     1
                                                                        03-0   sulfide
Dimethyl phthalate                                                      131-   Avolin, Fermine, Mipax,         L     1,000
                                                                        11-3   Repeftal, Solvanom, Unimolum
Dimethyl sulfate                                                        77-78- DMS, Methyl Sulfat              L     1
                                                                        1
Dimethyl sulfide                                                        75-18- DMS,2-Thiapropane, Dimethyl     L     1
                                                                        3      Thioether, Exact-S
Dimethyl-p-phenylene diamine                                            99-98- N.N,-Dimethyl-1, 4-             S     1
                                                                        9      Benzenediamine
Dimethylamine                                                           124-   Methylmethanamine               G     100
                                                                        40-3
Dimethyldichlorosilane                                                  75-78- Dichlorodimethylsilicon,        L     1
                                                                        5      Inerton AW-DMCS
DimethyIhydrazine                                                       57-14- Dimazin, Unsymmetrical          L     1
                                                                        7      DimethyIhydrazine
Dimetilan                                                               644-   Fly Bands, Snip                 S     1
                                                                        64-4
Dinitrobenzene                                                          25154- Dinitrobenzol                   S     100
                                                                        54-5
Dinitrocresol                                                           534-   2,4-Dinitro-6-Methylcresol,     S     10
                                                                        52-1   Antinonin, Capsine Elgetol
Dinitrophenol                                                           25550- —                             S     10
                                                                        58-7
Dinitrotoluene                                                          25321- Methyl-dinitrobenzene           S     100
                                                                        14-6
Dinoseb                                                                 88-85- Butaphene, Caldon, Dibutox,     S     100
                                                                        7      Elgetol, Premgra
Dinoterb                                                                1420-  Herbogil, Stirpanforte,         S     1
                                                                        07-1   Veraline, Creme
Dioctyl phthalate                                                       117-   1,2-Benzene tricarboxylic Acid  L     1,000
                                                                        84-0   Dioctyl Ester
Dioxathion                                                              78-34- Bercotox, Delnatex, Dioxothion, L     1
                                                                        2      Navadel, Ruphos
Dioxolane                                                               646-   1,3-Dioxole, Ethylene Glycol    L     1
                                                                        06-0   Formal, Formal
Diphacinone                                                             82-66- Diandrin, Didion. Dipaxi,       S     1
                                                                        6      Diphacin, promar, Ramik
Diphosphoramide                                                         152-   Lethalaire G-59, Ompatox, Ompax L     100
                                                                        16-9   Postox III
                                                                        98-    Disystox, Ethylthiometon,
Disulfoton                                                              298-   Frumin, Glebofos                L     —
                                                                        04-4
Dithiazanine iodide                                                     514-   Abminthic, Anelmid, Delvex,     S     1
                                                                        73-8   Dilombrinl, Partel
Dithiobiuret                                                            541-   2-Thio-1-thiocarbamoyl urea     S     100
                                                                        53-7
Emetine, dihydrochloride                                                316-   Amebicide, Emetine              S     1
                                                                        42-7   Hydrochloride
Endosulfan                                                              115-   Thiosulfan, Thiotex, Benzoepin, S     1
                                                                        29-7   Chlorthiepin
Endothion                                                               2778-  Endocide, Exothion,             S     1
                                                                        04-3   Phosphopylon, Phosphopyrone
Endrin                                                                  72-20- Hexadrin, Isodrin Epoxide,      S     1
                                                                        8      Endrical, Endrex, Mendrin
Epichlorohydrin                                                         106-   1-chloro-2,3-Epoxypropane,      L     100
                                                                        89-8   Glycidyl Chloride
EPN                                                                     2104-  Santox                          S     1
                                                                        64-5
Ergocalciferol                                                          50-14- Activated Ergosterol, Condol,   S     1
                                                                        5      Drisdol, Vitamin D2
Ergotamine tartrate                                                     379-   Gynergen, Ergam, Exmigra,       S     1
                                                                        79-3   Rigtamin, Secagyn, Secopan
Ethanesulfonyl chloride, 2-chloro                                       1622-  2-Chlolroethylsulfonyl Chloride L     1
                                                                        32-8
Ethanol,1,2-dichloro-acetate                                            10140- 1,2-Dichloroethyl Acetate       L     1
                                                                        87-1
Ethion                                                                  5563-  Diethion, Ethopaz, Hylemox,     L     10
                                                                        12-2   Rhodocide, Soprathion
Ethoprophos                                                             13194- Mocap, Ethoprop, Jolt, Prophos, L     1
                                                                        48-4   Rovokil, VC9-104
Ethyl cyanide                                                           107-   Propanenitrile                  L     10
                                                                        12-0
Ethyl ether                                                             60-29- Diethyl ether, Ethyl oxide,     L     1
                                                                        7      Ether
Ethyl thiocyanate                                                       542-   Ethyl Rhodanate, Ethyl          L     1
                                                                        90-5   Sulphocyanate, Thicyanatoethane
Ethylbenzene                                                            100-   Phenylethane                    L     100
                                                                        41-4
Ethylbis(2-chlorethyl) amine                                            538-   2,2'-Dichlorotriethylamine      L     1
                                                                        07-8
Ethylene dibromide                                                      106-   1,2-Dibromoethane               L     1,000
                                                                        93-4
Ethylene dichloride                                                     107-   1,2-Dichloroethane              L     100
                                                                        06-2
Ethylene fluorohydrin                                                   371-   2-Fluoroethanol, beta-          L     1
                                                                        62-0   fluoroethanol
Ethylene oxide                                                          75-21- Oxane, Oxirane, Oxyfume,        G     1
                                                                        8      Oxacyclopropane
Ethylenediamine                                                         107-   1,2'-Diaminoethane,             L     100
                                                                        15-3   Dimethylenediamine
Ethyleneimine                                                           151-   Azacyclopropane, Azirane,       L     1
                                                                        56-4   Aziridine, Ethylimine
Ethylidene dichloride                                                   75-34- 1,2-Diaminoethane,              L     100
                                                                        3      Dimethylenediamine
Ethylmercuric phosphate                                                 2235-  Soilsin, Ruberon, Ceresan,      S     1
                                                                        25-8   Lignasin, Granosan M
Fenamiphos                                                              22224- Nemacur, Phenamiphos            S     1
                                                                        92-6
Fenitrothion                                                            122-   Nitrophos, Metathion, Nuvanol,  L     1
                                                                        14-5   Sumithion, Fentrothione
Fensulfothion                                                           115-   Agricur, Dasanit, Terracur,     L     1
                                                                        90-2   Daconit, Chemgro 25141
Flammable substances                                                    —    —                             L     100
Fluenetil                                                               4301-  Fluenethyl, Lambrol, Mytrol     S     1
                                                                        50-2
Fluoracetyl chloride                                                    359-   —                             L     1
                                                                        06-8
Fluorine                                                                7782-  —                             G     10
                                                                        41-4
Fluoroacetamide                                                         640-   Fussol, Megatox, Navron, Rodex, S     100
                                                                        19-7   Yanock, Fluorakil 100
Fluorouracil                                                            51-21- Efudex, Fluoroplex, Fluracil,   S     1
                                                                        8      Fluril
Fluroacetic acid                                                        144-   Cymonic Acid, Gifblaar Poison   S     1
                                                                        49-0
Fonofos                                                                 944-   Dyphonate, Difonat, Difonatul,  L     1
                                                                        22-9   Dyfonate
Formaldehyde                                                            50-00- Formalin, Lysoform, Morbicid,   G     100
                                                                        0      Methanai, Formal
Formaldehyde cyanohydrin                                                107-   Hydroxyacetonitrile,            L     1
                                                                        16-4   Cyanomethanol, Glycolic Nitrile
Formetanate                                                             23422- Formenatate Hydrochloride,      S     1
                                                                        53-9   Carzol
Formothion                                                              2540-  Aflix, Anthio, Toprose, Antio   L     1
                                                                        82-1
Formparanate                                                            17702- —                             S     1
                                                                        57-7
Fosthietan                                                              21548- Acconem, Geofos, Nem-a-tak      L     1
                                                                        32-3
Fuberidazole                                                            3878-  Fuberidatol, Fubridazole,       L     100
                                                                        19-1   Voronit, Fuberisazol
Furan                                                                   110-   Tetrol, Axole, 1,4-Epoxy-1,3-   L     100
                                                                        00-9   Butadiene, Furfuran
Gallium trichloride                                                     13450- Gallium (III) Chloride          S     1
                                                                        90-3
Hexachlorocyclopentadiene                                               77-47- Graphlox,                       L     1
                                                                        4      Perchlorcyclopentadiene
Hexachloronaphthalene                                                   1335-  Halowax 1014                    S     1
                                                                        87-1
Hexamethylenediamine, N,N'-dibutyl                                      4835-  1,6-N,N'-Dibutylhexanediamine   L     1
                                                                        11-4
Hydrazine                                                               302-   Diamine, Levoxine               L     1
                                                                        01-2
Hydrochloric acid                                                       7647-  Muriatic acid                   L     100
                                                                        01-0
Hydrocyanic acid                                                        74-90- Hydrogen Cyanide, Prussic Acid, G     10
                                                                        8      Cyclon, Evercyn
Hydrofluoric acid                                                       7664-  Fluohydric Acid                 L     100
                                                                        39-3
Hydrogen chloride                                                       7647-  Hydrochloric Acid, Muriatic     L,G   100
                                                                        01-0   Acid, Spirits of Salt
Hydrogen fluoride                                                       7664-  Hydrofluoric Acid, Antisal 2B   L,G   100
                                                                        39-3
Hydrogen peroxide (conc>52%)                                            7722-  Albone, Inhibine, Perhydrol,    L     1
                                                                        84-1   Superoxol
Hydrogen selenide                                                       7783-  Selane, Selenium Anhydride,     G     1
                                                                        07-5   Selenium Dihydride
Hydrogen sulfide                                                        7783-  Sewer Gas, Stink Damp,          G     100
                                                                        06-4   Hydrosulfuric Acid
Hydroquinone                                                            123-   1,4-Benzenediol, Quinol,        S     1
                                                                        31-9   Tequinol, Arctuvin
Hydrosulphuric acid                                                     7783-  Aqueous hydrogen sulfide        L     100
                                                                        06-4
Ignitable substances                                                    —    —                             S,L,G 100
Indomethacin                                                            53-86- Amuno, Artrivia, Indacin,       S     1
                                                                        1      Indomed, Metartril, Sadoreum
Iridium tetrachloride                                                   10025- Iridium(IV)Chloride, Iridic     S     1
                                                                        97-5   Chloride
Iron,pentacarbonyl-                                                     13463- Pentacarbonyliron, Iron         L     1
                                                                        40-6   Carbonyl
Isobenzan                                                               297-   Omtan, Telodrin                 S     1
                                                                        78-9
Isobutyronitrile                                                        78-82- 2-Cyanopropane, Isopropyl       L     1
                                                                        0      Nitrile, Isopropyl
Isocyanic acid,3,4-dichlorophenyl ester                                 102-   1,2-Dichloro-4-                 S     1
                                                                        36-3   Isocyanatobenzene
Isodrin                                                                 465-   Experimental Insecticide 711    S     1
                                                                        73-6
Isofluorphate                                                           55-91- Difmpyl, Dyflos, Floropryl,     L     100
                                                                        4      Fluostigmine
Isophorone                                                              78-59- —                             L     100
                                                                        1
Isophorone diisocyanate                                                 4098-  —                             S     1
                                                                        71-9
Isopropyl chloroformate                                                 108-   Isopropyl Chlorocarbonate       L     1
                                                                        23-6
Isopropyl formate                                                       625-   —                             L     1
                                                                        55-8
Isopropylmethylpyrazolyl dimethylcarbamate                              119-   Primin, Saolan, Isolan          L     1
                                                                        38-0
Kepone                                                                  143-   Chlordecone                     S     1
                                                                        50-0
Lactonitrile                                                            78-97- 2-Hydroxypropanentrile,         L     1
                                                                        7      Acetocyanohydrin
Leptophos                                                               21609- Abar, Fosvel, Lepton,           S     1
                                                                        90-5   OJeophosvel, Vlsicol 506
Lewisite                                                                541-   Chlorovinylarsine Dichloride    L     1
                                                                        25-3
Lindane                                                                 58-89- Aficide, Isotox, Silvanol,      S     1
                                                                        9      Viton, Gammahexa, Horte
Lithium hydride                                                         7580-  —                             S     1
                                                                        67-8
Malathion                                                               1.21-  Carbofos                        L     1
                                                                        75-5
                                                                        109-   Dicyanomethane,
Malononitrile                                                           77-3   Propanedinitrile,               S     100
                                                                               Methylenedinitrile
Manganese, tricarbonyl methylcyclopentadienyl                           12108- Antiknock-33, Methylcymantrene  L     1
                                                                        13-3
Mechlorethamine                                                         51-75- Chloramine, Mustargen, Nitrogen L     1
                                                                        2      Mustard, Embichin
Mercuric acetate                                                        1600-  Mercury(II)Acetate, Mercuric    S     1
                                                                        27-7   Diacetate
Mercuric chloride                                                       7487-  Mercury(Il)Chloride, Corrosive  S     1
                                                                        94-7   Sublimate, Fungchex Solem
Mercuric cyanide                                                        592-   Canurina                        S     1
                                                                        04-1
Mercuric oxide                                                          21908- Montroydite, Red Precipitate,   S     1
                                                                        53-2   Yellow Precipitate
Mercury                                                                 7439-  Quick Silver                    S     1
                                                                        97-6
Mesitylene                                                              108-   1,3,5-Trimethylbenzene, Fleet X L     1
                                                                        67-8
Mesphosfolan                                                            950-   —                             L     1
                                                                        10-7
Methacrolein diacetate                                                  10476- —                             L     1
                                                                        95-6
Methacrylic anhydride                                                   760-   Methacryloyl Anhydride          L     1
                                                                        93-0
Methacrylonitrile                                                       126-   2-Cyano-1-Propene, Isopropene   L     100
                                                                        98-7   Cyanide
Methacryloyl chloride                                                   920-   Methacrylic Chloride            L     1
                                                                        46-7
Methaeryloyioxyethyl isocyanate                                         30674- —                             L     1
                                                                        80-7
Methamidophos                                                           10265- Monitor, Acephate-Met. Hamidop, S     1
                                                                        92-6   Tamaron, Chevaron 9006
Methanesulfonyl fluoride                                                558-   Fumette                         L     1
                                                                        25-8
Methanol                                                                67-56- Methyl alcohol, Wood alcohol    L     100
                                                                        1
Methidathion                                                            950-   Ultracide, Supracide,           S     1
                                                                        37-8   Medathion, Somonil, Supracid
Methiocarb                                                              2032-  Mesurol, Metmercapturon         S     10
                                                                        65-7
Methomyl                                                                16752- Lannate, Meysomile, Nudrin      S     100
                                                                        77-5
Methoxyethylmercuric-acetate                                            151-   Landisan, Mercuran, Radosan     S     1
                                                                        38-2
Methy thiocyanate                                                       556-   Methyl Rhodanate, Methyl        L     1
                                                                        64-9   Sulfocyanate
Methyl 2-chloroacrylate                                                 80-63- Methyl 2-chloro-2-Propenoate    L     1
                                                                        7
Methyl bromide                                                          74-83- Bromomethane, Corafume,         G     100
                                                                        9      Pestmaster, Rotox, Zytox
Methyl chloride                                                         74-87- Chloromethane                   G     1
                                                                        3
Methyl chloroformate                                                    79-22- Methoxycarbonyl Chloride,       L     100
                                                                        1      Methyl Chlorocarbonate
Methyl disulfilde                                                       624-   Dimethyldisulfide               L     1
                                                                        92-0
Methyl ethyl ketone                                                     78-93- 1-Butanone                      L     100
                                                                        3
Methyl ethyl ketone peroxide                                            1338-  2-Butanone peroxide             L     10
                                                                        23-4
Methyl isobutyl ketone                                                  108-   Methyl pentanone, 4-Methyl-2-   L     5,000
                                                                        10-1   pentanone
Methyl isocyanate                                                       624-   Isocyanatomethane               L     1
                                                                        83-9
Methyl isothiocyanate                                                   556-   Methyl Mustard Oil, Trapex,     S     1
                                                                        61-6   Trapexide, Vorlex, Vortex
Methyl mercaptan                                                        74-93- Methanethiol, Thiomethanol,     G     100
                                                                        1      Mercaptomethane
Methyl methacrylate                                                     80-62- Methyl methacrylate monomer     L     100
                                                                        6
Methyl phenkapton                                                       3735-  Methyl Phencapton               L     1
                                                                        23-7
Methyl phosphonic dichloride                                            676-   —                             S     1
                                                                        97-1
Methyl vinyl ketone                                                     78-94- 2-Butenone, 3-Buten-2-one,      L     1
                                                                        4      Methylene Acetone
Methylene bromide                                                       74-95- Dibromomethane                  L     100
                                                                        3
Methylene chloride                                                      75-09- Dichloromethane                 L     100
                                                                        2
Methylhydrazine                                                         60-34- Hydrazomethane, 1-              L     10
                                                                        4      Monomethylhydrazine
Methylmercuric dicyonamide                                              502-   Agrosol, Morsodren, Morton Soil S     1
                                                                        39-6   Drench, Pano-Drench
Methyltrichlorosilane                                                   75-79- Methylsilyl Trichloride,        L     1
                                                                        6      Trichloromethyl silicon
Metolcarb                                                               1129-  Tsumacide, m-Cresyl Methyl      S     1
                                                                        41-5   carbamate, Kumia, Metacrate
                                                                        7786-  Apavinphos, Fosdrin, Gesfid.
Mevinphos                                                               34-7   Gestid, Meniphos, Menite,       L     10
                                                                               Phosfene
Mexacarbate                                                             315-   Zectran, Mexicarbate, Zectane,  S     1,000
                                                                        18-4   Zaxfran, Zactran
Mitomycin C                                                             50-07- Ametycine, Mutamycin            S     1
                                                                        7
Monocrotophos                                                           6923-  Azodrin, N-methyl Bidrin,       S     1
                                                                        22-4   Nuvacron, Bilogran, Monocron
Muscimol                                                                2763-  Agarin, Agarine, Pantherine     S     1,000
                                                                        96-4
Mustard gas                                                             505-   Sulfur Mustard. Yperite, Yellow L     1
                                                                        60-2   cross liquid, Mustard Vapor
Napthalene                                                              91-20- Naphthene                       S     100
                                                                        3
Nickel                                                                  7440-  Nickel sponge, Raney Alloy,     S     1
                                                                        02-0   Cabonyl nickel powder
Nickel carbonyl                                                         13463- Nickel tetracarbonyl            L     1
                                                                        39-3
Nickel cyanide                                                          557-   —                             S     1
                                                                        19-7
Nicotine                                                                54-11- Destruxol orchid spray, Mach-   L     100
                                                                        5      Nic, Nicocide, Nico-Dust
Nicotine sulfate                                                        65-30- Black leaf 40                   S     1
                                                                        5
Nitric acid                                                             7697-  Aqua fortis. Nital, Engraver's  L     100
                                                                        37-2   acid, Azotic Acid
Nitric oxide                                                            10102- Nitrogen Monoxide, Nitrogen     G     10
                                                                        43-9   Oxide
Nitrobenzene                                                            98-95- Mirbane oil, essence of myrbane L     100
                                                                        3
Nitrocyclohexane                                                        1122-  —                             L     1
                                                                        60-7
Nitrogen dioxide                                                        10102- Nitrito, Nitro, Nitrogen        G     10
                                                                        44-0   peroxide, Nitrogen tetroxide
Nitroglycerine                                                          55-63- Nitroglycerol, glycerine        L     10
                                                                        0      trinitrate
Nitroxodimethylamine                                                    62-75- Dimethyl Nitrosamine,           L     1
                                                                        9      Dimethylnitrosoamine
Nitrotoluene                                                            1321-  Methylnitrobenzene              L     100
                                                                        12-6
Norbormide                                                              991-   Raticide, Raticate, Shoxin      S     1
                                                                        42-4
Oleum                                                                   0      Fuming Sulfuric Acid            L     1
Organorhodium complex (PMN-82-147)                                      0      —                             —   —
Orotic acid                                                             65-86- Animal galactose factor, Whey   S     1
                                                                        1      Factor, Orodin, Orotonin
Osmium tetroxide                                                        20816- Osmic acid anhydride, Perosmic  S     100
                                                                        12-0   Oxide, Osmium Oxide
Ouabain                                                                 630-   Acocantherin, Astrobain,        S     1
                                                                        60-4   Storphosan, Purostrophan
Oxamyl                                                                  23135- Thioazmyl, Vydate               S     1
                                                                        22-0
Oxetane,3,3 bis(chloromethyl)-                                          78-71- Penton                          L     1
                                                                        7
Oxydisulfoton                                                           2497-  Disyston Sulfoxide, Oxydemeton- L     1
                                                                        07-6   ethyl
Ozone                                                                   10028- Triatomic oxygen                G     1
                                                                        15-6
Paraformaldehyde                                                        30525- Paraform                        S     100
                                                                        89-4
Paraquat                                                                1910-  Crisquat, Gramoxone, Methyl,    S     1
                                                                        42-5   Vilogen, pathclear
Paraquat methosulfate                                                   2074-  Paraquat Dimethyl Sulfate,      S     1
                                                                        50-2   Gramoxone Methyl Sulfate
Parathion                                                               56-38- Ethyl Parathion, Alkron,        L     1
                                                                        2      Phoskil, Panthion, Phosphenol
                                                                        298-   Azophos, Dalf, Metaphos,
Parathion methyl                                                        00-0   Metacide, Metron, Nitrox,       S     100
                                                                               Wofotox
Paris green                                                             12002- Basle Green, Pigment Green 21,  S     100
                                                                        03-8   Cupric acetoarsenite
Penol, 2,2'-thiobis [4-chloro-6-methyl]                                 4418-  Chlorbisan, Orbisan             S     1
                                                                        66-0
Pentaborane                                                             19624- Pentaboron Nonahydride          L     1
                                                                        22-7
Pentachloroethane                                                       76-01- Pentalin, Ethane Pentachloride  L     1
                                                                        7
Pentachlorophenol                                                       87-86- Chem-Tol, Chlorophen, Penta,    S     10
                                                                        5      Weedone, Permacide
Pentadecylamine                                                         2570-  1-Pentadecanamine               S     1
                                                                        26-5
Peracetic acid                                                          79-21- Peroxyacetic Acid, Acetyl       L     1
                                                                        0      Hydroperoxide
Perchloromethylmercaptan                                                594-   Trichloromethane sulfenyl       L     100
                                                                        42-3   chloride
Petroleum Distillates and Residues                                      —    —                             L     10
   (a) light crude and light distillates (petroleum ether, gasoline,
naphtha, Stoddard's solvent, mineral spirits, petroleum spirits,        —    —                             —   —
ligroin, benzine(e);
   (b) kerosene, diesel oil (light or heavy), #2, fuel oil;          —    —                             L     100
   (c) #4 and heavier fuel oils, heavy crude oil and residues.       —    —                             L     500
Phenol                                                                  108-   Carbolic Acid, Izal, Phenyl     S     100
                                                                        95-2   Alcohol
Phenol,3-((1-methylethy l)-ethyl)-methylcarbamate                       64-00- m-Cumenyl methyl carbanate,     S     1
                                                                        6      Hercules 5727
Phenol,2,2-thiobis [4,6-dichloro-]                                      97-18- Actamer, Bidiphen, Bithionol,   S     1
                                                                        7      Bitin, Lorothiodel, Neopellis
Phenoxarsine,10,10'-oxydi                                               58-36- Estabex ABF                     S     1
                                                                        6
Phenyl dichloroarsine                                                   696-   Phenylarsinedichloride          L     1
                                                                        28-6
Phenylhydrazine hydrochloride                                           59-88- Phenylhydrazine                 S     1
                                                                        1      Monohydrochloride
Phenyl mercury acetate                                                  62-38- Mersolite, Liquiphene,          S     100
                                                                        4      Dyanacide, Algimycin, Trigosan
Phenylsilatrane                                                         2097-  —                             S     1
                                                                        19-0
Phenylthiourea                                                          103-   Phenythiocarbamide              S     100
                                                                        85-5
Phorate                                                                 298-   Thimet, Granotox, Rampart,      L     10
                                                                        02-2   Vegfru, Foratox, Vergfru
Phosacetim                                                              4104-  Gophacide, Phosazetim           S     1
                                                                        14-7
Phosfolan                                                               947-   Cyolane, Cayolan, Cylan, Cyolan S     1
                                                                        02-4
Phosgene                                                                75-44- Carbonyl Chloride, Chloroformyl G     10
                                                                        5      Chloride
Phosmet                                                                 732-   Prolate, Imidan, Decemthion,    S     1
                                                                        11-6   Ftalophos, Percolate
Phosphamidon                                                            13171- Dimecron, Dixon, Famfos,        L     1
                                                                        21-6   Merkon, Sundaram
                                                                        7803-  Celphos, Delicia, Hydrogen
Phosphine                                                               51-2   Phosphide, Detia Phosphorus     G     100
                                                                               Trichloride
Phosphonothioic acid methyl-S-((2-bis(1- methylethyl)amino) ethyl)O-    50782- —                             L     1
ethyl ester                                                             69-9
Phosphonothioic acid, dimethyl 4-(methylethio) phenyl ester             2665-  CP40294                         L     1
                                                                        30-7
Phosphonothioic acid, methyl-, O-ethyl O-(4- methyrthio)phenyl          2703-  Bayer 29952                     L     1
                                                                        13-1
Phosphoric acid                                                         7664-  —                             L     100
                                                                        38-2
Phosphoric acid, dimethyl                                               3254-  —                             L     1
                                                                        63-5
Phosphorus                                                              7723-  Rat-Nip, Bonide Blue Death      S     1
                                                                        14-0   Ratkiller, Exolit, LPK
Phosphorus oxychloride                                                  10025- Phosphoric Trichloride,         L     100
                                                                        87-3   Phosphorus Oxytrichloride
Phosphorus pentachloride                                                10026- Phosphoric Perchloride,         S     1
                                                                        13-8   Phosphorus (V) Chloride
Phoxphorus pentoxide                                                    1314-  Phosphoric Acid Anhydride,      S     1
                                                                        56-3   Phosphorous (V) Oxide
Phylloquinone                                                           84-80- Vitamin K1, Synthex P, Kephton, L     1
                                                                        0      Aquamephyton
Physostigmine                                                           57-47- Calabarine, Esgrine,            S     1
                                                                        6      Esromiotin, Ezerin, Physost
Physostigmine salicylate (1:1)                                          57-64- Eserine Salicylate, Physostol   S     1
                                                                        7      Salicylate
Picrotoxin                                                              124-   Cocculus, Indian Berry,         S     1
                                                                        87-8   Cocculin, Fish Berry
Piperidine                                                              110-   Azacyclohexane, Cylopentimine,  L     1
                                                                        89-4   Cypentil
Piprotal                                                                5281-  Heliotropin Acetal, Tropital    S     1
                                                                        13-0
Pirmifos-ethyl                                                          23505- Fernex, Pirimifosethyll,        L     1
                                                                        41-1   Primicid, Primotec, Pinicid
Platinous chloride                                                      10025- Platinum Chloride, Muriate of   S     1
                                                                        65-7   Platinum
Platinum tetrachloride                                                  13454- Platinum (IV) Chloride,         S     1
                                                                        96-1   Platinic Chloride
Polychlorinated Biphenyls                                               1336-  PCBs, Aroclors                  L     10
                                                                        36-3
Posphorus trichloride                                                   7719-  Trichlorphosphine               L     100
                                                                        12-2
Potassium arsenite                                                      10124- Potassium Metaarsenite,         S     1,000
                                                                        50-2   Fowler's Solution
Potassium cyanide                                                       151-   Cyanide of Potassium            S     10
                                                                        50-8
Potassium hydroxide                                                     1310-  Caustic potash                  S,L   100
                                                                        58-3
Potassium silver cyanide                                                506-   Potassium Argentocyanide,       S     1
                                                                        61-6   Potassium Dicyanoargentate
Promecarb                                                               2631-  Carbamult, Promecarb            S     1
                                                                        37-0
Propargyl bromide                                                       106-   3-Bromo-Propyne, gamma-         L     I
                                                                        96-7   Bromoallylene
Propiolactone, beta-                                                    57-57- 2-Oxetanone, Betaprone, 3-      L     1
                                                                        8      Hydroxypropionic Acid Lactone
Propionitrile                                                           107-   Cyanoethane, Ether Cynatus,     L     10
                                                                        12-0   Ethyl cyanide, Propylnitrile
Propionitrile, 3-chloro-                                                542-   3-Chloropropanonitrile, 1-      L     100
                                                                        76-7   chloro-2-cyanoethane
Propyl chlorformate                                                     309-   Propyl Chlorocarbonate          L     1
                                                                        61-5
Propylene glycol, allyl ether                                           1331-  Propanol, Allyloxy;1,2-         L     1
                                                                        17-5   Propanediol, Allyl Ether
Propylene oxide                                                         75-56- 1,2-Epoxypropane, Methyl        L     100
                                                                        9      Oxirane, Propylene
Propyleneimine                                                          75-55- 2-Methyl Aziridine, 2-          L     1
                                                                        8      Methylazacyclopropane
Prothoate                                                               2275-  Trimethoate, Fostion, Oleofac,  S     1
                                                                        18-5   Prothoat, Telefos
Pseudocumene                                                            95-63- 1,2,4-Trimethylbenzene,         L     1
                                                                        3      Pseudocumol,psi-cumene
Pyrene                                                                  129-   Benzo [d,e,f,] henanthrene,     S     1,000
                                                                        00-0   beta-Pyrene
Pyridine, 2-methyl-5-vinyl                                              140-   2-Picoline 5-vinyl, 2-Methyl-5- L     1
                                                                        76-1   Ethylpyridine
Pyridine, 4-amino-                                                      504-   Aritrol, p-Aminopyridine, 4-    S     1,000
                                                                        24-5   Pyradinamine
Pyridine,4-nitro-,1-oxide                                               1124-  4-Nitro-Pyridine-N-Oxime        S     1
                                                                        33-0
Pyriminil                                                               53558- VACOR, DLP-87, DLP 787          S     1
                                                                        25-1
Reactive substances                                                     —    —                             S,L,G 100
Rhodium trichloride                                                     10049- Rhodium (III) Chloride, Rhodium S     1
                                                                        07-7   Chloride
Salcomine                                                               14167- Salcomin, Salcomine Powder      S     1
                                                                        18-1
Sarin                                                                   107-   Trilone 46, Isopropyl Methyl    L     1
                                                                        44-8   Fluorophosphate
Selenium oxychloride                                                    7791-  Seleninyl Chloride, Selenynyl   L     1
                                                                        23-3   Dichloride
Selenous acid                                                           7783-  Selenious Acid, Monohydrated    S     10
                                                                        00-8   Selenium Dioxide
                                                                        563-   Amidourea Hydrochloride,
Semicarbazide hydro-chloride                                            41-7   Hydrazine Carboxamide           S     1
                                                                               Hydrochloride
Silane,(4-aminobutyl) diethoxymethyl-                                   3037-  delta- Aminobuty lmethyldiethyl L     1
                                                                        72-7   oxy s ilane
Silvex                                                                  93-72- 2,4,5-TP acid                   L     100
                                                                        1
Sodium anthraquinone-1-sulfonate                                        128-   —                             S     1
                                                                        56-3
Sodium arsenate                                                         7631-  Sodium Orthoarsenate, Fatsco    S     100
                                                                        89-2   Ant Poison, Sweeney's Ant Go
Sodium arsenite                                                         7784-  Sodium Metaarsenite, Kill-All,  S     100
                                                                        46-5   Penite, Prodalumnol, Atlas 'A'
Sodium azide (Na(N3))                                                   26628- Azide, Azium, Kazoe, Smite      S     1
                                                                        22-8
Sodium cacodylate                                                       124-   Silvisar, Arsycodile,           S     1
                                                                        65-2   Alkarsodyl, Ansar 160
Sodium cyanide (Na(CN))                                                 143-   Cyanogran, Cymag                S     10
                                                                        33-9
Sodium fluoroacetate                                                    62-74- Fratol, Furatol, Compd 1080,    S     10
                                                                        8      Yasoknock, Ratbane 1080
Sodium hydroxide                                                        1310-  Caustic Soda, Caustic           S,L   100
                                                                        73-2
Sodium hypochlorite                                                     7681-  —                             S,L   100
                                                                        52-9
Sodium pentachlorophenate                                               131-   Pentaphenate, Santobrite,       S     1
                                                                        52-2   Weedbeads, Dowicide G
Sodium selenate                                                         13410- Disodium Selenate, Sel-Tox SS02 S     1
                                                                        01-0
Sodium selenite                                                         10102- Disodium Selenite, Disodium     S     100
                                                                        18-8   Selenium Trioxide
Sodium tellurite                                                        10102- Sodium Tellurate (IV)           S     1
                                                                        20-2
Solfoxide,3-chloropropyl octyl                                          3569-  MGK Repellent 1,207             L     1
                                                                        57-1
                                                                        57-24- Certox, Kwik-kill, Mouse-Rid,
Strychnine                                                              9      Sanaseed, Strychnos, Mouse      S     10
                                                                               Notes
Strychnine, sulfate                                                     60-41- Strychnidin-10-one, Sulfate (2: S     1
                                                                        3      1)
Styrene                                                                 100-   Phenylethylene                  L     100
                                                                        42-5
Sulfotep                                                                3689-  Dithion, Dithiofos, Bladafum,   L     100
                                                                        24-5   Thiotep, Pirofos
Sulfur dioxide                                                          7446-  Sulfur oxide, Sulfurous         G     1
                                                                        09-5   Anhydride
Sulfur tetrafluoride                                                    7783-  Sulfur Fluoride (SF4),          G     1
                                                                        60-0   Tetrafluorosulfurane
Sulfur trioxide                                                         7446-  Sulfan, Sulfuric Anhydride,     S     1
                                                                        11-9   Sulfuric oxide
Sulfuric acid                                                           7664-  Battery Acid, Dipping Acid, Oil L     100
                                                                        93-9   of Vitrei, Hydrogen Sulfate
Sylylene dichloride                                                     28347- bis-Chloromethyl Benzene,       S     1
                                                                        13-9   Xylylene Chloride
Tabun                                                                   77-81- —                             L     1
                                                                        6
Tellurium                                                               13494- Aurum Paradoxum, Metallum       S     1
                                                                        80-9   Problematum
Tellurium hexafluoride                                                  7783-  Tellurium Fluoride (TeF6)       G     1
                                                                        80-4
Tepp                                                                    107-   Tetraethyl Diphosphate, Tetron, L     10
                                                                        49-3   Hexamite, Killax
Terbufos                                                                13071- Counter                         L     1
                                                                        79-9
1,1,1,2-Tetrachloroethane                                               79-34- Unsymmetric tetrachlorethane    L     1
                                                                        5
1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane                                               630-   Acetylene tetrachloride         L     100
                                                                        20-6
Tetrachloroethylene                                                     127-   Perchloroethylene, Perc         L     1
                                                                        18-4
Tetrachlorobenzene                                                      95-94- Benzene tetrachloride           L     100
                                                                        3
Tetraethyltin                                                           597-64 Tetraethylstannane              L     1
                                                                        1314-  Dithallium Trioxide, Thallium
Thallic oxide                                                           32-5   (III) Oxide, Thallium           S     100
                                                                               Sesquioxide
Thallium sulfate                                                        10031- Ratox, Zelid                    S     100
                                                                        59-1
                                                                        6533-  Thallium (I) Carbonate,
Thallous carbonate                                                      73-9   Dithallium Carbonate, Thallium  S     100
                                                                               Carbonate
Thallous chloride                                                       7791-  Thallium (I) Chloride, Thallium S     100
                                                                        12-0   Monochloride, Thallium Cloride
                                                                        2757-  Formomalenic Thallium,
Thallous malonate                                                       18-8   Propanedioic Acid, Dithallium   S     1
                                                                               Salt
Thallous sulfate                                                        7446-  Thallium (I) Sulfate,           S     100
                                                                        18-6   Dithallium Sulfate
Thiocarbazide                                                           2231-  1,3-Diamino-2Thiourea,          S     1
                                                                        57-4   Thiocarbonic Dihydrazide
Thiocyanic acid, 2-(benzothiazolylthio methyl ester)                    21564- Busan 30, Busan 72, Ichiban     L     1
                                                                        17-0
Thiofanox                                                               39196- Dacomax                         S     100
                                                                        18-4
Thiometon                                                               640-   Ekatin, Intrathion, Intration,  L     1
                                                                        15-3   Luxistelm, Thiameton
Thionazin                                                               297-   Cynem, Nemafos, Nemaphos,       L     100
                                                                        97-2   Nematocide, Zinophos
Thiophenol                                                              108-   Benzenethiol, Mercaptobenzene,  L     100
                                                                        98-5   Phenyl Mercaptan, Phenylthiol
                                                                        79-19- 1-Amino- 2-Thiourea,
Thiosemicarbazide                                                       6      Thiocarbamoylhydrazine,         S     100
                                                                               Hydrazinecarbothioamite
Thiourea,(2-chlorophenyl)                                               5344-  (o-Chlorophenyl)Thiourea        S     100
                                                                        82-1
Thiourea,(2-methylphenyl)                                               614-   1-o-Tolyl-2-Thiourea            S     1
                                                                        78-8
Titanium tetrachloride                                                  7550-  Tetrachlorotitanium, Titanic    L     1
                                                                        45-0   Chloride, Titanium Chloride
Toluene                                                                 108-   Mefhylbenzene                   L     100
                                                                        88-3
Toluene 2,4-diisocyanate                                                584-   Hylene TM, Mondur TD, Niax TDI, L     100
                                                                        84-9   Nacconate 100
Toluene 2,6-diisocyanate                                                91-08- Hylene TM, Niax TDI             L     100
                                                                        7
Toxaphene                                                               8001-  Octachlorocamphene              S     1
                                                                        35-2
Trans-1,4-dichlorobutene                                                110-   1,4-Dichloro-2-Butene, 1,4-     L     1
                                                                        57-6   Dichloro-trans-2-Butene
Triamiphos                                                              1031-  Triamphos, Wepsin, Wepsyn       S     1
                                                                        47-6
Triazofos                                                               24017- Hostathion, Triazophos          L     1
                                                                        47-8
Trichloracetyl chloride                                                 76-02- Tricholoroacetic Acid Chloride, L     1
                                                                        8      Trichloro-acetochloride
Trichloro(chloromethyl)silane                                           1558-  (Chloromethyl)Trichlorosilane   L     1
                                                                        25-4
Trichloro(dichIorophenyl)silane                                         27137- (Dichlorophenyl)trichlorosilane L     1
                                                                        85-5
1,1,1 -Trichloroethane                                                  71-55- Methyl chloroform               L     100
                                                                        6
1,1,2-Trichlorethane                                                    79-00- Vinyl trichloride               L     1
                                                                        5
Trichloroethylene                                                       79-01- Trichloroethene, TCE            L     100
                                                                        6
Trichloroethylsilane                                                    315-   Ethyltrichlorosilane, Ethyl     L     1
                                                                        21-9   Silicon Trichloride
Trichloromonormoromethane                                               75-69- Trichlorofluoromethane          L     100
                                                                        4
Trichloronate                                                           327-   Agrisil, Agritox, Fenophosphon, L     1
                                                                        98-0   Fitosol, Phytosol
Trichlorophenols                                                        25167- —                             S     10
                                                                        82-2
2,4,5-Trichlorophenoxy acetic acid                                      93-76- 2,4,5-T                         L     1,000
                                                                        5
Trichlorophenyisilane                                                   98-13- Phenyitrichlorosilane, Silicon  L     1
                                                                        5      Phenyl Trichloride Richloronate
2,4,6-Trinitrophenol                                                    88-89- Picric Acid                     S     1
                                                                        1
Trichlorophon                                                           52-68- Phoschlor, Prolox, Soldep,      S     100
                                                                        6      Trichlorophene, Trinex, Tugon
Triethoxysilane                                                         998-   —                             L     1
                                                                        30-1
Trimethylolchlorosilane                                                 75-77- Trimethylsilyl Chloride,        L     1
                                                                        4      Chlorotrimethylsilane
Trimethyltin chloride                                                   1066-  Chlorotrimethyl Stannane,       S     1
                                                                        45-1   Chlorotrimethyltin
Trimethyoipropane phosphite                                             824-   —                             S     1
                                                                        11-3
Tri nitrobenzene                                                        99-35- Trinitrobezol                   S     1
                                                                        4
Triphenyltin Chloride                                                   639-   Brestanol, Chloro triphenyltin, S     1
                                                                        58-7   Fentin Chloride, Tinmate
Tris(2-chloroethyl)amine                                                555-   2,2',2'-Trichlortotriethylamine L     1
                                                                        77-1
Valinomycin                                                             2001-  Antibiotic N-329 B, Vanilomicin S     1
                                                                        95-8
Vanadium pentoxide                                                      1314-  Vanadic Anhydride, Divanadium   S     100
                                                                        62-1   Pentoxide
Vinyl acetate monomer                                                   108-   Vinyl Acetate HQ, Vyac, Zesett, L     100
                                                                        05-4   Ethenyl Acetate
Vinyl chloride                                                          75-01- Chloroethane, Chlorethylene     L     1
                                                                        4
Vinylnorbornene                                                         3048-  5-Vinyl-2-Norborene,2,-         L     1
                                                                        64-4   Vinylnorborene
Warfarin                                                                81-81- 200 Coumarin, Athrombine-K,     S     100
                                                                        2      Coumadin, Coumafen, Ratoxin
Warfarin sodium                                                         129-   Athrombin, Coumadin Sodium,     S     1
                                                                        06-6   panivarfin, Panwrfin, Waran
Xylene                                                                  1330-  Dimethylbenzene                 L     100
                                                                        20-7
Xylenol                                                                 1300-  Dimethylphenol                  L     100
                                                                        71-6
Zinc cyanide                                                            557-   —                             S     100
                                                                        21-1
Zinc dichloro(4,4-dimethyl-5(((Methyl-amino)cabonyl                     58270- —                             S     1
oxy)imino)pentanenitrile                                                08-9
Zinc phosphide                                                          1314-  Blue-Ox, Delusal, Kilrat, Mous- S     100
                                                                        84-7   con, Phosvin, Rumetan, Stutox
 
§ 11-05 Administrative Proceedings.
   (a)   Applicability.
      (1)   This section shall apply to all administrative proceedings brought
at the request of a responsible person pursuant to § 24-610(a)(4) of the
Administrative Code.
      (2)   This section shall not apply if the Commissioner:
         (i)   issued no order; or
         (ii)   has determined pursuant to § 24-610(a)(4) of the Administrative
Code that response measures are to be implemented without any delay.
   (b)   Request for hearing.
      (1)   A responsible person who has been served with an order issued by
the Commissioner pursuant to §§ 24-608 and 24-610 of the Administrative Code,
may submit a written request for a hearing within ten (10) working days of
service of such order.
      (2)   The request for a hearing shall be served personally or by
certified or registered mail, to the following address:
         New York City Department of Environmental Protection
         Bureau of ____________
         Attention: Hazardous Substances Emergency Response Administrator
         59-17 Junction Boulevard
         Corona, New York 11368-5107
      (3)   The request for a hearing shall state with specificity:
         (i)   the date of service of the Commissioner's order to the
responsible person; (ii) the location of the site which is the subject of the
order;
         (iii)   the substance which was released or may be released;
         (iv)   the action ordered to be taken;
         (v)   the reason for requesting a hearing; and
         (vi)   an address for subsequent service of documents.
      (4)   The request for a hearing, when made within the time specified,
shall constitute a stay against compliance with the Commissioner's order.
However, nothing in this section shall preclude or affect the authority of the
Commissioner to implement response measures deemed to be necessary to protect
the public health or welfare or the environment from a release or threat of
release of a hazardous substance.
   (c)   Commissioner's response to request for hearing.
      (1)   Within ten (10) working days of service of a request for a hearing,
the Commissioner shall either deny the request, or require the submission of
additional information in support of the request, or grant the request.
      (2)   The Commissioner's response to a request for a hearing shall be
served on the responsible person who made the request, personally or by
certified or registered mail within the prescribed time period, to the address
provided in the request for hearing or, if no such address was provided, to the
address at which the Commissioner's order was served.
   (d)   Denial of request.
      (1)   The Commissioner shall give specific reasons for denying the
request for a hearing in his/her written response.
      (2)   Service of such denial shall end the stay against compliance with
the Commissioner's order. The responsible person shall thereafter be subject to
the enforcement of § 24-610 and any other applicable provisions of the
Administrative Code.
   (e)   Response requesting additional information.
      (1)   Service of the Commissioner's response requesting additional
information shall continue the stay against compliance with the Commissioner's
order, pending resolution of the request for a hearing.
      (2)   The responsible person's answer shall be served personally or by
certified or registered mail to the address in 15 RCNY §
11-05(b)(2), within ten (10) days of service of the Commissioner's response.
Such answer shall be deemed a request for hearing for purposes of 15 RCNY §
11-05(c).
      (3)   Failure to answer within the specified time shall end the stay
against compliance with the Commissioner's order. The responsible person shall
thereafter be subject to the enforcement of § 24-610 and any other applicable
provisions of the Administrative Code. The Commissioner shall set forth a time
and place for the hearing in his/her written response. The time set for the
hearing shall be no more than fifteen (15) working days from the date of
service of the Commissioner's response granting the hearing.
   (f)   Default.
      (1)   A responsible person who fails to appear at the hearing granted in
response to that person's request may have the issue of his/her challenge to
the Commissioner's order resolved against him/her.
      (2)   Service of notice of default shall be made upon the responsible
person, either personally or by certified or registered mail, at the address
provided in the request for hearing or, if no such address was provided, the
address at which the Commissioner's order was served, and such service shall
end the stay against compliance with the Commissioner's order. The responsible
person shall thereafter be subject to the enforcement of § 24-610 and any other
applicable provisions of the Administrative Code.
      (3)   Application to reopen.
         (i)   The hearing officer may open a default or relieve any party of
the consequences of the default upon good cause shown, where written
application is served personally or by certified or registered mail to the
address in 15 RCNY §
11-05(b)(2), within seven (7) working days of service of notice of default.
         (ii)   Such written application, when made within the time specified,
shall constitute a stay against compliance with the Commissioner's order
pending resolution of the application.
         (iii)   If the hearing officer decides that a hearing should be held
on the merits, such hearing shall be held and the matter decided as if the
default had not been issued.
   (g)   Hearing procedures.
      (1)   The burden of proof shall be on the responsible person to show by a
preponderance of the relevant evidence why the order should either be revoked
or modified.
      (2)   The responsible person shall be entitled to be represented by
counsel and to present evidence as to why the Commissioner should either revoke
or modify the order.
      (3)   Testimony given and other proceedings had at a hearing shall be
recorded verbatim. For this purpose, the Department may use whatever means it
deems appropriate, including but not limited to the use of stenographic
transcriptions or recording devices.
         (i)   Depending on the means used, a copy of the Department's
transcription may be available to the responsible person at his/her own
expense.
         (ii)   When such a copy will not be available, the responsible person
may arrange for a transcription at her/his own expense.
   (h)   Hearing officer.
      (1)   The Commissioner shall designate a hearing officer as her/his
representative for the purpose of conducting a fair and impartial hearing under
this section. Such officer shall not be a person who participated in the
drafting of the order.
      (2)   (i)   The hearing officer shall have power to:
            (A)   rule upon motions and requests;
            (B)   set the time and place of hearing;
            (C)   administer oaths and affirmations;
            (D)   summon and examine witnesses;
            (E)   admit or exclude evidence;
            (F)   hear argument on facts or law;
            (G)   do all acts and take all measures necessary for the
maintenance of order and efficient conduct of the hearing.
         (ii)   The hearing officer's exercise of such powers may be reviewed
by the Commissioner upon submission of the hearing officer's report.
      (3)   The hearing officer shall admit all relevant, competent, and
material evidence, except where such evidence is unduly repetitious, or where
its value as proof is substantially outweighed by a potential for unfair
prejudice, confusion of the issue, undue delay, waste of time or needless
presentation of the repetitious or duplicative evidence. The application of the
rules of evidence shall be within the hearing officer's discretion.
      (4)   Report.
         (i)   The hearing officer shall prepare and submit a report to the
Commissioner for his/her review.
         (ii)   Such report shall be submitted within ten (10) working days of
the close of the record. The record shall not be closed before the hearing
officer receives the verbatim recording produced pursuant to 15 RCNY §
11-05(g)(3).
         (i)   Final determination.
      (1)   Within a reasonable time after receipt of the hearing officer's
report, the Commissioner shall make a final determination, based on the hearing
officer's report and on the record, which may provide for affirmation,
suspension, modification, or revocation of the order in issue, or any
determination consistent with the applicable provisions of the Administrative
Code, §§ 24-601 et seq., and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
      (2)   A copy of the final determination and order shall be served
personally or by certified or registered mail, to the responsible person who
requested the hearing, at the address provided in the request for hearing or,
if no such address was provided, the address at which the Commissioner's order
was served.
      (3)   At any time prior to issuance of the Commissioner's final
determination, the Department of Environmental Protection may enter into a
stipulation or consent order with the responsible person who requested a
hearing. Such stipulation or consent order shall be admissible as evidence to
provide the basis for a finding of fact in any subsequent proceeding brought by
the Department of Environmental Protection against such responsible person.
Chapter 12: Perchloroethylene Dry Cleaning Facilities
§ 12-01 Applicability.
This Rule applies to all new and existing dry cleaning facilities in the City
of New York.
§ 12-02 Definitions.
   (a)   For the purpose of this Rule, the definitions of the New York City Air
Pollution Control Code apply.
   (b)   For the purpose of this Rule, the following definitions also apply:
      (1)   Adsorptive cartridge filter. A replaceable cartridge filter that
contains diatomaceous earth or activated clay as the filter medium.
      (2)   Ancillary equipment. The equipment used with a dry cleaning machine
in a dry cleaning system including, but not limited to, emission control
devices, pumps, filters, muck cookers, stills, solvent tanks, solvent
containers, water separators, exhaust dampers, diverter valves, interconnecting
piping, hoses and ducts.
      (3)   Articles. Clothing, garments, textiles, fabrics, leather goods, and
the like, that are dry cleaned.
      (4)   Azeotropic control device. A dry cleaning control system where the
vapor stream from the dry cleaning machine drum is first cooled and condensed
to reduce the concentration of perc in the vapor stream, and is then treated
with water to further enhance the displacement of perc from the articles when
the vapor stream is returned to the machine drum. There is no exhaust to the
atmosphere during the drying cycle.
      (5)   Carbon adsorber. An air cleaning device that consists of an inlet
for exhaust gases from a dry cleaning machine; activated carbon in the form of
a fixed bed, cartridge, or canister, as an adsorbent; an outlet for exhaust
gases; and a system to regenerate, or reclaim saturated adsorbent.
      (6)   Cartridge filter. A replaceable cartridge filter that contains one
of the following as the filter medium: paper, activated carbon, or paper and
activated carbon. A cartridge filter contains no diatomaceous earth or
activated clay. Cartridge filters include, but are not limited to: standard
filters, split filters, "jumbo" filters, and all carbon polishing filters.
      (7)   Closed-loop machine. Dry cleaning equipment in which washing,
extraction, and drying are all performed in the same single unit (also known as
a dry-to-dry unit) and which recirculates perc-laden vapor through a primary
control system (e.g., refrigerated condenser) with no exhaust to the atmosphere
during the drying cycle. A closed-loop machine may allow for venting to the
ambient air through a local exhaust ventilation system, such as a door fan,
after the drying cycle is complete and only while the machine door is open.
      (8)   Co-located. Sharing a common wall, floor, or ceiling with a
residence or business.
      (9)   Colorimetric detector tube. A glass tube (sealed prior to use),
containing material impregnated with a chemical that is sensitive to perc and
is designed to measure the concentration of perc in air.
      (10)   Commercial building. Any building where only commercial business
is conducted, such as an office building or strip mall.
      (11)   Condenser. An air cleaning device that removes condensable vapors
by a reduction in the temperature of the exhaust gases or, in the case of a
surface condenser, by contact of the exhaust gases with structures that are
cooled by a circulating cooling fluid.
      (12)   Converted machine. An existing vented machine that has been
modified to be a closed-loop machine by eliminating the aeration step,
installing a primary control system, and providing for recirculation of the
perc-laden vapor with no exhaust to the atmosphere or workroom during the
drying cycle. A converted machine may allow for venting to the ambient air
through a local exhaust ventilation system, such as a door fan, after the
drying cycle is complete and only while the machine door is open.
      (13)   Cool-down. The portion of the drying cycle that begins when the
heating mechanism deactivates and the refrigerated condenser continues to
reduce the temperature of the air recirculating through the drum to reduce the
concentration of perc in the drum.
      (14)   Department. The New York City Department of Environmental
Protection.
      (15)   Desorption. Regeneration or stripping of an activated carbon bed,
or any other type of vapor adsorber by removal of the adsorbed solvent using
hot air, steam, or other means.
      (16)   Dip tank. A separate tank that contains perc and is used for
purposes other than dry cleaning (e.g., waterproofing).
      (17)   Diverter valve. A flow control device that prevents room air from
passing through a refrigerated condenser when the door of a dry cleaning
machine is open.
      (18)   Door fan. A local exhaust ventilation system designed to provide
for a minimum 100 fpm inward air velocity into the effective door open area of
a dry cleaning machine whenever the door is opened, and where the perc
emissions are controlled by a carbon adsorber or equivalent control prior to
venting to the outer air.
      (19)   Drum. The rotating cylinder or wheel of the dry cleaning machine
that holds the articles being cleaned.
      (20)   Dry cleaning. The process used to remove soil, greases, paints and
other unwanted substances from articles with the use of perc or non perc.
      (21)   Dry cleaning control system. Equipment (e.g., carbon adsorber,
refrigerated condenser, azeotropic unit, etc.) or an air cleaning device used
to reduce the amount of air pollutant(s) in an air stream prior to discharge to
the atmosphere.
      (22)   Dry cleaning equipment. Any machine, device, or apparatus used to
dry clean articles.
      (23)   Dry cleaning facility. A facility with one or more dry cleaning
systems.
      (24)   Dry cleaning system. All of the following equipment, devices, or
apparatus associated with the perc dry cleaning operations, including, but not
limited to: dry cleaning equipment; filter or purification systems; waste
holding, treatment, or disposal systems; perc supply systems; dip tanks; pumps;
gaskets; piping, ducting, fittings, valves, or flanges that convey perc-
contaminated air; and dry cleaning control systems.
      (25)   Drying cabinet. A housing in which materials that have been
previously dry cleaned in perc are dried instead of being dried by tumbling in
a dry cleaning machine.
      (26)   Drying cycle. The operation used to actively remove the perc
remaining in the materials after washing and extraction. For closed-loop
machines, the heated portion of the cycle is followed by cool-down and may be
extended beyond cool-down by the activation of a control system. The drying
cycle begins when heating coils are activated and ends when the machine ceases
rotation of the drum.
      (27)   Drying sensor. A device that senses when articles being cleaned
are relatively dry and automatically controls the drying cycle. Drying sensors
include but are not limited to: infrared analyzers, float switches, and
resistance probes. The device detects the concentration of synthetic solvents
in the drying air or that the liquid solvent recovery rate is at a minimal
rate. The drying sensor extends the drying cycle for a minimum time beyond the
activation point to ensure dry articles.
      (28)   Dry-to-dry machine. A one-machine dry cleaning operation in which
drying and washing are performed in the same machine.
      (29)   Dry-to-dry vented machine. Dry cleaning equipment in which
washing, extraction, and drying are all performed in the same single unit and
in which fresh air is introduced into the drum in the last step of the drying
cycle and exhausted to the outdoor atmosphere, either directly or through a
control device (2nd generation equipment).
      (30)   Environmental Training Program. An initial course or a refresher
course of the Environmental Training Program, described in 15 RCNY §
12-14 and § 232.14 of Title 6 of the Codes, Rules, and Regulations of the State
of New York for owners and operators of perc dry cleaning operations that has
been authorized by the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
or the Department.
      (31)   Equivalent closed-loop vapor recovery system. A device or
combination of devices that achieves, in practice, a perc recovery performance
equal to or exceeding that of refrigerated condensers.
      (32)   Existing facility. Any facility at which dry cleaning equipment
was installed or operated prior to May 15, 1997.
      (33)   Facility. All emission sources located at one or more adjacent or
contiguous properties owned or operated by the same person or persons under
common control.
      (34)   Filter muck. The residue from a filter using loose diatomaceous
earth, which must be replaced periodically.
      (35)   First generation equipment. Transfer machines where cleaning and
drying (reclaiming) take place in separate machines with the manual transfer of
articles from one machine to another.
      (36)   Fourth generation equipment. A primary closed-loop refrigerated
dry cleaning machine that has a "secondary control system" (e.g., closed-loop
refrigerated condenser with a drying sensor and an integral carbon adsorber).
      (37)   Fugitive emissions. Emissions of air contaminants which could not
reasonably pass through a stack, vent, chimney, or other functionally
equivalent opening.
      (38)   fpm. Feet per minute.
      (39)   Full-size carbon unit. A carbon unit that is used to adsorb perc
from a dry cleaning machine when the vapors are recirculating or venting from
the drum during the drying cycle. (Normally used on first and second generation
equipment.)
      (40)   General exhaust ventilation system. A mechanical exhaust
ventilation system consisting of fresh air makeup inlets and one or more
exhaust fans in a dry cleaning facility. This type of system would commonly be
used to exhaust a dry cleaning workroom or a room enclosure. This system shall
be completely separate from the ventilation system(s) for the remainder of the
building.
      (41)   Halogenated-hydrocarbon detector. A portable device capable of
detecting vapor concentrations of perc and indicating an increasing
concentration by emitting an audible signal or visual indicator that varies as
the concentration changes.
      (42)   Liquid leak. A leak of liquid containing perc of more than one
drop every three minutes.
      (43)   Local exhaust ventilation system. A mechanical exhaust ventilation
system connected directly to a dry cleaning machine or other related dry
cleaning equipment. For example, the exhaust system on a door fan for a third
generation machine constitutes a local exhaust ventilation system.
      (44)   Major source. A dry cleaning facility that emits or has the
potential to emit more than 9.1 megagrams per year (10 tons per year) of perc
to the atmosphere. In lieu of measuring a facility's potential to emit perc or
determining a facility's potential to emit perc, a dry cleaning facility is a
major source if: (1) it includes only dry-to-dry machine(s) and has a total
yearly perc consumption greater than 8,000 liters (2,100 gallons) as determined
according to 15 RCNY §
12-12, subdivision (b); or, (2) it includes only transfer machine system(s) or
both dry-to-dry machine(s) and transfer machine system(s) and has a total
yearly perc consumption greater than 6,800 liters (1,800 gallons) as determined
according to 15 RCNY §
12-12, subdivision (b).
      (44-a)   Material safety data sheet. The material safety data sheet as
defined in § 24-702 of the Administrative Code of the City of New York.
      (45)   Mixed-use facility. A facility that is co-located.
      (46)   Muck cooker. A device for heating filter muck to drive off perc
vapors for reclaiming.
      (47)   New facility. A facility that was not used for the operation of
any dry cleaning equipment prior to May 15, 1997.
      (47-a)   Non perc. Any chemical substance used in the dry cleaning
process other than perc.
      (48)   Occupancy. Any building or part of a building, excluding the dry
cleaning facility.
      (49)   Openings. Any window, door or air intake.
      (50)   Perceptible leak. Any perc vapor or liquid leaks that are obvious
from the odor of perc, pools or droplets of perc or the detection of gas flow
by passing a finger over the surface of the equipment, or as detected by an
appropriate portable monitoring instrument.
      (51)   Perc. A colorless volatile chlorinated hydrocarbon. Perc is also
known as perchloroethylene, tetrachloroethylene, tetrachloroethene, and PCE.
The chemical formula for perc is C1 2 C:CC1 2 . The CAS registry number for
perc is 00127-18-4.
      (52)   Perc-contaminated wastewater evaporator. A device that vaporizes
wastewater through physical action or the addition of thermal energy.
      (53)   ppb. Parts per billion by volume in air or by weight in water.
      (54)   ppm. Parts per million by volume in air or by weight in water.
      (54-a)   Primary chemical. The chemical that is used in the greatest
concentration in the dry cleaning process.
      (55)   Primary control system. A refrigerated condenser or equivalent
closed-loop vapor recovery system approved by the Department.
      (56)   Process ventilation emission. An emission from any dry cleaning
machine normally vented to the outer air that occurs both during the aeration
cycle and when the machine door is open, excluding any emissions from door fans
on azeotropic control devices and third generation equipment.
      (57)   Refrigerated condenser. A closed-loop vapor recovery system into
which perc vapors are condensed by cooling below the dew point of the perc
using a mechanical refrigerated system.
      (58)   Residential building. Any dwelling or housing that is owned,
rented, or occupied by the same person for a period of 180 days or more in a
year, excluding short-term housing such as a motel or hotel room rented and
occupied by the same person for a period of less than 180 days.
      (59)   Room enclosure. A room that encloses the dry cleaning machine or
equipment. It is constructed of material that is impermeable to perc and
designed and operated to maintain negative pressure at all times that the
equipment is operating and is used with a general exhaust ventilation system.
      (60)   Second generation equipment. A dry-to-dry vented-dry cleaning
machine which is not vented to a refrigerated condenser. Typically these
machines are properly vented to a control device which may, for example,
consist of a carbon adsorber or azeotropic control device plus a small carbon
adsorber.
      (61)   Secondary control system. A device or apparatus that reduces the
concentration of perc in the recirculating air at the end of the drying cycle
beyond the level achievable with a refrigerated condenser alone. For example,
an integral carbon adsorber used in fourth generation equipment constitutes a
secondary control system.
         (i)   An "integral" secondary control system is designed and offered
as an integral part of a production package with a single make and model of dry
cleaning machine and primary control system.
         (ii)   An "add-on" secondary control system is designed or offered as
a separate retrofit system for use on multiple machine makes and models.
      (62)   Self-service dry cleaning machine. A perc dry cleaning machine
that is loaded, activated, or unloaded by the customer.
      (63)   Small carbon adsorbers. A carbon unit that is used to adsorb perc
from the machine drum when the machine door is opened to remove clothes at the
end of the drying cycle. For example, the adsorbers used to control emissions
from supplemental door fans or azeotropic control devices would constitute
small carbon adsorbers.
      (64)   Solvent mileage. The average weight of articles cleaned per volume
of perc used.
      (65)   Solvent tank. Any container that is used to store perc prior to
use in the dry cleaning operation and from which the perc is introduced into
the drum of the machine at the start of the cleaning cycle.
      (66)   Stand-alone facility. A facility that is not co-located.
      (67)   Still. Distillation equipment used to volatilize and recover perc
from contaminated solvent removed from the cleaned materials.
      (68)   Third generation equipment. A closed-loop dry cleaning machine
equipped with a refrigerated condenser or other equivalent primary control
system.
      (69)   Trained operator. A person who holds a certificate of completion
for the initial course of an environmental training program and maintains her/
his status by successfully completing refresher courses as required.
      (70)   Transfer machine. Perc dry cleaning equipment in which washing and
extraction are performed in one unit and drying is performed in a separate
unit. (First generation equipment.)
      (71)   Vapor adsorber. A bed of activated carbon or other adsorbent into
which vapors are introduced and trapped for subsequent desorption.
      (72)   Vapor barrier. A material surface or coating that is impermeable
to perc.
      (73)   Vapor leak. A fugitive emission of perc vapor from unintended
openings in the dry cleaning system. A vapor leak can be indicated by a rapid
audible signal or visual signal from a halogenated-hydrocarbon detector or
other approved instrument.
      (74)   Water separator. A vessel that uses gravity to physically separate
liquid perc from liquid water.
§ 12-03 Variances.
   (a)   Unless otherwise precluded by federal or state statute or regulation,
or subdivision (d) of this section, the Department may, upon written
application from any person who is subject to this Rule, grant a variance from
one or more specific provisions of this Rule consistent with § 24-110 of the
Administrative Code of the City of New York and under the conditions set forth
in this subchapter.
   (b)   Every application for a variance must:
      (1)   identify the specific provisions of this Rule from which a variance
is sought;
      (2)   demonstrate that compliance with the identified provisions would,
on the basis of conditions unique to the person's particular situation in
contrast to the rest of the industry or any segment thereof, impose
unreasonable hardship;
      (3)   demonstrate that the proposed activity will have no significant
adverse impact on the public health, safety, or welfare, the environment or
natural resources and will be consistent with the provisions of the New York
City Air Pollution Control Code and the performance expected from an activity
permitted under the provisions of this Rule; and
      (4)   include a copy of any variance granted by the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation. If no variance has been granted by
the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation then the
application to the Department shall state that no variance has been granted by
the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
   (c)   In granting any variance under this subchapter, the Department may
impose specific conditions necessary to assure that the subject activity will
have no significant adverse impact on the public health, safety, or welfare,
the environment, or natural resources.
   (d)   Phase-out dates for dry cleaning equipment cannot be extended by a
variance.
§ 12-04 Prohibitions.
   (a)   Perc dry cleaning machines may not be installed in residential
buildings after July 13, 2006.
   (b)   Perc dry cleaning machines that were installed in residential
buildings between December 21, 2005 and July 13, 2006 must eliminate perc use
by July 13, 2009. In the interim, all perc dry cleaning facilities must
continue to comply with the requirements of 6 NYCRR Part 232.
   (c)   Perc dry cleaning machines that were installed in residential
buildings before December 21, 2005, must eliminate perc use by December 21,
2020.
   (d)   The use of any dry-to-dry vented or non-vented equipment as a transfer
machine is prohibited.
   (e)   The installation of any self-service dry cleaning machine(s) after May
15, 1997 is prohibited.
   (f)   The use or offering for use of any self-service dry cleaning machine
(s) after May 15, 1997 is prohibited.
   (g)   The use of immersion heaters to evaporate solvent from the untreated
water effluent of solvent water separators is prohibited.
   (h)   Except as provided in 15 RCNY §
12-05, the installation, construction, alteration, modification, or operation
of a perc dry cleaning facility without first obtaining an installation or
alteration permit or an operating certificate issued by the Department in
accordance with the requirements of 15 RCNY §
12-15 is prohibited.
   (i)   Venting of perc emissions from dry cleaning equipment or emission
control devices into the workroom or facility is prohibited.
§ 12-05 Pre-Permitting Requirements for Existing Facilities.
Existing facilities with a valid operating certificate(s) issued by the
Department must comply with the following requirements in accordance with the
timeframes established in this section in advance of applying for and obtaining
an operating certificate amendment(s) required under 15 RCNY §
12-15. Prior approvals from the Department are not needed for construction of
room enclosures, vapor barriers, general exhaust ventilation systems, or
changes in vent stack locations. New facilities must comply with all the
applicable requirements contained in this section at the time of installation.
   (a)   Room enclosures, vapor barriers, and general exhaust ventilation.
      (1)   Stand-alone dry cleaning facilities that are designated as major
sources, pursuant to the National Perchloroethylene Air Emission Standards for
Dry Cleaning Facilities under Title 40, Part 63 of the Code of Federal
Regulations, Subpart M and that have transfer type machines should have
contained all such machines inside room enclosures by September 23, 1996. Each
room enclosure must be:
         (i)   Constructed of materials impermeable to perc; and,
         (ii)   Designed and operated to maintain a negative pressure at each
opening at all times that the machine is operating.
      (2)   Co-located dry cleaning facilities must be equipped with a vapor
barrier or room enclosure(s) and general exhaust ventilation that meets the
design and performance requirements established in 15 RCNY §
12-06, subdivision (a), by the following dates:
         (i)   transfer machines – immediately upon the effective date of this
Rule.
         (ii)   dry-to-dry vented machines – by no later than August 15, 1998.
         (iii)   3rd generation dry-to-dry machines – by no later than November
15, 1998.
         (iv)   4th generation dry-to-dry machines – by no later than May 15,
1999.
      (3)   The facility owner shall notify the Department by mail no later
than 30 days after the installation of the required vapor barrier and general
exhaust ventilation system and certify that it meets all regulatory
requirements. Such notification shall be sent by certified mail to the
Department.
   (b)   Relocation of emission points. The relocation of process ventilation
emission point(s) to the outdoor atmosphere must comply with the retrofitting
requirements and be completed by the deadlines established under 15 RCNY §
12-06(b)(3) and (b)(6).
   (c)   Public information notice. The facility owner must post a copy of the
notice required under 15 RCNY §
12-18 immediately.
   (d)   Leak inspection. The facility owner must initiate the leak inspection
requirements established in 15 RCNY §
12-07 immediately upon the effective date of this Rule.
   (e)   Operation and maintenance. The facility owner must initiate all
operation and maintenance requirements which apply to dry cleaning machines and
existing emission control systems established in 15 RCNY §
12-08 immediately upon the effective date of this Rule. However, all
requirements established under 15 RCNY §
12-08 that are already in effect pursuant to the National Perchloroethylene Air
Emission Standards for Dry Cleaning Facilities in Title 40, Part 63, Subpart M
of the Code of Federal Regulations continue to be in effect.
   (f)   Compliance inspections. The compliance inspection requirements under
15 RCNY §
12-16 are effective immediately upon the effective date of this Rule. Facility
owners must initiate the first compliance inspection at their facility
immediately upon the effective date of this Rule.
   (g)   Recordkeeping. The facility owner must initiate all applicable
recordkeeping required under 15 RCNY §
12-12 immediately upon the effective date of this Rule. Such recordkeeping must
cover all requirements established under 15 RCNY §
12-12 for dry cleaning systems and facilities in general and must also comply
with requirements for specific dry cleaning machine types and emission control
systems. However, all requirements established under 15 RCNY §
12-12 that are already in effect pursuant to the National Perchloroethylene Air
Emission Standards for Dry Cleaning Facilities in Title 40, Part 63, Subpart M
of the Code of Federal Regulations, continue to be in effect.
   (h)   Perc-contaminated wastewater management. Facilities must comply with
the perc-contaminated wastewater management requirements under 15 RCNY §
12-09 and under 15 RCNY
Chapter 19 governing the use of the public sewer system by no later than May
15, 1998.
   (i)   Hazardous waste management and emergency response. The hazardous waste
management requirements under 15 RCNY §
12-10 and the emergency response requirements under 15 RCNY §
12-11 are effective immediately upon the effective date of this Rule.
§ 12-06 Equipment Standards and Specifications.
   (a)   Specific equipment standards and emission control specifications:
      (1)   Vapor barriers. Vapor barriers must, at a minimum, enclose the dry
cleaning equipment. Vapor barriers can be constructed of polyvinyl chloride,
PVC sheet 22 mil thick (0.022 in.), sheet metal, metal foil face composite
board, or other equivalent materials that are impermeable to perc vapors. Vapor
barriers must be constructed so that all joints and seams are sealed except for
inlet makeup air and exhaust openings and entry doors. Entry doors may only be
open when a person is entering or exiting the room enclosure.
      (2)   General exhaust ventilation system. Dry cleaning facilities which
are co-located must be equipped with a vapor barrier and with a general exhaust
ventilation system that is completely separate from the ventilation system(s)
serving other areas of the building. The general exhaust ventilation system
must be located near the dry cleaning machinery or connected to a separate room
enclosure with a vapor barrier exhausting emissions to the outer air. The
system shall be designed and operated to maintain a negative pressure in the
room enclosure whenever the dry cleaning machine(s) is operating. This dry
cleaning general exhaust ventilation system must be operated at all times when
the dry cleaning machine(s) is in operation, and during maintenance operations
and must be capable of at least one air change per five minutes.
      (3)   Door fan/local exhaust ventilation systems.
         (i)   All first, second and third generation dry cleaning equipment
must be equipped with a door fan/local exhaust ventilation system. This system
must include a mechanical exhaust fan that is activated when the loading door
is open, drawing air from the machine drum causing fresh air to be drawn in
through the loading door. A minimum inward air velocity of 100 fpm, must be
maintained through the effective door opening area of the loading door of the
machine.
         (ii)   Door fan/local exhaust ventilation systems must not recirculate
vapors into the workroom and must be properly vented to the outer air.
         (iii)   Door fan/local exhaust ventilation emissions must be
controlled to a design emission standard of five ppm perc with an in-use
maximum compliance standard of 20 ppm.
      (4)   Process Ventilation Emissions – Interim Standards.
         (i)   Process ventilation emission points on first and second
generation machines that exhaust during the aeration cycle and when the machine
door is open must be vented to the outer air above the roof and more than 25
feet from all openings in nearby occupancies.
         (ii)   Process ventilation emissions from existing first and second
generation vented machines having emission controls as part of the original
equipment or retrofitted to comply with the 100 ppm perc emission standard
effective May 10, 1981 under the repealed version of Title 6, Part 232 of
Codes, Rules, and Regulations of the State of New York must continue to meet
this standard until such time as retrofitting, replacement, or shutdown is
required under this section.
         (iii)   Process ventilation emissions from existing second generation
machines that are retrofitted with control equipment to comply with interim
standards established under (b)(3) or (b)(6) in this section must be designed
to achieve a perc concentration of five ppm or less in the exhaust and achieve
an in-use compliance standard of less than 20 ppm perc in the exhaust.
         (iv)   The exhaust damper of a vented first or second generation
machine must be completely closed when the machine is not being vented, and
must not leak vapors into the workroom or the outer air.
      (5)   Primary emission control systems. Refrigerated condensers or
equivalent closed-loop vapor recovery systems must meet the following
requirements:
         (i)   Refrigerated condensers must be capable of achieving an outlet
vapor temperature downstream of any by-pass of the condenser less than or equal
to 45°F (7.2°C) during the final cool down cycle, and achieve a concentration
of 8600 ppm or less perc in the drum upon completion of the drying cycle.
         (ii)   Refrigerated condensers must have a graduated thermometer,
thermocouple or equivalent instrument with a minimum range from 0°F (-18°C) to
150°F (66°C), that measures the temperature of the outlet vapor stream
downstream of any by-pass of the condenser, and is easily visible to the
operator.
         (iii)   New third and fourth generation equipment with refrigerated
condenser control systems must be equipped with a drying sensor/controller that
extends the drying time at least four minutes beyond the point that the solvent
recovery rate is less than 40 ml/min or solvent vapor concentration in the drum
is less than 8600 ppm perc.
         (iv)   The refrigerated condenser must be operated with a diverter
valve.
         (v)   Equivalent closed-loop vapor recovery systems or other control
device must use a technology that has been demonstrated, pursuant to the
requirements of 15 RCNY §
12-17, to achieve at least 90 percent by weight emission reduction based upon
the amount of perc entering and leaving the control device.
      (6)   A secondary control system must:
         (i)   be designed to function with a primary control system complying
with all requirements for third generation equipment.
         (ii)   be capable of reducing the perc concentration in the drum from
8600 ppm or greater to 300 ppm.
         (iii)   Any integral carbon adsorber used as a secondary control
system must be sized correctly for the machine and be capable of reducing the
perc concentration in the drum from 8,600 ppm or greater to 300 ppm or less.
         (iv)   The integral carbon adsorber must be designed for non-contact
steam or hot air stripping operation, and must be stripped or desorbed in
accordance with manufacturer's instructions or at least weekly, whichever is
more stringent.
      (7)   Spill containment. All new third and fourth generation, or used,
reinstalled dry cleaning equipment must be equipped with a spill containment
system capable of containing 125 percent of the capacity of the largest dry
cleaning perc tank or vessel associated with the dry cleaning machine.
   (b)   To determine which standards will apply to a particular dry cleaning
facility, first determine whether the facility is new or existing. Then
determine whether the facility is a stand-alone or is co-located. If co-
located, determine whether it is in a commercial or residential building.
Finally, for each piece of equipment there are two primary issues addressed by
this Rule – the type of emissions control and the location of any process
ventilation emission points. Process ventilation emissions apply only to
transfer and dry-to-dry vented equipment, not to door fans, general or other
ventilation. In all, there are six different categories for which equipment
standards are provided as follows:
      1)   New stand-alone facilities – Equipment requirements
      2)   Existing stand-alone facilities – Replacement or addition of
equipment
      3)   Existing stand-alone facilities – Retrofitting of equipment
      4)   New mixed-use facilities – New equipment
      5)   Existing mixed-use facilities – Replacement or addition of equipment
      6)   Existing mixed-use facilities – Retrofitting of equipment
      (1)   New stand-alone facilities – equipment requirements. The following
types of new and/or used equipment are allowed in new stand-alone facilities.
         (i)   New equipment – Fourth generation.
            (A)   Vapor barrier – Not Required.
            (B)   Spill containment – Required as specified in paragraph (a)(7)
of this section.
            (C)   General exhaust ventilation system – Optional.
            (D)   Primary and secondary control systems, and drying sensor –
Required as specified in paragraphs (a)(5) and (6) of this section.
            (E)   Fugitive perc emissions from any part of the dry cleaning
system must not exceed 50 ppm at any time.
         (ii)   New equipment – Third generation. The installation of this type
of equipment is prohibited after December 31, 1999.
            (A)   Vapor barrier – Not Required.
            (B)   Spill containment – Required as specified in paragraph (a)(7)
of this section.
            (C)   General exhaust ventilation system – Optional.
            (D)   Primary control system, drying sensor, and door fan –
Required as specified in paragraph (a)(3) and (5) of this section.
            (E)   Fugitive perc emissions from any part of the dry cleaning
system must not exceed 50 ppm at any time.
            (F)   An additional option would be to convert to a fourth
generation machine with less than or equal to 300 ppm in drum. Under this
option a door fan would not be required.
         (iii)   Used equipment – Third generation.
            (A)   Vapor barrier – Not Required.
            (B)   Spill containment – Required as specified in paragraph (a)(7)
of this section.
            (C)   General exhaust ventilation system – Optional.
            (D)   Primary control system and door fan – Required as specified
in paragraphs (a)(3) and (5) of this section.
            (E)   Fugitive perc emissions from any part of the dry cleaning
system must not exceed 50 ppm perc at any time.
            (F)   An additional option would be to convert to a fourth
generation machine with less than or equal to 300 ppm perc in the drum. Under
this option a door fan would not be required.
      (2)   Existing stand-alone facilities – replacement or addition of
equipment. The equipment standards for new stand-alone facilities must be
followed. However, transfer machines may be replaced with upgraded dry-to-dry
vented equipment in accordance with the retrofitting requirements.
      (3)   Existing stand-alone facilities – retrofitting of equipment.
         (i)   Transfer machines – no retrofitting is allowed. All transfer
machines must be removed from service on the following schedule.
            (A)   If the process ventilation emission point is located above
the roof and more than 25 feet from all openings in nearby occupancies, and if
previously retrofitted to meet the less than 100 ppm perc vented emission level
(see subparagraph (a)(4)(ii) of this section) and is operating in compliance
with that emission level, the equipment must be replaced with third or fourth
generation equipment by January 1, 2000.
            (B)   If the process ventilation emission point is located below
the roof or less than 25 feet from any opening in a nearby occupancy, or if
process ventilation emissions do not meet the 100 ppm perc emission level, the
equipment must be replaced with third or fourth generation equipment
immediately upon the effective date of this Rule.
            (C)   Vapor barrier – not required.
            (D)   General exhaust ventilation system – Optional.
         (ii)   Dry-to-dry vented – Second generation.
            (A)   Vapor barrier – Not required.
            (B)   General exhaust ventilation system – Optional.
            (C)   Process ventilation emission point location –
               (a)   If the process ventilation emission point is above the
roof and more than 25 feet from all openings in nearby occupancies, the
relocation of the process ventilation emission point is not required.
               (b)   If the process ventilation emission point is below the
roof or less than 25 feet from any opening in a nearby occupancy, the process
ventilation emission point must be changed to be over the roof and more than 25
feet from all openings in nearby occupancies immediately upon the effective
date of this Rule. Alternatively, the equipment may be replaced with third or
fourth generation equipment within the same time limit.
            (D)   Emission controls. 
               (a)   Controlled.
                  (1)   If the machine has been controlled with either an
azeotropic control device plus small carbon adsorber or converted to a closed-
loop third generation machine having an integral or external primary
refrigerated condenser (the water cooled condensing system having been
eliminated) and has a door fan, meeting the requirements of paragraph (a)(3) of
this section, no additional control is required.
                  (2)   If the machine is equipped with either a full sized
carbon adsorber or a refrigerated condenser with a water cooled condensing
system, it must be retrofitted with either an azeotropic control device plus
small carbon adsorber (provided EPA publishes a determination that an
azeotropic control device is equivalent to a refrigerated condenser), or
converted to a closed-loop third generation machine by adding an integral or
external primary refrigerated condenser (eliminating the water cooled
condensing system) and a door fan with a small carbon adsorber by December 31,
1999. Alternatively, the equipment may be replaced with a third generation
machine with a door fan by December 31, 1999, or with a fourth generation by
January 1, 2001.
               (b)   Uncontrolled. Equipment must be retrofitted with either an
azeotropic control device plus small carbon adsorber (provided EPA publishes a
determination that an azeotropic control device is equivalent to a refrigerated
condenser), or converted to closed-loop third generation by adding an integral
or external primary refrigerated condenser (eliminating the water cooled
condensing system) and a door fan with a small carbon adsorber immediately upon
the effective date of this Rule. Alternatively, equipment may be replaced with
third or fourth generation equipment within the same time limit.
            (E)   Fugitive perc emissions from any part of the dry cleaning
system must not exceed 50 ppm at any time.
         (iii)   Dry-to-dry non-vented. Third generation.
            (A)   Vapor barrier – Not Required.
            (B)   General exhaust ventilation system – Optional.
            (C)   Equipment must be retrofitted with a door fan meeting the
requirement of paragraph (a)(3) of this section by no later than May 15, 2001;
or,
            (D)   An additional option would be to convert this type of
equipment to a fourth generation machine that achieves a perc concentration of
less than or equal to 300 ppm in the drum by no later than May 15, 2001. Under
this option a door fan would not be required.
            (E)   Fugitive perc emissions from any part of the dry cleaning
system must not exceed 50 ppm at any time.
         (iv)   Dry-to-dry non-vented. Fourth generation.
            (A)   Vapor barrier – Not Required.
            (B)   General exhaust ventilation system – Optional.
            (C)   Primary and secondary control system and drying sensors must
meet requirements specified in paragraphs (a)(5) and (6) of this section.
However, for non-major facilities that purchased machines prior to May 15, 1997
the following provision applies: If the owner/manager or operator can
demonstrate that the machine is operating in the best possible working
condition, no action is required if the measured perc concentration in the drum
is less than 500 ppm. If the level exceeds 500 ppm, a door fan that meets the
requirements of paragraph (a)(3) of this section must be installed by January
1, 2000.
            (D)   Fugitive perc emissions from any part of the dry cleaning
system must not exceed 50 ppm at any time.
      (4)   New mixed-use facilities – new equipment. Only new dry-to-dry
fourth generation equipment is allowed in new mixed-use facilities. No used or
retrofitted equipment is allowed.
         (i)   Vapor barrier and general exhaust ventilation system. Required
as specified in paragraphs (a)(1) and (2) of this section.
         (ii)   Spill containment. Required as specified in paragraph (a)(7) of
this section.
         (iii)   Primary and secondary control systems and drying sensor.
Required as specified in paragraphs (a)(5) and (6) of this section. Note: Any
machine not meeting the 300 ppm requirement, and, where the owner/manager or
operator can demonstrate that the machine is operating in the best possible
working condition must have a door fan installed that meets the requirements of
paragraph (a)(3) of this section within six months of an inspection indicating
high ppm levels.
         (iv)   Fugitive perc emissions from any part of the dry cleaning
system must not exceed 50 ppm at any time.
      (5)   Existing mixed-use facilities – replacement or addition of
equipment. The equipment standards for new mixed-use facilities must be
followed.
      (6)   Existing mixed-use facilities – retrofitting of equipment.
         (i)   Transfer machines. No emission control retrofitting is allowed.
All transfer machines must be removed from service on the following schedule.
            (A)   If the process ventilation emission point is located above
the roof and more than 25 feet from all openings in nearby occupancies, and if
the equipment has been previously retrofitted to comply with the less than 100
ppm perc vented emission level (see subparagraph (a)(4)(ii) of this section)
and is operating in compliance with that emission level, the equipment must be
removed from service by September 22, 1998.
            (B)   If the process ventilation emission point is located at or
below the roof or is 25 feet or less from all openings in nearby occupancies,
or if the equipment has not previously been retrofitted or is not in compliance
with the less than 100 ppm perc emission level (see subparagraph (a)(4)(ii) of
this section), the equipment must be removed from service immediately upon the
effective date of this Rule.
            (C)   A vapor barrier and general exhaust ventilation system are
required immediately upon the effective date of this Rule as specified in
paragraphs (a)(1) and (2) of this section.
         (ii)   Dry-to-dry vented. Second generation.
            (A)   Vapor barrier and general exhaust ventilation system.
Required immediately upon the effective date of this Rule as specified in
paragraphs (a)(1) and (2) of this section.
            (B)   Process vent emission location.
               (a)   If the process ventilation emission point is above the
roof and more than 25 feet from all openings in nearby occupancies, the
relocation of the process ventilation emission point is not required.
               (b)   If the process ventilation emission point is at or below
the roof or 25 feet or less from any opening in a nearby occupancy, the process
ventilation emission point must be changed to be over the roof and more than 25
feet from all openings in nearby occupancies immediately upon the effective
date of this Rule. Alternatively, equipment may be replaced with fourth
generation equipment within the same time limit.
            (C)   Emission Controls.
               (a)   Mixed-use – commercial – uncontrolled. Equipment must be
retrofitted with either an azeotropic control device plus a small carbon
adsorber (provided EPA publishes a determination that an azeotropic control
device is equivalent to a refrigerated condenser), or converted to a closed-
loop third generation machine by adding an integral or external primary
refrigerated condenser (eliminating the water cooled condensing system) and a
door fan as specified in paragraph (a)(3) of this section immediately upon the
effective date of this Rule. Alternatively, equipment may be replaced with
fourth generation equipment within the same time limit. The retrofit of this
equipment is only an interim measure, and all retrofitted equipment of this
type must be removed from service by January 1, 2005.
               (b)   Mixed-use – commercial – controlled.
                  (1)   If the machine has been controlled with either an
azeotropic control device plus small carbon adsorber or converted to a third
generation machine having an integral or external primary refrigerated
condenser (the water cooled condensing system having been eliminated) and has a
door fan as specified in paragraph (a)(3) of this section, no interim
retrofitting action is required. This equipment must be removed from service
and replaced with fourth generation equipment by January 1, 2005.
                  (2)   If the machine is equipped with either a full-sized
carbon adsorber or a refrigerated condenser with a water cooled condensing
system, it must be retrofitted with either an azeotropic control device plus
small carbon adsorber (provided EPA publishes a determination that an
azeotropic control device is equivalent to a refrigerated condenser), or
converted to a third generation machine by adding an integral or external
primary refrigerated condenser (eliminating the water cooled condensing system)
and a door fan as specified in paragraph (a)(3) of this section by January 1,
2001. Alternatively, equipment may be replaced with fourth generation equipment
by January 1, 2001. The retrofit of this equipment is an interim measure only
and all retrofitted equipment must be replaced with fourth generation equipment
by January 1, 2005.
               (c)   Mixed-use – residential – uncontrolled. Equipment must be
retrofitted with either an azeotropic control device plus small carbon adsorber
(provided EPA publishes a determination that an azeotropic control device is
equivalent to a refrigerated condenser), or converted to third generation
equipment by adding an integral or external primary refrigerated condenser
(eliminating the water cooled condensing system) and a door fan as specified in
paragraph (b)(3) of this section immediately upon the effective date of this
Rule. Alternatively, the equipment must be replaced with fourth generation
equipment within the same time limit. The retrofit of this equipment is only an
interim measure and all retrofitted equipment of this type must be removed from
service by January 1, 2000.
               (d)   Mixed-use – residential – controlled.
                  (1)   If the machine has been controlled with either an
azeotropic control device plus a small carbon adsorber or has been converted to
a third generation machine having an integral or external primary refrigerated
condenser (the water cooled system having been eliminated) and has a door fan
as specified in paragraph (b)(3) of this section, no additional retrofitting is
required. However, all equipment of this type must be replaced with fourth
generation equipment by January 1, 2000.
                  (2)   If the machine is equipped with a full-sized carbon
adsorber with a water cooled condensing system, it must be operated in
compliance with the 100 ppm standards of the previous version of Part 232 of
Title 6 of the Codes, Rules, and Regulations of the State of New York and must
be replaced with fourth generation equipment by January 1, 2000.
            (D)   Fugitive perc emissions from any part of the dry cleaning
system must not exceed 50 ppm at any time.
         (iii)   Dry-to-dry non-vented. Third generation.
            (A)   Vapor barrier and general exhaust ventilation system.
Required by no later than November 15, 1998 as specified in paragraphs (a)(1)
and (2) of this section.
            (B)   Equipment must be retrofitted with a door fan meeting the
requirements of paragraph (a)(3) of this section by no later than May 15, 2001;
or,
            (C)   An additional option is to convert this piece of equipment to
a fourth generation machine that achieves a perc concentration of less than or
equal to 300 ppm in the machine drum by no later than May 15, 2001. Under this
option a door fan would not be required.
            (D)   Fugitive perc emissions from any part of the dry cleaning
system must not exceed 50 ppm at any time.
         (iv)   Dry-to-dry non-vented. Fourth generation.
            (A)   Vapor barrier and general exhaust ventilation system.
Required by no later than May 15, 1999 as specified in paragraphs (a)(1) and
(2) of this section.
            (B)   Primary and secondary controls and drying sensor. Required as
specified in paragraphs (a)(5) and (6) of this section. However, for non-major
facilities that purchased machines prior to May 15, 1997 the following
provision applies: If the owner/manager or operator can demonstrate that the
machine is operating in the best possible working condition, no action is
required if the measured perc concentration in the drum is less than 500 ppm.
If the level exceeds 500 ppm, a door fan as specified in paragraph (a)(3) of
this section is required.
            (C)   Fugitive perc emissions from any part of the dry cleaning
system must not exceed 50 ppm at any time.
§ 12-07 Leak Inspections and Self Monitoring Requirements.
   (a)   Leak check requirements. The trained operator, must inspect the dry
cleaning system for perceptible liquid and vapor leaks and other fugitive
emissions. The trained operator, or a designee, must record the status of each
component on a checklist supplied by the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation. Completed checklists must be kept for at least five
years from the date of the inspection.
      (1)   The dry cleaning system must be thoroughly inspected, at least
weekly, for vapor leaks using one of the following devices or methods for
detecting vapor leaks:
         (i)   a halogenated-hydrocarbon detector;
         (ii)   a portable gas analyzer;
         (iii)   an air sampling pump and colorimetric tube; or
         (iv)   an alternative method approved by the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation.
      (2)   all equipment referenced in paragraph (a)(1) of this section must
be properly calibrated.
   (b)   The following components of the dry cleaning system must be inspected
weekly for perceptible liquid and vapor leaks and for proper operation as
required by 15 RCNY §
12-08 (operation and maintenance requirements) while the dry cleaning system is
operating:
      (1)   hose and pipe connections, fittings, couplings and valves;
      (2)   door gaskets and seatings;
      (3)   filter gaskets and seatings;
      (4)   pumps;
      (5)   solvent (including spent solvent) tanks and containers;
      (6)   water separators;
      (7)   muck cookers;
      (8)   stills;
      (9)   exhaust dampers;
      (10)   diverter valves; and
      (11)   cartridge filter housings.
   (c)   Carbon adsorber vents must be tested weekly using colorimetric
detector tubes or portable halogen detectors and the test results must be noted
on the checklist.
   (d)   The temperature of the vapor stream on the inlet and outlet side of a
refrigerated condenser must be measured weekly and recorded on the checklist.
   (e)   Preparedness and prevention equipment and conditions as required in
paragraph (d)(7) of 15 RCNY §
12-08 must be inspected weekly to ensure proper operation and maintenance. A
notation must be made on the checklist at the time of inspection.
   (f)   The inward air velocity for a loading door fan must be checked weekly
with a portable velometer or equivalent measurement instrument. A notation of
the instrument reading must be made on the checklist.
   (g)   Any liquid leak, vapor leak, or malfunction that has been detected by
the operator must be noted on the checklist and, if at all possible, repaired
immediately. If the leak cannot be repaired at the time of detection, the
leaking component must be physically marked or tagged in a manner that is
readily observable by an inspector and must be repaired within 24 hours of
detection, unless repair parts are unavailable.
      (1)   If repair parts are not available at the facility, the parts must
be ordered within two working days of detecting such a leak. Such repair parts
must be installed within five working days after receipt. Equipment with a leak
that has been repaired by the end of the 15th working day after detection must
not be operated until the leak is repaired, unless the facility owner or
operator receives a leak-repair extension from the Department.
      (2)   The Department may grant a leak-repair extension to a facility
owner for a single period of thirty days or less. Any person applying to the
Department for a leak-repair extension shall include a copy of a leak-repair
extension granted by the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation. If no leak-repair extension has been granted by the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation, then the application to the
Department shall state that no leak-repair extension has been granted by the
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation. A leak-repair
extension may be granted only if the Department makes the following findings:
         (i)   the delay in repairing the leak could not have been avoided by
action on the part of the facility owner or operator;
         (ii)   the facility owner and operator used reasonable preventive
measures and acted promptly to initiate the repair;
         (iii)   the leak will not significantly increase perc exposure near
the facility; and
         (iv)   the facility is in compliance with all other requirements of
this section and has a history of compliance.
      (3)   Once a repair is completed, the completion date must be recorded on
the checklist.
      (4)   Where a hazard is imminent or has already occurred, remedial action
must be taken immediately.
      (5)   All uncontainable releases, fires or explosions must be reported to
the Department and appropriate emergency response agencies immediately.
   (h)   A fugitive emission concentration of 50 ppm of perc emanating from any
part of the dry cleaning system is a violation; except for short-term
maintenance operations involving the opening of dry cleaning system components
for inspection or repair.
   (i)   Any exceedance of the leak inspection requirements of this Rule that
has been detected by the operator must be noted on the checklist and repaired/
adjusted immediately.
§ 12-08 Operation and Maintenance Requirements.
   (a)   Dry cleaning facilities must be maintained and operated to minimize
the release of perc to the environment.
   (b)   The operator must operate and maintain all components of the dry
cleaning system in accordance with the requirements of this Rule and the
conditions specified in a facility's operating permit. For operations not
specifically addressed, the components must be operated and maintained in
accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. The facility operator must
retain, on-site, a copy of the design specifications and the operating manuals
for each dry cleaning system and each emission control device located at the
dry cleaning facility.
   (c)   Each operation and maintenance function and the date performed must be
recorded on a checklist supplied by the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation. Completed checklists must be maintained on-site for
at least five years from the date of the checklist.
   (d)   Operators must comply with the following operation and maintenance
requirements, as applicable:
      (1)   Fourth generation machines.
         (i)   Refrigerated condensers must be operated in accordance with
manufacturer's specifications.
         (ii)   Integral refrigerated condensers must be operated to ensure
that exhaust gases are recirculated until the air-vapor stream temperature is
45°F or less at the outlet. The difference between the temperature of the air-
perc gas vapor stream entering and exiting the refrigerated condenser must be
greater than or equal to 20°F (11.1°C). The temperature differential must be
determined at least weekly with a thermometer with a temperature range of from
32°F (0°C) to 120°F (48.9°C) to an accuracy of ±2°F (1.1°C) (see 15 RCNY §
12-07).
         (iii)   Vapor adsorbers used with a primary control system or
secondary control system must be operated to ensure that exhaust gases are
recirculated at the temperature specified for optimum adsorption.
         (iv)   Cartridge filters and adsorptive cartridge filters must be
handled using one of the following methods:
            (A)   Drained in the filter housing, before disposal, for no less
than 24 hours for cartridge filters and 48 hours for adsorptive cartridge
filters. If the filters are then transferred to a separate device to further
reduce the volume of perc, this treatment must be done in a system that routes
any vapor to a primary closed-loop control system, with no exhaust to the
atmosphere. In performing such a transfer the filter housing must be closed as
soon as possible to minimize vapor leaks. The general exhaust ventilation
system must be operated during this activity.
            (B)   Dried, stripped, sparged, or otherwise treated, within the
sealed filter housing, to reduce the volume of perc contained in the filter.
         (v)   All steam and condensing coils must be maintained to be free of
lint and hard lint build-up on interior surfaces.
         (vi)   For dry cleaning equipment equipped with a door fan the
operator must use a portable velometer or equivalent measurement instrument to
verify that the required 100 fpm inward air velocity is maintained through the
effective door opening when the loading door is open. The inward air velocity
must be checked on a weekly basis.
         (vii)   Test carbon absorber exhaust vents daily using colorimetric
detector tubes or portable gas detectors. These absorbers shall be stripped
periodically and maintained so that the perc concentration in the exhaust air
does not exceed 20 ppm.
      (2)   Third Generation Machines.
         (i)   Refrigerated condensers must be operated in accordance with
manufacturer's specifications.
         (ii)   Integral and external refrigerated condensers must be operated
to ensure that exhaust gases are recirculated until the air-vapor stream
temperature is 45°F or less at the outlet. The difference between the
temperature of the air-perc gas vapor stream entering and exiting the
refrigerated condenser must be greater than or equal to 20°F (11.1°C). The
temperature differential must be determined at least weekly with a thermometer
with a temperature range of from 32°F (0°C) to 120°F (48.9°C) to an accuracy of
±2°F (1.1°C) (see 15 RCNY §
12-07).
         (iii)   Vapor adsorbers used when the machine has been retrofitted as
a fourth generation machine must be operated to ensure that exhaust gases are
recirculated at the temperature specified by the manufacturer for optimum
adsorption.
         (iv)   Cartridge filters and adsorptive cartridge filters must be
handled using one of the following methods:
            (A)   Drained in the filter housing, before disposal, for no less
than: 24 hours for cartridge filters and 48 hours for adsorptive cartridge
filters. If the filters are then transferred to a separate device to further
reduce the volume of perc, this treatment must be done in a system that routes
any vapor to a primary closed-loop control system, with no exhaust to the
atmosphere. In performing such a transfer the filter housing must be closed as
soon as possible to minimize vapor leaks. The general exhaust ventilation
system must be operated during this activity.
            (B)   Dried, stripped, sparged, or otherwise treated, within the
sealed filter housing, to reduce the volume of perc contained in the filter.
         (v)   All steam and condensing coils must be maintained to be free of
lint and hard lint build-up on interior surfaces.
         (vi)   For dry cleaning equipment equipped with a door fan, the
operator must use a portable velometer or equivalent measurement instrument to
verify that the required 100 fpm inward air velocity is maintained through the
effective door opening when the loading door is open. The inward air velocity
must be checked on a weekly basis.
         (vii)   Test carbon absorber exhaust vents daily using colorimetric
detector tubes or portable gas detectors. These absorbers shall be stripped
periodically and maintained so that the perc concentration in the exhaust air
does not exceed 20 ppm.
      (3)   Second Generation Machines.
         (i)   A vented machine operated with full-sized carbon adsorbers (dry-
to-dry vented) that function during the drying cycle must meet the following
requirements:
            (A)   Desorption must be performed at the frequency specified by
the manufacturer or as specified by this clause, whichever is more stringent.
The minimum frequency for desorption of full-size carbon units is as follows,
each time all dry cleaning equipment exhausted to the device has cleaned a
total of three pounds of articles for each pound of activated carbon.
Desorption must be performed with the minimum steam pressure and air flow
capacity specified by the manufacturer.
            (B)   Once desorption is complete, the carbon bed must be fully
dried according to the manufacturer's instructions.
            (C)   No perc vapors may bypass the carbon adsorber to the outdoor
atmosphere at any time, nor be recirculated into the facility.
            (D)   The filter located in front of the carbon adsorber must be
checked and cleaned weekly.
            (E)   For dry cleaning equipment in mixed-use settings, the carbon
adsorber vent must be tested weekly using colorimetric detector tubes. Test
results must be recorded on the checklist. Test results of five ppm or greater
of perc will require an immediate stripping of the carbon adsorber.
         (ii)   Small external carbon adsorbers used for azeotropic control
systems, must be stripped at least weekly when in use. If not in continuous
daily use, adsorbers must be stripped after they have been used for ten days.
            (A)   Small external carbon adsorbers must be vented to outside the
building and must not recirculate vapor into the facility.
            (B)   Small external carbon adsorbers used in mixed-use settings
must be tested weekly using colorimetric detector tubes or equivalent measuring
devices. Test results must be recorded on the inspection checklist. A test
result of five ppm or greater of perc will require an immediate stripping of
the carbon adsorber.
         (iii)   The exhaust damper of a vented machine must be completely
closed when the machine is not being vented and must be repaired or replaced
within five working days if malfunctioning.
         (iv)   Cartridge filters and adsorptive cartridge filters must be
handled using one of the following methods:
            (A)   Drained in the filter housing, before disposal, for no less
than 24 hours for cartridge filters and 48 hours for adsorptive cartridge
filters. If the filters are then transferred to a separate device to further
reduce the volume of perc, this treatment must be done in a system that routes
any vapor to a primary closed-loop control system, with no exhaust to the
atmosphere. In performing such a transfer the filter housing must be closed as
soon as possible to minimize vapor leaks. The general exhaust ventilation
system must be operated during this activity.
            (B)   Dried, stripped, sparged, or otherwise treated, within the
sealed filter housing, to reduce the volume of perc contained in the filter.
         (v)   All water-cooled condensers must include temperature gauges
installed in the inlet and outlet water lines of the condensing coil on the
dryer. The temperature difference must be maintained according to
manufacturer's specifications.
         (vi)   Azeotropic control devices must be maintained and operated in
accordance with manufacturer's instructions and specifications.
         (vii)   Test carbon absorber exhaust vents daily using colorimetric
detector tubes or portable gas detectors. These absorbers shall be stripped
periodically and maintained so that the perc concentration in the exhaust air
does not exceed 20 ppm.
      (4)   First generation machines. An existing facility with a transfer
machine operating a full-sized carbon adsorber or azeotropic control device,
and cartridge filters must meet the applicable requirements of paragraph (d)(3)
of this section.
      (5)   Ancillary Equipment.
         (i)   All filter muck must be treated in a still or muck cooker, which
routes perc-contaminated vapors to a condenser or other control device and
recycles condenser vapors into the machine. Still or muck cooker emissions must
not be vented into the facility. Any still or muck cooker must not be operated
in a manner that exceeds 75 percent of its capacity or other alternate value
recommended by the manufacturer. Any still or muck cooker must be cooled to
100°F (38°C) or less before being emptied or cleaned.
         (ii)   Button and lint traps must be cleaned each working day and the
lint must be placed in a tightly sealed container. Whenever possible such
operations must be performed so that the opening of such traps is done quickly
with the local or general exhaust ventilation system operating to minimize perc
emissions.
         (iii)   Perc-contaminated wastewater treatment units.
            (A)   Carbon filtration units – carbon cartridges must be replaced
according to a schedule as specified by the manufacturer to assure an effluent
quality that does not exceed 20 ppb perc.
            (B)   Evaporators – perc contaminated wastewater evaporators must
be operated to ensure that no liquid perc or visible emulsion is allowed to
vaporize.
         (iv)   Dip tanks and drying cabinets must be exhausted to maintain an
inward air flow, and be maintained under negative pressure, to ensure that
fugitive emissions will be no greater than 50 ppm. Vented emissions from dip
tanks and drying cabinets must not exceed 20 ppm.
      (6)   The owner or operator of a dry cleaning system must maintain the
following equipment as recommended by manufacturer's specifications:
         (i)   hose and pipe connections, fittings, couplings, and valves;
         (ii)   door gaskets and seatings;
         (iii)   filter gaskets and seatings;
         (iv)   pumps;
         (v)   water separators;
         (vi)   muck cookers;
         (vii)   stills;
         (viii)   exhaust dampers;
         (ix)   diverter valves;
         (x)   cartridge filter housings;
         (xi)   drying sensors;
      (7)   Preparedness and prevention.
         (i)   All dry cleaning operations must be equipped with the following:
            (A)   adequate spill control equipment including sorbent materials,
or alternative method for absorbing spills,
            (B)   vapor-proof containers for storing spill-contaminated
material, and
            (C)   fire control equipment.
         (ii)   The facility owner must maintain aisle space to allow proper
inspection of the dry cleaning equipment.
         (iii)   A reasonable supply of spare parts for repairing dry cleaning
equipment must be available at the dry cleaning facility.
      (8)   All parts of the dry cleaning system including solvent containers
where perc may be emitted to the atmosphere must be kept closed at all times
except when access is required for proper operation and maintenance.
§ 12-09 Perc-Contaminated Wastewater Management.
Perc-contaminated wastewater generated by all new and existing facilities
subject to this Rule must be managed as follows:
   (a)   Perc-contaminated wastewater discharges.
      (1)   Perc-contaminated wastewater that is discharged to the public sewer
system must be treated by physical separation (water separator) and double
carbon filtration, or an equivalent control which has been approved by the
Department, which has been properly designed to assure an effluent quality
that:
         (i)   is less than or equal to 20 ppb perc without perc evaporation;
and
         (ii)   complies in all other respects to the requirements of 15 RCNY
Chapter 19 regulating the use of the public sewer system.
      (2)   Except as provided for by subparagraph (a)(1)(i) of this section,
no person may discharge into the public sewer system any perc-contaminated
wastewater or wastes resulting from dry cleaning processes including, but not
limited to, still bottom or sludge residues, dirt, lint, soils, or any other
deposits or residues extracted as a result of dry cleaning processes. The
discharge into the public sewer system of filters or other filter media used in
dry cleaning processes is prohibited.
      (3)   No person may discharge perc-contaminated wastewater to the surface
or groundwaters within New York City except in compliance with the terms and
conditions of a valid State Pollution Discharge Elimination Permit.
   (b)   Evaporation of perc-contaminated wastewater. Perc-contaminated
wastewater that is evaporated must be treated by physical separation (water
separator) and double carbon filtration prior to evaporation.
§ 12-10 Hazardous Waste Management.
   (a)   Any perc-contaminated wastes generated must be managed in accordance
with Parts 370 through 376 of Title 6 of the Codes, Rules, and Regulations of
the State of New York. Perc-contaminated wastewater must be handled as provided
in 15 RCNY §
12-09.
   (b)   All perc-contaminated wastes (including spent cartridge filters, spent
carbon, still bottoms, and lint) must be stored in tightly sealed containers,
which are impermeable to the solvent, so that no perc is emitted to the
atmosphere.
   (c)   Containers must be appropriately labeled and stored in a designated
area.
   (d)   Containers must be in good condition and must be kept closed except
when necessary to add or remove waste.
   (e)   Receipts or records showing the date and volume of any perc-
contaminated hazardous waste shipments must be retained for five years.
§ 12-11 Emergency Response.
   (a)   Dry cleaning systems must be operated and maintained to ensure that
perc releases are contained and do not migrate to sewer systems or groundwater.
      (1)   For existing dry cleaning equipment:
         (i)   floor drains and flooring in the vicinity of the equipment must
be sealed so as to be impermeable to spills, or
         (ii)   temporary dikes, berms and containment devices must be placed
in areas where spills are most likely to occur and procedures for preventing
spill migration must be established and followed.
      (2)   For new dry cleaning equipment, a spill containment system must be
installed under the equipment as specified in paragraph (a)(7) of 15 RCNY §
12-06. This spill tank shall be capable of holding 125% of the capacity of the
largest perc tank or vessel that is part of the dry cleaning machine.
   (b)   In the event of a perc release, the owner, operator or a designee must
take all reasonable measures to ensure the release is contained. These measures
must include, where applicable, stopping processes and operations, increasing
room exhaust ventilation, collecting and containing released perc and removing
and maintaining containers.
   (c)   If the facility owner and/or operator knows or has reason to know of
any release of one (1) pound or more of perc (1 pound of perc is equivalent to
0.0740 gallons of perc), a fire, or an explosion, then the facility owner and/
or operator shall report the perc release, fire, or explosion to the Department
immediately and shall also comply with all other reporting requirements of 15
RCNY
Chapter 11 governing Hazardous Substances Emergency Response.
   (d)   Any emergency response action must be recorded as specified in 15 RCNY
§
12-12. This record must include, at a minimum:
      (1)   The date, duration and nature of any malfunction, spill or incident
of the dry cleaning system;
      (2)   The notification procedures; and,
      (3)   The corrective actions taken.
§ 12-12 Reporting and Recordkeeping.
   (a)   Operators of all dry cleaning facilities or their designees must
record the following:
      (1)   The date, duration and nature of any malfunction, spill, incident,
or emergency response at the facility as outlined in paragraph (d) of 15 RCNY §
12-11;
      (2)   The date of maintenance on any air cleaning component or exhaust
system (such as the regeneration and/or replacement of the carbon in a carbon
adsorber);
      (3)   The number of loads between regenerations, cleaning and replacement
of lint filters and carbon adsorber pre-filters, repair or replacement of
exhaust fans;
      (4)   The amount of activated carbon in carbon adsorbers (dry weight in
pounds);
      (5)   The date of maintenance of drying sensors;
      (6)   The date and volume of any perc-contaminated hazardous waste
shipments; and
      (7)   The dates of perc-contaminated wastewater treatment unit carbon
cartridge replacement.
   (b)   Each owner or operator of a dry cleaning facility must keep receipts
of perc purchases, a log of the following information, maintain such
information on-site and provide it upon request for a period of five years:
      (1)   The volume of perc purchased each month by the dry cleaning
facility as recorded from perc purchases; if no perc is purchased during a
given month then the owner or operator would enter zero gallons into the log;
      (2)   The owner or operator must perform the following calculation on the
first day of every month:
         (i)   Sum the volume of all perc purchases made in each of the
previous twelve months, as recorded in the log described in paragraph (1)
above.
         (ii)   If no perc purchases were made in a given month, then the perc
consumption for that month is zero gallons.
         (iii)   The total sum calculated is the yearly perc consumption at the
facility.
   (c)   Each owner or operator of a dry cleaning facility must record the
following information on an inspection checklist as described in 15 RCNY §
12-07.
      (1)   The dates when the dry cleaning system components are inspected for
perceptible leaks as specified under the inspection and testing requirements,
and the name or location of dry cleaning system components where perceptible
leaks are detected;
      (2)   The date, time and colorimetric detector tube monitoring results as
specified in 15 RCNY §
12-07, if a carbon adsorber is used for primary or secondary emission control;
      (3)   The date, time and temperature sensor monitoring results for
refrigerated condensers, as specified in 15 RCNY §
12-07; and,
      (4)   The dates of repair and records of written or verbal orders for
repair parts to demonstrate compliance with the inspection and testing
requirements in 15 RCNY §
12-07.
   (d)   Each owner or operator of a dry cleaning facility must retain on-site
copies of the operation and maintenance checklists required under 15 RCNY §
12-08 and compliance inspection reporting forms required under 15 RCNY §
12-16.
   (e)   Each owner or operator of a dry cleaning facility must retain on-site
a copy of the design specifications and the operating manuals for each dry
cleaning system and each emission control device located at the dry cleaning
facility.
   (f)   All records must be maintained on-site for at least five years and
must be made available to the Department upon written or verbal request.
   (g)   In addition to the permitting requirements of 15 RCNY §
12-15, new facilities, or facilities installing new equipment, must submit to
the Department a copy of the compliance report submitted to the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation within 30 days of commencing operation
to certify compliance with the federal National Emission Standard for Hazardous
Air Pollutants requirements. This statement must include:
      (1)   The name and address of the owner or operator;
      (2)   The address (that is, physical location) of the dry cleaning
facility;
      (3)   An estimation of the annual perc consumption;
      (4)   A description of the machines' control devices;
      (5)   A statement verifying compliance with each applicable requirement
under Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations subchapters 63.322, 63.323,
and 63.324; and,
      (6)   A statement certifying that all information contained in the
statement is accurate and true.
   (h)   In addition to the permitting requirements of 15 RCNY §
12-15, facilities exceeding the consumption thresholds identified in Title 40
of the Code of Federal Regulations subchapter 63.620(d), (e), or (g) must
submit to the Department a copy of the compliance report submitted to the New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation within 30 days of the
compliance deadline of 180 days certifying compliance with any additional
federal requirements. This statement must include:
      (1)   The name and address of the owner or operator;
      (2)   The address (that is, physical location) of the dry cleaning
facility;
      (3)   An estimation of the annual perc consumption;
      (4)   A description of the machines' control devices;
      (5)   A statement verifying compliance with each applicable requirement
under 40 C.F.R. Subchapters 63.322, 63.323, and 63.324; and,
      (6)   A statement certifying that all information contained in the
statement is accurate and true.
§ 12-13 Equipment Testing and Certification.
   (a)   Prohibitions and requirements. The provisions of this section will be
effective 60 days after the date that the first qualifying testing program is
approved by the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation or its
agent.
      (1)   Only the following kinds of dry cleaning equipment are permitted to
be installed in perc dry cleaning facilities subject to this Rule: new closed-
loop dry cleaning machines; converted dry cleaning machines; door fan systems;
or, add-on secondary control systems which meet the design and performance
standards in 15 RCNY §
12-06 and testing requirements of this section. Unless otherwise specified in
this Rule, the dry cleaning equipment as manufactured and installed must comply
in all respects with the unit upon which certification by the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation or its agent was based.
      (2)   Any manufacturer or vendor of any new closed-loop dry cleaning
equipment that is to be installed in and used by a dry cleaning facility in New
York City must apply for and receive certification from the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation or its agent that the equipment to be
installed and operated complies in all respects with the performance standards
and the testing requirements of Part 232 of Title 6 of the Codes, Rules, and
Regulations of the State of New York. Such certification must include the
operating parameters under which the equipment was tested to receive
certification.
      (3)   It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, cause to be
offered for sale, lease or represent new closed-loop dry cleaning equipment or
any other machine or system described in paragraph (a)(1) of this section as
one which can be used by a dry cleaning facility in New York City unless it has
been certified by the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
or its agent.
      (4)   The contract of sale, lease, or use between the manufacturer or
vendor and dry cleaning equipment user must contain, at a minimum, a provision
stating that the manufacturer or vendor must, upon request, provide the user
with a copy of the certification of the equipment by the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation or its agent, as required by § 232.13
of Title 6 of the Codes, Rules, and Regulations of the State of New York.
      (5)   The manufacturer or vendor must provide immediate notification to
the Department of any generic design or functional defect discovered in the
equipment. Such notice must include a detailed plan of the manufacturer's or
vendor's remedy.
      (6)   After the certified dry cleaning equipment has been installed at
the user's facility, the manufacturer or manufacturer's representative must
supply at least a two-day training session to the purchaser or lessee. The
training must include instruction on how to maintain and operate the dry
cleaning machine. This requirement does not apply to add-on door fan systems
designed to capture drum vapors when the door is open.
   (b)   Equipment testing. All persons conducting equipment testing must
comply with the equipment testing requirements, protocols, methods, and
procedures of § 232.13(b) of Title 6 of the Codes, Rules, and Regulations of
the State of New York.
§ 12-14 Owner/Manager Operator and Inspector Training and Certification.
   (a)   Except for the conditions established in subdivision (b) and the
effective date provisions of subdivision (f) of this subchapter, it is unlawful
for any person to operate a dry cleaning facility subject to this Rule unless:
      (1)   the facility manager and/or owner has a current and valid Dry
Cleaning Owner/Manager Certification; and
      (2)   the person operating the dry cleaning machine has a current and
valid Dry Cleaning Operator Certification.
   (b)   In the event that an unforeseen/unpredictable situation prevents a dry
cleaning facility from having a certified operator operating the dry cleaning
equipment, the owner/manager will be allowed to continue operation of the dry
cleaning machine with a non-certified operator for a period not to exceed three
days per occurrence. Under no circumstances may an uncertified operator operate
dry cleaning equipment at any facility for a total of more than ten days in any
calendar year. If the use of an uncertified operator would cause nonperformance
of required maintenance and leak detection, the facility must suspend dry
cleaning operations until a certified operator is available. The purpose of
this provision is to accommodate emergencies or unforeseen extenuating
circumstances and must not be used to cover routine situations such as
vacations or other scheduled absences.
   (c)   A Dry Cleaning Owner/Manager Certification may be issued by any
organization that offers a training program (including refresher courses)
approved by the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation in
accordance with the requirements of § 232.14(c) of Title 6 of the Codes, Rules,
and Regulations of the State of New York.
   (d)   A Dry Cleaning Operator Certification may be issued by any
organization that offers a training and testing program (including refresher
courses) approved by the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation in accordance with the requirements of § 232.14(d) of Title 6 of
the Codes, Rules, and Regulations of the State of New York.
   (e)   Individuals that inspect dry cleaning facilities, either as a
registered inspector or under the supervision of a registered inspector, must
obtain a Dry Cleaner Owner/Manager Certification.
   (f)   Effective date for Dry Cleaning Owner/Manager and Dry Cleaning
Operator Certification. After the date of the first qualifying training program
approved by the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation, the
requirements of this subdivision will take effect and the first training and
certification will be mandatory according to the following schedule:
      (1)   upon start up for all operators of new dry cleaning facilities
unless the facility Owner/Manager can demonstrate that compliance with this
requirement poses an unreasonable burden because of the unavailability of
scheduled training courses or testing facilities;
      (2)   three months for operators of all existing dry cleaning facilities
that are in mixed-use locations and that contain transfer machines;
      (3)   six months for operators of all existing dry cleaning facilities in
mixed-use locations that contain dry-to-dry vented machines but do not contain
transfer machines;
      (4)   nine months for operators of all the rest of the existing dry
cleaning facilities in mixed-use locations;
      (5)   twelve months for operators of all existing dry cleaning facilities
in stand-alone locations that contain transfer machines;
      (6)   fifteen months for operators of existing dry cleaning facilities in
stand-alone locations that contain dry-to-dry vented machines but do not
contain transfer machines; and,
      (7)   eighteen months for operators of all the rest of existing dry
cleaning facilities in stand-alone locations.
   (g)   A Dry Cleaning Operator Certification will be valid for a three year
period and may be renewed upon completion of a refresher course.
   (h)   Persons or organizations authorized to offer operator training and
certification courses may not require membership in an association or purchase
of a product as a prerequisite to enrollment or successful completion of the
course.
   (i)   An authorization to offer operator training and certification courses
is valid for a maximum of five years. The authorization may be renewed by
filing an application provided by the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation. Such ap- plication must be filed at least six
months prior to the expiration of the current authorization.
   (j)   If the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation fails
to approve and implement the training programs set forth in § 232.14 of Title 6
of the Codes, Rules, and Regulations of the State of New York in a timely
manner then the Department may elect, in its sole discretion, to implement such
training programs consistent with this subchapter and § 232.14 of Title 6 of
the Codes, Rules, and Regulations of the State of New York.
   (k)   Dry cleaning owners and/or managers and all machine operators shall
attend a 16-hour training course, successfully pass a DEC Certification test
and hold current, valid DEC Owner/Manager and/or Operator Certificates. Every
shop owner shall have at least one person with an Owner/Manager Certification
and one person with an Operator Certification.
§ 12-15 Permits and Certificates.
   (a)   Alterations or Modifications to Existing Certificated Dry Cleaning
Facilities Required by 15 RCNY §
12-05. Any person who owns or operates an existing perc dry cleaning facility
which has a valid operating certificate and who is required to perform
alterations or modifications in order to comply with the requirements of 15
RCNY §
12-05 shall submit to the Department by means of certified mail a copy of the
same notice submitted to the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation in accordance with the requirements of § 232.5(a)(3) of Title 6 of
the Official Compilation of Codes, Rules, and Regulations of the State of New
York.
   (b)   New Installations that are Not Major Sources of Perc and Alterations
or Modifications to Existing Certificated Dry Cleaning Facilities. No person
may install or construct a new perc dry cleaning facility or undertake
alterations or modifications to an existing certificated perc dry cleaning
facility, except for alterations or modifications required by 15 RCNY §
12-05, without first submitting an application on a form to be supplied by the
Department and obtaining an installation or alteration permit. All installation
and alteration permit applications shall reference any process application
number(s) previously assigned to the facility by the Department and shall also
include a copy of the facility's New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation air permit or registration. Except as provided for by subdivision
(c) of this section, the Department shall issue an installation or alteration
permit or an operating certificate to any new or existing perc dry cleaning
facility that the Department determines is in full compliance with all the
provisions, requirements, and standards of this Rule.
   (c)   New Installations that are Major Sources of Perc. The Department may
grant an installation permit to a new dry cleaning facility that will be a
major source of perc only after the Department has determined that the proposed
dry cleaning facility is in full compliance with the provisions, requirements,
and standards of this Rule and that the proposed dry cleaning facility will not
cause detriment to the health, safety, welfare or comfort of any person. The
Department may impose such additional permit and/or certificate terms and
conditions as it determines may be necessary to protect the health, safety,
welfare, or comfort of any person. In addition to the requirements of this
section, any new perc dry cleaning facility which is a major source of perc
must comply with all requirements under federal and state law including, but
not limited to, the National Emission Standard for Hazardous Air Pollutants for
Perchloroethylene Dry Cleaning Facilities and shall also obtain a Title V
permit as required by the Federal Clean Air Act.
§ 12-16 Compliance Inspections.
   (a)   Stand-alone dry cleaning facilities must be inspected at least
annually, and mixed-use facilities must be inspected according to the following
schedule:
      (1)   At least twice annually where any transfer or dry-to-dry vented
equipment is operated; or
      (2)   At least annually where only non-vented equipment is operated.
   (b)   Such inspections must be performed by an inspector registered with the
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation or by an individual
working under the supervision of a registered inspector.
   (c)   All registered inspectors must meet the requirements of paragraphs
(1), (2) and (3) of this subdivision. All individuals working under the
supervision of a registered inspector must meet the requirements of paragraphs
(2) and (3) of this subdivision.
      (1)   The inspector must be one of the following:
         (i)   a licensed professional engineer;
         (ii)   a registered architect; or
         (iii)   a certified industrial hygienist.
      (2)   Must possess a Dry Cleaner Owner/Manager certification in
accordance with 15 RCNY §
12-14 and complete other appropriate training as specified by the New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation on topics related to
inspections.
      (3)   Must not be engaged in the sales or marketing of dry cleaning
equipment. Must not be engaged in providing services to the dry cleaning
industry. Employees of trade associations may not conduct inspections, but
trade associations may solicit bids for performing inspections on behalf of
their members.
   (d)   Inspections must be conducted in accordance with protocols specified
by the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation, using an
inspection reporting form supplied by the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation.
   (e)   Analysis of air samples collected by passive sampling devices or the
equivalent must be conducted by a laboratory certified by the Environmental
Laboratory Approval Program (ELAP) of the New York State Department of Health.
   (f)   The inspection will verify that the NOTICE required by 15 RCNY §
12-18 is posted in a conspicuous location in the facility.
   (g)   After the inspection is completed, the registered inspector must
provide a completed inspection reporting form to the Department and to the
facility owner within 45 days of the inspection.
   (h)   Failure of the registered inspector to comply with the above
requirements may result in the removal of the registered inspector from the
Department's list of registered inspectors.
   (i)   The owner/manager or operator must:
      (1)   Make available upon request the most recent completed inspection
reporting form to interested individuals for review on premises during normal
business hours.
      (2)   If the inspection reveals a leak or malfunction, the facility must
be repaired within the timeframes established in 15 RCNY §
12-07 and reinspected within one month.
§ 12-17 Equivalency.
Any person requesting that use of alternative equipment or procedures be
considered as equivalent to the requirements under 15 RCNY §
12-06 shall make an application to the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation in accordance with the requirements of § 232.17 of
Title 6 of the Codes, Rules, and Regulations of the State of New York and shall
submit a copy of the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation's
equivalency determination to the Department.
§ 12-18 Posting Notice.
   (a)   The facility owner must post the notice required by § 232.18 of Title
6 of the Official Compilation of Codes, Rules, and Regulations of the State of
New York in a conspicuous location in the dry cleaning facility to inform
building tenants and/or customers of the substances (perc) used in the dry
cleaning system and potential health effects associated with exposure to them.
   (b)   In addition to the notice required by subdivision (a), the owner of a
dry cleaning facility that uses perc in the cleaning process must post in a
conspicuous location in the facility a notice, on a form to be provided by the
Department and with dimensions of 8 1/2 × 11 inches, that contains the
following statements:
         (i)   "Information about the hazardous chemical substance (perc) used
at this dry cleaning facility can be found on the Material Safety Data Sheet,
which may be read at www.nyc.gov/dep/drycleanermsds."
         (ii)   "This facility is inspected and permitted by the Department of
Environmental Protection. The Department of Environmental Protection permit
number is ____________. The RTK ID # is ____________."
   (c)   The owner of a dry cleaning facility that uses non-perc in the
cleaning process must post in a conspicuous location in the facility a notice,
on a form to be provided by the Department and with dimensions of 8 1/2 × 11
inches, that contains the following statements:
         (i)   "The primary non-perc chemical substance used at this dry
cleaning facility is ______________."
         (ii)   "Detailed information about the primary non-perc chemical
substance can be found on the Material Safety Data Sheet, which may be read at
www.nyc.gov/dep/drycleanermsds."
         (iii)   "This facility is inspected and permitted by the Department of
Environmental Protection. The Department of Environmental Protection permit
number is ____________. The RTK ID # where applicable is __________."
   (d)   The owner of a dry cleaning facility that uses both perc and non-perc
in the cleaning process must post the notice required by subdivision (c) of
this section, in addition to the notices required by subdivisions (a) and (b)
of this section.
§ 12-19 Enforcement.
Any person who is in violation of or fails to comply with any provision,
standard, or requirement of this Rule or the terms and conditions of any permit
issued pursuant to this Rule shall be subject to the issuance of notice(s) of
violation and other enforcement action(s) pursuant to the provisions of the
Administrative Code of the City of New York including, but not limited to, the
payment of civil penalties and compliance with orders of the Environmental
Control Board.
§ 12-20 Severability.
If any provision of this Rule or its application to any person or circumstance
is held invalid, the remainder of this Rule, and the application of those
provisions to persons other than those to which it is held invalid, will not be
affected thereby.
Chapter 13: Rules Pertaining to the Prevention of the Emission of Dust from
Construction Related Activities
§ 13-01 Scope and Application.
   (a)   The following dust prevention regulations, 15 RCNY §§
13-01 et seq., shall apply to all construction related activities occurring
within the city of New York.
   (b)   Every owner of a building or property where construction related
activity occurs shall be responsible for the performance of the construction
related activities by his/her agent, contractor, employee, or other
representative.
   (c)   Every contractor and worker engaged in construction related activities
shall comply with the provisions of this chapter except as otherwise specified.
   (d)   The Department may inspect, at a reasonable time and in a reasonable
manner, any site where construction related activity is being conducted.
   (e)   No person shall interfere with or obstruct any employee of the
Department in the performance of his/her official duties, including but not
limited to the performance of inspections.
§ 13-02 Definitions.
Adequately Wetted. "Adequately Wetted" shall mean sufficiently mised or
penetrated with liquid to prevent the release of particulate matter. If visible
emissions are observed coming from particulate matter, then that material has
not been adequately wetted.
Board or ECB. "Board or ECB" shall mean the environmental control board of the
city of New York.
City. "City" shall mean the city of New York.
Commissioner. "Commissioner" shall mean the commissioner of environmental
protection.
Contractor. "Contractor" shall mean a public authority or any other
governmental agency or instrumentality thereof, self-employed person, company,
unincorporated association, firm, limited liability corporation, partnership or
corporation and any owner or operator thereof, which engages in a construction
project or employs persons engaged in a construction project.
Control apparatus. "Control apparatus" shall mean any device which prevents or
controls the emission of any air contaminant.
Construction. "Construction" shall mean any or all activity necessary or
incidental to the erection, demolition, assembling, altering, installing or
equipping of buildings, public or private highways, roads, premises, parks,
utility lines including such lines in already-constructed tunnels, or other
property, including land clearing, grading, excavating and filling.
Construction Material. "Construction Material" shall mean any material,
regardless of composition, designed and customarily used in construction
including but not limited to any rails, pillars, columns, beams, bricks,
flooring, wall, ceiling, or roofing material, gravel, sand, cement or asphalt.
Controlled Filled Operations. "Controlled Filled Operations" shall mean the use
of a dust control apparatus that utilizes an exhaust ventilation system which
bags the dust, thereby preventing dust from becoming airborne.
Demolition. "Demolition" shall mean the dismantling or razing of a building,
including all operations incidental thereto and any removal of non-structural
interior building walls, partitions, finishes, equipment and fittings as would
be required for an interior renovation project.
Department or DEP. "Department or DEP" shall mean Department of Environmental
Protection.
Disturbed area. "Disturbed area" shall mean an area that has been significantly
disrupted by fugitive dust.
Dust. "Dust" shall mean solid particulate matter which has been released into
the open air by natural forces or by mechanical processes.
Emission. "Emission" shall mean dispersion of an air contaminant into the open
air of the city.
Open air. "Open air" shall mean all the air that is available for human,
animal, or plant respiration, but shall not include the air in equipment and
private dwellings.
Owner. "Owner" shall mean and includes the owner of a freehold of the premises
or lesser estate therein or mortgagee thereof, a lessee or an agent of any of
the above persons, a lessee of the equipment or his or her agent, a tenant,
operator, or any other person who has regular control of equipment or
apparatus.
Person. "Person" shall mean an individual or partnership, company, corporation,
association, firm, organization, governmental agency, administration or
department, or any other group of individuals, or any officer or employee
thereof.
Re-suspension. "Re-suspension" shall mean dust accumulation that once again
becomes airborne.
Sandblasting. "Sandblasting" shall mean the use of a high pressure current of
air or stream carrying sand, water, or other material for the cleaning or
grinding of hard surfaces, including, but not limited to, stone and metal.
§ 13-03 Enforcement.
Any person who is in violation of or fails to comply with any provision,
standard or requirement of these Rules or the terms and conditions of any
permit issued pursuant to these Rules shall be subject to the issuance of
notice(s) of violation and other civil or criminal enforcement action(s)
pursuant to the provisions of Title 24, Chapter 1, Subchapter 9 of the
Administrative Code of the city of New York, including but not limited to
payment of civil penalties and compliance with orders of the Commissioner and/
or ECB.
§ 13-04 Wetting.
   (a)   Provision shall be made at every construction site to control the
amount of airborne dust released off site from construction operations, by
wetting the construction material as necessary with appropriate spraying
agents, provided wetting will not damage utility infrastructure or create any
safety hazards. Other means or dust-control apparatus may also be used provided
they are acceptable to the Commissioner. Fire hydrants shall not be opened to
accomplish this purpose unless a fire hydrant use permit is in effect.
   (b)   Trucks and other vehicles used to transport particulate matter shall
be covered and any particulate matter kept on site shall be sufficiently wetted
or stored to prevent particulate matter from becoming airborne.
   (c)   The wet method of dust control shall include an adequate and
continuous supply of water delivered to the construction site under proper
pressure and distributed by a hose system and terminating in suitable water
sprays or jets at the several points of application, or shall provide the same
facilities by means of a self-contained recirculating system. For excavation
jobs, a fine mist is deemed to be an adequate supply of water. The application
of water shall be done in such a way so as not to create a slipping hazard.
Controlled filled operations shall be exempt from this section. When the fill
pile is to remain on site and undisturbed overnight or longer, the pile shall
be covered with a tarp.
   (d)   Portable hand water sprinklers or hose sprinklers are acceptable means
of wetting for dust control. The water sprays or jets shall be designed to
break the water stream into small droplets or otherwise to provide effective
wetting.
   (e)   Suitable drainage means shall be provided for the removal of water and
sludge which drains from the operation. When no such drainage is available, the
use of access roads and other acceptable methods shall be used.
§ 13-05 Construction Activities Requiring Wetting.
   (a)   Prior to the commencement of demolition activities, all exterior
surfaces of a building up to six stories in height shall be wetted and shall be
maintained adequately wet thereafter while operations continue.
   (b)   All construction material shall be sufficiently wetted to prevent dust
from becoming airborne before loading into trucks, vehicles or other
containers. During transport, such material shall be enclosed or covered to
prevent dust dispersion.
   (c)   Wetting shall be used to control dust where drilling, grinding, or
other similar construction activities occur.
   (d)   Sprinklers or other effective means shall be provided to control dust
produced at dumps, conveyors, chutes, and other transfer points.
   (e)   Wherever water sprinklers are used to control dust at transfer points,
they shall be capable of being operated by the person(s) responsible for
conducting the loading.
   (f)   Soil or debris piles shall be moistened if dust is being emitted from
the piles due to prevailing winds and not from a momentary gust. Adequately
secured tarps, plastic or other material may be required by the Commissioner to
further reduce dust emissions.
§ 13-06 Construction Activities Requiring Additional Forms of Dust Control.
   (a)   Where the demolition or renovation of any building or other structure
is being performed by hand, debris, bricks, and other material shall be removed
by means of chutes, by means of buckets or hoists, or through openings in the
floors of the building or other structure in compliance with these Rules and
the Administrative Code of the city of New York.
   (b)   Where windows and other exterior wall openings in buildings or other
structures being renovated are more than 25 feet in height above the ground or
grade level and are within 20 feet of any floor opening used for removal of
debris from floors above, such windows and other openings shall be solidly
boarded up during renovation operations to prevent the emission of dust into
the atmosphere so long as applicable OSHA standards are followed.
   (c)   During sandblasting or other similar operations, installation and use
of hoods, fans and dust collectors to enclose and vent the handling of dusty
materials or the use of water sprays or other measures and control apparatuses
acceptable to the Commissioner to suppress the dust emission or adequate
containment methods shall be employed.
   (d)   Open-bodied trucks transporting dust producing construction materials
likely to become airborne shall be covered at all times when in motion.
   (e)   Removal of earth or other material from paved roads, driveways and
parking lots on which earth or other material has been deposited by trucking,
earth moving equipment or erosion is required daily. There shall be no re-
suspension of roadway dust during the removal process.
   (f)   Dry street sweepers, including broom sweeping, may be used if designed
to prevent the re-suspension of street/sidewalk particulate matter.
   (g)   The use of blower devices for the removal of deposited mud or dirt is
prohibited.
   (h)   Vehicles entering or exiting construction areas shall travel at slow
speeds to minimize dust emissions.
   (i)   Disturbed areas shall be stabilized for the duration of the
construction activity or until construction work resumes on the inactive
disturbed area. All disturbed areas of a construction site, including storage
piles of fill dirt and other bulk materials, which are not being actively
utilized for construction purposes for a period of seven calendar days or more,
shall be stabilized using one or more of the following soil stabilization
methods:
      (1)   Water, as a dust suppressant;
      (2)   Chemical dust stabilizer or suppressant;
      (3)   Planting of trees or vegetative ground cover. Where soil moisture
or natural crushing is sufficient to limit visible dust emissions, no action is
required.
§ 13-07 Demolition.
   (a)   A DEP demolition registration shall be filed with the Department 10
days prior to the commencement of demolition. Such registration shall include
the following information: name of owner or demolition contractor, address of
owner or demolition contractor, description of the building, structure,
facility or installation, scheduled starting and completion dates of
demolition, method of demolition to be employed, and procedure to be employed
to meet the requirements of these Rules.
   (b)   Adequate wetting shall be employed before and during the demolition of
any section or wall of the structure.
   (c)   Debris shall be transported through dust-tight chutes or in buckets
and shall not be dropped or thrown from any floor. Any debris in chutes or
buckets shall be sufficiently wetted to preclude dust dispersion at the point
of discharge.
   (d)   Dust and debris from the demolition operations shall be removed daily
from the adjacent streets, sidewalks and alleys.
   (e)   Any contractor or person who intends to demolish a building,
structure, facility or installation to which the provisions of this section
apply is exempt from the requirements of this section if such building,
structure, facility or installation has been declared by a state or local
governmental authority to be structurally unsound and in danger of imminent
collapse.
§ 13-08 Sandblasting.
   (a)   No dry sandblasting shall be permitted except where wet sandblasting
cannot be done due to unique circumstances.
   (b)   Whenever sandblasting is done, contaminant methods such as blast-
cleaning machines and cabinets shall be used.
   (c)   Whenever sandblasting is done, curtains shall be used as temporary
dust-containment structures.
   (d)   A minimum of three days notice shall be given by the contractor to
owners, tenants and occupants of all structures within one hundred fifty feet
of the site on which sandblasting is to be done.
§ 13-09 Construction Devices.
All persons constructing or operating a large article, machine, device,
equipment, such as a rock crusher, or other contrivance or facility capable of
causing or permitting emission of dust into the atmosphere at a construction
site shall keep on site a document detailing such equipment. Information
provided on this document shall include the ownership, location, design, make
and model, operation, i.e. how does it operate, as well as any other pertinent
information requested by the Department. In addition, the measures utilized to
reduce dust emissions resulting from the use of these items as set forth in 15
RCNY §§
13-01 et seq. shall be clearly outlined. This document shall be attached as an
addendum sheet to the Noise Mitigation Plan prepared pursuant to § 24-220 of
the Noise Code.
§ 13-10 Open Areas.
Owners shall take sufficient measures including wetting and covering and open
area to prevent dust emissions from becoming airborne after demolition is
completed.
Chapter 14: Rules Concerning the Use of Ultra Low Sulfur Diesel Fuel and
Emissions Control Technology in Nonroad Vehicles Used in City Construction
**** Subchapter A: General Provisions ****
§ 14-01 Definitions.
Code. "Code" shall mean the Administrative Code of the City of New York.
Commissioner. "Commissioner" shall mean the commissioner of the New York City
Department of Environmental Protection or his or her designee.
Nonroad engine. "Nonroad engine" shall mean an internal combustion engine
(including the fuel system) that is not used in a motor vehicle or a vehicle
used solely for competition, or that is not subject to standards promulgated
under § 7411 or § 7521 of Title 42 of the United States code, except that this
term shall apply to internal combustion engines used to power generators,
compressors or similar equipment used in any construction program or project.
Nonroad vehicle. "Nonroad vehicle" shall mean a vehicle powered by a nonroad
engine, fifty horsepower and greater, and that is not a motor vehicle or a
vehicle used solely for competition, which shall include, but not be limited
to, excavators, backhoes, cranes, compressors, generators, bulldozers, and
similar equipment, except that this term shall not apply to horticultural
maintenance vehicles used for landscaping purposes that are powered by a
nonroad engine of sixty-five horsepower or less and that are not used in any
construction program or project.
Ultra low sulfur diesel fuel. "Ultra low sulfur diesel fuel" shall mean diesel
fuel that has a sulfur content of no more than fifteen parts per million.
**** Subchapter B: Use of Best Available Technology and Ultra Low Sulfur Diesel
Fuel ****
§ 14-02 Best Available Technology Determination.
An engine that has been certified to meet the United States Environmental
Protection Agency's ("EPA") Tier IV Exhaust Emission Standards is deemed to be
using the Best Available Technology ("BAT"), and does not require additional
retrofit technologies. EPA's Tier IV Exhaust Emission Standards are described
in Table 1 of the EPA's Clean Air Nonroad Diesel Rule Fact Sheet, EPA420-F-04-
032, May 2004, available at http://www.epa.gov/nonroaddiesel/2004fr/
420f04032.htm. If an engine has not been certified to meet the Tier IV Exhaust
Emission Standards, pursuant to § 24-163.3 of the Administrative Code, the BAT
that must be utilized is one of the following, provided, that this technology
shall achieve the greatest reduction in emissions of particulate matter and
shall in no event result in an increase in the emissions of either particulate
matter or nitrogen oxides:
 Category I (a) Any properly installed and functioning system utilizing a
Diesel Particulate Filter ("DPF") that primarily reduces emissions of
particulate matter ("PM"), demonstrating an 85% or greater reduction in PM, and
secondarily nitrogen oxide ("NOx") that appears on either the United States
Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA") or the California Air Resources Board
("CARB") verified lists at http://www.epa.gov/otaq/retrofit/verif-list.htm and
http://www.arb.ca.gov/diesel/verdev/background.htm for onroad or nonroad
engines.
 Category I (b) Any properly installed DPF from either the EPA or CARB verified
lists.
 Category I(c) A filter that has undergone the Verminderung der Emissionen
Realer Dieselmotoren im Tunnelbau ("VERT") test procedure and appears as
approved for continuous use on the VERT list maintained by http://akpf.org/pub/
vert__filterliste.pdf or similar test procedures to those conducted by EPA/CARB
and has demonstrated an 85% or greater reduction in emissions of PM.
 Category II Any properly installed and functioning system utilizing a Flow
through Filer ("FTF") that primarily reduces emissions of particulate matter
("PM") and secondarily nitrogen oxide ("NOx") that appears on either the
verified lists for onroad or nonroad engines or any properly installed FTF on
the verified list and that produces the greater PM reduction but not less than
a 50% reduction in PM.
 Category III Any properly installed and functioning system utilizing a Diesel
Oxidation Catalyst ("DOC") or any emulsified diesel fuel that appears on either
the EPA or CARB verified lists for onroad or nonroad engines that produces not
less than a 25% reduction in FM. Fuel technologies must be compatible with the
use of ultra low sulfur diesel fuel.
§ 14-03 Method of Best Available Technology Selection.
   (a)   Any contractor or agency operating a type of nonroad vehicle must
select the appropriate BAT for use with such type of nonroad vehicle. For each
type of nonroad vehicle subject to the BAT requirement, the contractor or
agency operating such type of vehicle must identify, in list form, all types of
pollution control technology devices that qualify as BAT in Category I for such
nonroad vehicle.
   (b)   All types of pollution control technology devices identified by the
contractor or agency as Category I (a) BAT that are not technologically
feasible for use with the subject type of nonroad vehicle are to be eliminated
from the list of Category I (a) BAT. To eliminate a specific type of pollution
control technology or individual device, the contractor or agency must
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Commissioner and document that
operational constraints or physical, chemical or engineering principles
preclude the successful and effective use of the nonroad vehicle when used with
the specific pollution control technologies of that type. The contractor or
agency shall then consider DPFs that satisfy the requirements set forth in
Category I(b). If use of a Category I(b) DPF is technologically feasible, the
contractor or agency must notify the Commissioner of the selection and the
installation schedule. If none are technologically feasible, the contractor or
agency shall select the technology devices set forth in Category I(c).
   (c)   If, after the elimination process, no technologies remain in Category
I (a), (b), or (c) from which the contractor or agency can select a BAT, the
contractor or agency shall apply for Approval of a Written Finding of
Unavailability. Upon approval by the DEP, the same identification and
elimination process shall be done for Category II. If, after the elimination
process, no technologies remain in Category II from which the contractor or
agency can select a BAT, the same identification and elimination process shall
be done for Category III. If, after the elimination process, no technologies
remain in Category III from which the contractor or agency can select a BAT,
the contractor or agency operating the subject nonroad vehicle shall apply for
an Approval of a Written Finding of Unavailability or a Safety Waiver.
   (d)   Once a category is selected as provided for in (c) above, an economic
impact analysis is to be performed on the remaining technologies if the
technology reduces both PM and NOx. If the cost of the technology that provides
NOx control is equal to or greater than thirty percent more than that of the
technology without NOx control, then the technology without NOx control shall
be selected. For the purpose of this paragraph, the criteria that shall be
considered is the cost of the strategies, themselves and the cost of
installation.
   (e)   For newly purchased vehicles, BAT may be Original Equipment
Manufacturer ("OEM") installed control technology, provided that the technology
is selected in a manner such that it provides the greatest reduction in
particulate matter above the PM standard that the EPA has certified without
increasing NOx and that reduction is verified by the manufacturer. The BAT need
not be on EPA or CARB verified retrofit lists.
   (f)   The contractor or agency must use the pollution control technology
identified as BAT by the process set forth in this subchapter.
   (g)   Prior to the installation of the selected technology, the contractor
or agency shall notify the DEP of the BAT selection and contact the DEP when
the DPF or other BAT is installed pursuant to this chapter and § 24-163.3 of
the Administrative Code. The contractor or agency shall make arrangements to
have the unit inspected and registered and the DEP shall label the vehicle as
compliant. The contractor shall retain all documentation generated in the BAT
selection process for as long as the selected BAT is in use. A contractor's
failure to fully document the selection process or to provide such
documentation shall be considered a violation of subdivision e of § 24-163.3
and is subject to applicable penalties.
§ 14-04 Best Available Technology Selection Applicability.
   (a)   The BAT listed in this subchapter may be amended, superseded, or
repealed at any time. However, no contractor or agency will be required to
replace a selected BAT within three years of first using such BAT on any
nonroad vehicle.
   (b)   A contractor or agency who is using a DPF that does not appear on the
EPA or CARB verified lists may use such DPF for three years from the date it
was first installed. After such three-year period, if such DPF does not appear
on either the EPA or CARB verified lists, such DPF may not be used in nonroad
vehicles used in City projects.
   (c)   A contractor or agency who is using Category I(c) technology may use
such technology for three years from the date it was first installed. After
such three-year period, if such technology does not appear on either the EPA or
CARB verified lists, such technology may not be used in nonroad vehicles used
in City projects.
   (d)   A contractor or agency that has installed technology that appears on
either the EPA and/or CARB verified lists at the time of installation, but
which has been removed from the EPA and/or CARB verified lists during the
thirty months following installation, may not use such technology in nonroad
vehicles used in City projects at the conclusion of the three-year period
following installation. A contractor or agency that has installed technology
that appears on the EPA and/or CARB verified lists at the time of installation,
but which has been removed from the EPA and/or CARB verified lists during the
six months preceding the conclusion of the three-year period following
installation, or at any time after the conclusion of such three-year period,
may use such technology in nonroad vehicles for an additional six months
following the date it was removed from the EPA and/or CARB verified lists.
§ 14-05 Use of Ultra Low Sulfur Diesel Fuel.
All nonroad vehicles subject to this rule must be powered by ultra low sulfur
diesel fuel, regardless of which BAT is selected, unless the Commissioner has
issued a written determination pursuant to subdivision i of § 24-163.3
permitting the use of diesel fuel that has a sulfur content of no more than
thirty parts per million.
§ 14-06 Public Works Contracts.
Any contractor acting pursuant to a public works contract that is subject to
the provisions of paragraph four of subdivision f of § 24-163.3, but not
paragraph one or three of such subdivision, shall comply with this subchapter
and Subchapters A and C of this chapter as of June 19, 2005.
**** Subchapter C: Waiver Procedures ****
§ 14-07 Application for Approval of a Written Finding of Unavailability.
   (a)   If the BAT required for any nonroad vehicle is unavailable, an agency
may submit a Written Finding of Unavailability for the Commissioner's approval.
Any application for approval of a Written Finding of Unavailability for the
applicable BAT must contain the following information:
      (1)   The name of the agency applying for approval of the Written Finding
of Unavailability;
      (2)   The name and identification number of the subject contract, if
applicable;
      (3)   Identification of the specific nonroad vehicle that is the subject
of the Written Finding of Unavailability;
      (4)   Identification of the required BAT;
      (5)   An explanation as to why the applicable BAT is unavailable. Such
explanation must include all documentation generated in the BAT selection
process described in this chapter;
      (6)   Identification of a technology for reducing the emission of
pollutants, if any, that is available and appropriate for such vehicle, which
may include a technology that does not appear on the EPA or CARB verified
lists, and that, if available and appropriate, will be used instead of the BAT.
      (7)   The name and contact number of the applicant.
   (b)   Applications should be sent to:
      Director of the Division of Air and Noise Programs, Enforcement and
Policy
      Bureau of Environmental Compliance
      New York City Department of Environmental Protection
      59-17 Junction Blvd.
      Flushing, NY 11373
   (c)   The Department will make a determination whether to approve the
Written Finding of Unavailability no later than thirty days after receipt of
the Written Finding.
   (d)   Approvals shall expire 180 days after issuance, unless the agency
renews the Written Finding and the Commissioner approves such Finding, in
accordance with the procedures set forth in subdivisions (a), (b) and (c) of
this section. Any such application for renewal shall be submitted no later than
thirty days prior to the expiration date of the approval.
§ 14-08 Application for a Safety Waiver.
   (a)   Any application for a waiver from the applicable BAT must contain the
following information:
      (1)   If a contractor applies, the name of the contractor applying for
the waiver and the agency to which the contractor is under contract;
      (2)   If an agency applies, the name of the agency applying for the
waiver;
      (3)   The name and identification number of the subject contract, if
applicable;
      (4)   Identification of the specific nonroad vehicle that is the subject
of the waiver request;
      (5)   Identification of the required BAT;
      (6)   A technical explanation as to why use of such Best Available
Technology may endanger the operator of the vehicle or those working near the
vehicle, due to engine malfunction;
      (7)   Identification of a technology for reducing the emission of
pollutants, if any, that is available and appropriate for such vehicle, which
may include a technology that does not appear on EPA or CARB verified lists,
and that, if available and appropriate, will be used instead of the BAT;
      (8)   The name and contact number of the applicant.
   (b)   Waiver applications should be sent to:
      Director of the Division of Air and Noise Programs, Enforcement and
Policy
      Bureau of Environmental Compliance
      New York City Department of Environmental Protection
      59-17 Junction Blvd.
      Flushing, NY 11373
   (c)   The Department will make a determination whether to issue a waiver no
later than thirty days after receipt of the waiver request.
   (d)   Waivers shall expire 180 days after issuance, unless the Commissioner
renews the waiver in accordance with the procedures set forth in subdivisions
(a), (b) and (c) of this section. Any such application for renewal shall be
submitted no later than thirty days prior to the expiration date of the waiver.
Chapter 15: Rules Concerning the Use of Ultra Low Sulfur Diesel Fuel and
Emission Control Technology on City Motor Vehicles
**** Subchapter A: General Provisions ****
§ 15-01 Definitions.
Best available retrofit technology. "Best available retrofit technology" shall
mean a technology, verified by the United States environmental protection
agency or the California air resources board, for reducing the emission of
pollutants that achieves reductions in particulate matter emissions at the
highest classification level for diesel emission control strategies, as set
forth in 15 RCNY §
15-04, that is applicable to the particular engine and application. Such
technology shall also, at a reasonable cost, achieve the greatest reduction in
emissions of nitrogen oxides at such particulate matter reduction level and
shall in no event result in a net increase in the emissions of either
particulate matter or nitrogen oxides.
CARB. "CARB" shall mean the California Air Resources Board.
City agency. "City agency" shall mean a city, county, borough, administration,
department, division, bureau, board or commission, or a corporation,
institution or agency of government, the expenses of which are paid in whole or
in part from the city treasury.
Code. "Code" shall mean the Administrative Code of the City of New York.
Commissioner."Commissioner" shall mean the Commissioner of the New York City
Department of Environmental Protection or her designee.
Department. "Department" shall mean the Department of Environmental Protection.
EPA. "EPA" shall mean the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
Gross vehicle weight rating. "Gross vehicle weight rating" shall mean the value
specified by the manufacturer of a motor vehicle model as the maximum design
loaded weight of a single vehicle of that model.
Motor vehicle. "Motor vehicle" shall mean a vehicle operated or driven upon a
public highway that is propelled by any power other than muscular power, except
electrically-driven mobility assistance devices operated or driven by a person
with a disability, provided, however, that this term shall not include vehicles
that are specially equipped for emergency response by the department, office of
emergency management, sheriff's office of the department of finance, police
department or fire department.
Person. "Person" shall mean any natural person, co-partnership, firm, company,
association, joint stock association, corporation or other like organization.
Reasonable cost. "Reasonable cost" shall mean that such technology does not
cost greater than thirty percent more than other technology applicable to the
particular engine and application that falls within the same classification
level for diesel emission control strategies, as set forth in 15 RCNY §
15-04, when considering the cost of the strategies, themselves, and the cost of
installation.
Ultra low sulfur diesel fuel. "Ultra low sulfur diesel fuel" shall mean diesel
fuel that has a sulfur content of no more than fifteen parts per million.
(Amended City Record 3/15/2017, eff. 4/14/2017)
Editor's note: The amendment from City Record 3/15/2017 purported to add
definitions of "CARB" and "EPA" to 15 RCNY §
15-04, but the new definitions were added here at the discretion of the editor.
**** Subchapter B: Use of Best Available Retrofit Technology and Ultra Low
Sulfur Diesel Fuel ****
§ 15-02 Best Available Retrofit Technology Determination.
Pursuant to § 24-163.4 of the Code, any diesel fuel-powered motor vehicle
having a gross vehicle weight rating of more than 8,500 pounds that is owned or
operated by a City agency must utilize the Best Available Retrofit Technology
("BART"), as defined in 15 RCNY §
15-01. In making their selections, agencies are directed to consult the EPA and
CARB verified lists at http://www.epa.gov/_otaq/retrofit/retroverifiedlist.htm
and http://www.arb.ca.gov/diesel/verdev/back-ground.htm.
City agencies must select BART for their diesel fuel-powered motor vehicles in
accordance with 15 RCNY §
15-05. City agencies must notify the Department of their selections, and the
Department will make a determination as to whether the BART selected may be
utilized for the vehicle, engine and application for which it was selected. The
Department will notify the selecting agency of its determination. City agencies
are not required to select BART for their diesel fuel-powered motor vehicles in
the following circumstances:
   (1)   If a vehicle will be retired within the next 12 months, the vehicle
does not have to be retrofitted if vehicle usage is limited to 2,000 miles; if
the agency does not limit such usage to 2,000 miles, a DOC must be installed;
and
   (2)   If a vehicle will be retired within the next 36 months, the vehicle
must have a DOC installed, and vehicle usage must be limited to yearly mileage
of 3,000 miles or 30% of the mileage averaged over the last three years,
whichever is less. Agencies that are retiring their vehicles pursuant to this
section must provide the odometer or hour-meter reading and date it was taken
to the Department and must maintain a mileage log for the vehicle(s).
§ 15-03 Motor Vehicles That Are Not Subject to BART.
Any diesel fuel-powered motor vehicle having a gross vehicle weight rating of
more than 8,500 pounds that is owned or operated by a City agency and that is
equipped with an engine certified to the applicable 2007 United States
Environmental Protection Agency standard for particulate matter as set forth in
section 86.007-11 of title 40 of the code of federal regulations or to any
subsequent United States environmental protection agency standard for such
pollutant that is at least as stringent, shall not be required to utilize the
BART as defined in 15 RCNY §
15-01.
§ 15-04 Classification Levels.
 Level IV Any Diesel Particulate Filter (DPF) or other technology verified for
a specific application from either the CARB or EPA verified lists that reduces
diesel particulate matter emissions by 85 percent or greater, or reduces engine
emissions to less than or equal to 0.01 grams diesel particulate matter per
brake horsepower-hour.
 Level III Any DPF or Diesel Oxidation Catalyst (DOC) or Catalyzed Wire Mesh
Filter (CWMF) or other technology or combination of technologies verified for a
specific application from either the CARB or EPA verified lists that reduces
diesel particulate matter emissions by between 50 and 84 percent.
 Level II Any DOC or other technology verified for a specific application from
either the CARB or EPA verified lists that reduces diesel particulate matter
emissions by between 25 and 49 percent.
 Level I Any DOC or emulsified diesel fuel or other technology verified for a
specific application from either the CARB or EPA verified lists that reduces
diesel particulate matter emissions by between 20 and 24 percent.
§ 15-05 Selection Process.
   (a)   For each type of motor vehicle subject to the BART requirement, the
City agency operating such vehicle must identify, in list form, all types of
pollution control technology devices verified for such motor vehicle at
classification Level IV.
   (b)   All types of pollution control technology devices identified by the
City agency as classification Level IV devices that are not technologically
feasible for use with respect to the particular vehicle, engine or application
are to be eliminated from such list. To eliminate all types of pollution
control technology devices identified by the agency at classification Level IV,
or a specific type of pollution control technology, or a particular pollution
control technology device, the agency must demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Commissioner that operational constraints or physical, chemical or
engineering principles preclude the successful and effective use of the motor
vehicle when used with such types of technology devices, or type of technology,
or particular pollution control technology device.
   (c)   If, after the elimination process, no pollution control technology
devices remain in classification Level IV from which the City agency can select
a BART, the same identification and elimination process must be done for
classification Level III. If after the elimination process, no pollution
control technology devices remain in classification Level III from which the
City agency can select a BART, the same identification and elimination process
must be done for classification Level II. If after the elimination process, no
pollution control technology devices remain in classification Level II from
which the City agency can select a BART, the same identification and
elimination process must be done for classification Level I.
   (d)   Once a level is selected as provided for in subdivisions (a), (b), and
(c) of this section, an economic impact analysis is to be performed on the
remaining technologies where the technology reduces both PM and nitrogen oxide
(NOx). The agency shall select the technology achieving, at a reasonable cost,
the greatest reduction in NOx emissions.
   (e)   The Commissioner may determine, upon application by a City agency,
that a technology, whether or not it has been verified by the United States
environmental protection agency or the California air resources board, may be
appropriate to test, on an experimental basis, on a particular type of diesel
fuel-powered motor vehicle owned or operated by a City agency. The Commissioner
may authorize such technology to be installed on up to five percent or twenty-
five of such type of motor vehicle, whichever is less.
§ 15-06 Best Available Retrofit Technology Selection Applicability.
No City agency shall be required to replace a selected BART or an experimental
technology within three years of having first utilized such technology.
Furthermore, no City agency shall be required to replace Level IV technology
until it has reached the end of its useful life.
§ 15-07 Use of Ultra Low Sulfur Diesel Fuel.
All motor vehicles owned or operated by a City agency must be powered by ultra
low sulfur diesel fuel unless the Commissioner has issued a written
determination pursuant to subdivision (e) of § 24-163.4 of the Code, or a
waiver pursuant to subdivision (f) of § 24-163.4 of the Code.
Chapter 16: NYCDEP Rules for the Recreational Use of City Property*
* Editor's note: Former Chapter 16, Rules for Recreational Use of Water Supply
Lands and Waters, was repealed and replaced (see City_Record_5/31/2019,_eff._6/
30/2019). See page 2753 of the City Record from May 31, 2019 for the
disposition of sections from former Chapter 16.
§ 16-01 Scope and Purpose.
The following rules (the "Rules") apply to all recreational uses of City
Property, as defined herein, in the counties of Delaware, Dutchess, Greene,
Putnam, Schoharie, Sullivan, Ulster, and Westchester. These Rules promote New
York City's goal of allowing recreational use and enjoyment of its City
Property. Additional information about recreational use opportunities is
available from the New York City Department of Environmental Protection (as
defined below, the "NYCDEP") offices and on the NYCDEP website at www.nyc.gov/
dep.
(Added City Record 5/31/2019, eff. 6/30/2019)
§ 16-02 Definitions.
All capitalized terms have the same meaning as in the New York State
Environmental Conservation Law ("ECL") unless defined differently herein as
follows:
   (a)   Access Permit. "Access Permit" means a valid NYCDEP instrument of
registration and permission to access certain City Property for Recreational
Use as further described in 15 RCNY §
16-04.1.
   (b)   Access Permit Areas. "Access Permit Areas" means a City Property
location designated by NYCDEP as available for recreation uses as determined by
NYCDEP, and for which a NYCDEP Access Permit and Vehicle Tag are required.
Access Permit Areas are generally located near Water Supply facilities, such as
Reservoirs and Controlled Lakes, and may have special access requirements or
restrictions.
   (c)   Angling. "Angling" means taking fish by hook and line. This includes
bait and fly fishing, casting, trolling and the use of landing nets to complete
the catch.
   (d)   Big Game. "Big Game" means deer and bear.
   (e)   Boat Storage Area. "Boat Storage Area" means a location on land
designated by NYCDEP for Fishing and/or Recreational Boats to be stored when
not on the water.
   (f)   City. "City" means the City of New York.
   (g)   City Property. "City Property" means all real property, Reservoirs and
Controlled Lakes owned by the City and within the jurisdiction of NYCDEP in the
counties of Delaware, Dutchess, Greene, Putnam, Schoharie, Sullivan, Ulster,
and Westchester.
   (h)   Controlled Lake. "Controlled Lake" means a lake from which the City
may withdraw water pursuant to rights acquired by the City or as a right of
ownership. The Controlled Lakes, for purposes of these Rules, are Lake Gilead
and Lake Gleneida.
   (i)   Day Use Area. "Day Use Area" means a City Property location designated
by NYCDEP as available for designated Recreational Uses, as determined by
NYCDEP in accordance with these Rules. It is not necessary to have an Access
Permit or a Vehicle Tag for activities in a Day Use Area. Day Use Areas are
generally areas that may be designated for activities including, but not
limited to, running, walking, in-line skating, biking, and dog walking.
   (j)   Fishing. "Fishing" means taking fish by Angling and also includes the
use of tip-ups for ice fishing and the taking of carp by bow and arrow.
   (k)   Fishing Boats. "Fishing Boats" means metal rowboats with a location-
designated NYCDEP Fishing Boat Tag that may be used on City Reservoirs and
Controlled Lakes and stored on a Boat Storage Area for Fishing.
   (l)   Fishing Boat Tag. "Fishing Boat Tag" means a valid instrument of
permission, which may include a sticker, bar code, or other instrument as
determined by NYCDEP, issued to allow Access Permit holders to store a Fishing
Boat in a Boat Storage Area, as further described in 15 RCNY §
16-10.1.
   (m)   Group Access Permit. "Group Access Permit" means an valid instrument
of registration and permission for groups to temporarily access certain City
Property that requires an Access Permit for Recreational Use without each
member having to obtain an individual Access Permit, as further described in 15
RCNY §
16-06.
   (n)   Group. "Group" means any congregation of individuals in excess of six
(6) people and shall not consist of more than thirty (30) individuals. Groups
larger than 30 people are not permitted.
   (o)   Group Leader. "Group Leader" means the person who applies for the
Group Access Permit and who agrees to accept responsibility for the conduct,
activities, and safety of all Group Members.
   (p)   Group Member. "Group Member" means an individual listed on the Group
Access Permit application for whom completed liability waivers have been
received and accepted by NYCDEP, and who will accompany the Group Leader on the
permitted Group activity.
   (q)   Guest. "Guest" means a person accompanying a valid Access Permit
holder who has completed and signed a Guest Pass application.
   (r)   Guest Pass. "Guest Pass" means a valid instrument of registration and
permission for Guests of valid Access Permit holders to temporarily access
certain City Property for Recreational Use as further described in 15 RCNY §
16-05.
   (s)   Hiking. "Hiking" means foot travel including hiking, walking, running,
cross-country skiing, snowshoeing, bird watching, nature observation and
photography.
   (t)   High Water Mark. "High Water Mark" means the visible mark along the
shoreline where the Reservoir water intersects with the shoreline during its
high peak level. Boaters are encouraged to contact the appropriate NYCDEP Boat
Office if they have questions identifying this boundary.
   (u)   Hunting. "Hunting" means pursuing, shooting, killing or capturing
(other than Trapping as defined below) wildlife, except wildlife which has been
lawfully trapped or otherwise reduced to possession, and includes all lesser
acts such as disturbing, harrying or worrying, whether they result in taking or
not, and every attempt to take and every act of assistance to any other person
in taking or attempting to take wildlife.
   (v)   Ice Free Period. "Ice Free Period" means that the main bodies and
shorelines of the Reservoirs and Controlled Lakes are free from ice. There is
the possibility that a Reservoir whose main body is free of ice (and therefore
"open" to Fishing) may still have some ice present in some of the isolated
coves and protected areas.
   (w)   Manned and Unmanned Aircraft. "Manned and Unmanned Aircraft" means,
without limitation, drones, model airplanes, airplanes, flying machines,
balloons, parachutes or other apparatus for aviation.
   (x)   NYCDEP. "NYCDEP" means the New York City Department of Environmental
Protection, an executive agency of the City.
   (y)   NYSDEC. "NYSDEC" means the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation, an executive agency of the State of New York.
   (z)   Public Access Area. "Public Access Area" means those areas of City
Property designated by NYCDEP and by these Rules as available for Recreational
Uses without a NYCDEP Access Permit and Vehicle Tag, as designated by NYCDEP
and described herein. Public Access Areas are generally not adjacent to
Reservoirs.
   (aa)   Recreational Areas. "Recreational Areas" means Public Access Areas,
Day Use Areas, Access Permit Areas, Fishing Boat Areas, and Recreational
Boating Areas
   (bb)   Recreational Boats. "Recreational Boats" means vessels that may be
used in Recreational Boating Areas and stored on adjacent City Property for
Recreational Uses, as further described in 15 RCNY §
16-10.2(b)(1).
   (cc)   Recreational Boat Tag. "Recreational Boat Tag" means a valid
instrument of permission, which could include a sticker or bar code or other
instrument as determined by NYCDEP, issued for the purpose of allowing Access
Permit holders to use and store boats for use when boating on Recreational
Boating Areas as further described in 15 RCNY §
16-10.2.
   (dd)   Recreational Boating Area. "Recreational Boating Area" means a
location designated by NYCDEP within the Cannonsville, Neversink, Pepacton and
Schoharie Reservoirs that is available for use of Recreational Boats.
   (ee)   Recreational Uses. "Recreational Uses" means activities on City
Property that, in the sole discretion of NYCDEP, do not pose a potential
adverse impact to natural resources, water quality or security, and includes,
without limitation, the following activities: Hunting, Hiking, Fishing,
Trapping, paddling, exercising, bird watching, nature observation, sightseeing,
cross country skiing, snowshoeing, and nature photography.
   (ff)   Reservoir. "Reservoir" means any natural or artificial impoundment of
water owned or controlled by the City which is tributary to the City Water
Supply system.
   (gg)   Restricted Area. "Restricted Area" means any area in which public
access is not allowed.
   (hh)   Small Game. "Small Game" means upland and migratory game birds, small
game mammals (e.g., squirrel, rabbit), furbearers (e.g., fox, coyote), and
reptiles and amphibians.
   (ii)   Special Event Area. "Special Event Area" means a location on City
Property designated by NYCDEP as available for designated Recreational Uses,
which shall be designated by NYCDEP in accordance with these Rules, but not
requiring NYCDEP Access Permits or Vehicle Tags. These areas are for short
duration, low-impact activities including but not limited to "Family Fishing
Day" and Reservoir clean-ups in which NYCDEP staff are present as facilitators
of the event.
   (jj)   Tag. "Tag" includes Vehicle Tags, Recreational Boat Tags and Fishing
Boat Tags.
   (kk)   Trapping. "Trapping" means taking, killing and capturing wildlife
with traps, deadfalls and other devices commonly used to take wildlife, and the
shooting or killing of wildlife lawfully trapped, and includes all lesser acts
such as placing, setting or staking such traps, deadfalls and other devices
whether they result in taking or not, and every attempt to take and every act
of assistance to any other person in taking or attempting to take wildlife with
traps, deadfalls or other devices.
   (ll)   Vehicle Tag. "Vehicle Tag" means a valid instrument of permission
issued in support of an Access Permit for the purpose of allowing visitors to
park a vehicle on City Property while accessing City Property for Recreational
Use, as further described in 15 RCNY §
16-04.2.
   (mm)   Voluntarily. "Voluntarily" means anything other than a forced or
emergency landing of any manned or unmanned aircraft.
   (nn)   Water Supply. "Water Supply" means the New York City public water
supply system, and includes all Watercourses, wetlands, Reservoirs, Reservoir
stems and Controlled Lakes tributary thereto.
   (oo)   Watercourse. For the purposes of these Rules, a "Watercourse" means a
visible path through which surface water travels on a regular basis, including
an intermittent stream, which is tributary to the Water Supply.
   (pp)   Watershed. "Watershed" or "New York City Watershed" means the land
area contributing surface water to the New York City Water Supply.
(Added City Record 5/31/2019, eff. 6/30/2019)
**** Subchapter A: Open Access Areas ****
§ 16-03.1 Public Access Areas
Public Access Areas (PAA) are those locations designated for public use without
the need for a Access Permit. NYCDEP may, in its discretion, designate portions
of City Property as PAAs. PAAs are located on City Property that is not
adjacent to Water Supply facilities such as Reservoirs or Controlled Lakes.
   (a)   Designations. PAAs are posted with signs and otherwise designated as
such by NYCDEP on NYCDEP maps, the NYCDEP website, and/or in other NYCDEP
publications.
   (b)   Season. Access to PAAs is year-round except as otherwise restricted on
NYCDEP sign postings and on NYCDEP maps on the NYCDEP website.
   (c)   Uses. Permitted uses will be posted on signs in the PAA, and may, at
NYCDEP's discretion, include one or more of the following permitted uses:
Fishing, Hunting, Hiking and/or Trapping. No boating is allowed on ponds within
PAAs; however, a person may float through a PAA on a Watercourse that traverses
the property. Boats do not need to be steam cleaned.
(Added City Record 5/31/2019, eff. 6/30/2019)
§ 16-03.2 Day Use Areas.
Day Use Areas (DUAs) are those locations on City Property designated for public
use without the need for a NYCDEP Access Permit. These areas may be near Water
Supply facilities and usually have some improvements. DUAs may or may not have
management agreements with local municipalities.
   (a)   Designations. DUAs and their allowed uses will be designated by NYCDEP
on NYCDEP maps on the NYCDEP website and by NYCDEP sign postings.
   (b)   Uses. Permitted uses will be posted on signs in the DUA, and may, at
NYCDEP's discretion, include one or more of the following activities: walking,
picnicking, in-line skating, dog walking, bicycling and Fishing. Permitted uses
will also be posted on signs and on the NYCDEP website.
   (c)   Hours. Hours of use will be posted on NYCDEP signage and will
typically be dawn to dusk.
(Added City Record 5/31/2019, eff. 6/30/2019)
§ 16-03.3 Special Event Areas.
Special Event Areas (SEA) are those locations on City Property designated for
public use during a NYCDEP-sponsored event without the need for a NYCDEP Access
Permit.
   (a)   Designations. SEAs will be designated by NYCDEP for specific limited
duration events, typically one day.
   (b)   Uses. Uses allowed in SEAs shall be determined by NYCDEP and shall be
posted on event flyers and other outreach material.
   (c)   Hours. Hours of use shall be determined by NYCDEP on an event-by-event
basis.
(Added City Record 5/31/2019, eff. 6/30/2019)
§ 16-04 Access Permit Areas.
Access Permit Areas (APAs) are those areas that require a valid NYCDEP Access
Permit and Vehicle Tag for entry. NYCDEP may, in its discretion, designate
portions of City Property as APAs that may be entered and used by the public
for Recreational Uses with the requirement of having a valid NYCDEP Access
Permit and Vehicle Tag.
   (a)   Designations. APAs and their allowed uses will be designated by NYCDEP
on NYCDEP maps on the NYCDEP website and by NYCDEP sign postings.
   (b)   Uses. Permitted uses will be posted on signs in the APA, and may, at
NYCDEP's discretion, include Fishing, Hunting, Hiking, Trapping, and use of
Fishing Boats, and Recreational Boats. Scouting for the purpose of deer Hunting
is allowed, provided that valid NYCDEP Access Permits are carried.
   (c)   All individuals entering APAs must have (1) a valid NYCDEP Access
Permit as required in 15 RCNY §
16-04.1, and (2) a Vehicle Tag as required in 15 RCNY §
16-04.2.
(Added City Record 5/31/2019, eff. 6/30/2019)
§ 16-04.1 Access Permit.
   (a)   Application. The Access Permit application will be available for
download or completion on the NYCDEP website and for pick-up at certain NYCDEP
facilities in New York City, NYCDEP offices throughout the Watershed and such
other locations as indicated on the NYCDEP website. No application fee is
required.
   (b)   Required Information. An Access Permit application will require the
following information:
      (1)   Applicant's name, mailing address, phone number, electronic mail
address, and date of birth;
      (2)   Applicant's gender, height, eye color and hair color;
      (3)   Applicant's driver's license number and state of issuance, or non-
driver's identification number and state of issuance, or IDNYC identification
card, or any valid passport, or any school-issued identification;
      (4)   Acknowledgement of risks and waiver of liability;
      (5)   Applicant's signature and date of signature;
      (6)   Parent or legal guardian's signature and date of signature if
applicant is between 16 and 17.
   Information provided will be maintained by NYCDEP for agency purposes only.
   (c)   Access Permit Eligibility. All persons 18 years of age and older must
complete an application for and receive, maintain and carry a valid Access
Permit in order to enter Access Permit Areas (and must have the applicable
NYSDEC hunting, fishing and/or trapping licenses as required by the NYSDEC
Environmental Conservation Law as described in 15 RCNY §
16-12(f)) and Recreational Boating Areas for recreational purposes as defined
in these Rules. Entry onto Access Permit Areas, without a valid Access Permit,
Guest Pass, or appropriate accompaniment as described herein, is prohibited and
shall be considered a trespass.
   Persons aged 16 and 17 are eligible to apply for an Access Permit and must
have the written consent of their parent or legal guardian indicated on their
Access Permit application to obtain an Access Permit. Persons aged 16 and 17
years old who obtain a valid Access Permit may enter City Property for
Recreational Activities without an adult.
   (d)   Other Access. All persons under 16 years of age may access City
Property without an Access Permit or a Guest Pass for Recreational Uses but
must be accompanied by a valid Access Permit holder aged 18 or older. A valid
Access Permit holder aged 18 or older may accompany up to six (6) persons under
the age of 16 and he or she is responsible for their conduct and safety and
shall be liable for any of their violations of these Rules. Groups in excess of
six (6) persons under the age of 16 require a Group Access Pass, signed by a
parent or guardian as provided in 15 RCNY §
16-06.
   (e)   Internet Submission and Processing. The NYCDEP Access Permit
application may be completed and submitted on the NYCDEP website. Access Permit
issuance letters, Access Permits and corresponding Vehicle Tags may be printed
directly from the NYCDEP website. NYCDEP is not responsible for electronic
delivery errors or limitations of equipment and services not maintained by
NYCDEP that may cause delays or prevent printing.
   (f)   Mail Submission and Processing. Completed Access Permit applications
may be submitted by United States Postal Service ("USPS") mail to the address
on the form. Accepted applications submitted by USPS mail shall be processed as
follows:
   An Access Permit issuance letter and Access Permit shall be generated and
mailed with the corresponding Vehicle Tag generally within two weeks of
receipt, except in unusual circumstances, directly to the address submitted on
the application.
   Addresses on any mailings returned to NYCDEP as undeliverable by the USPS
will be verified for accuracy and re-mailed if necessary. Applicants are
responsible for maintaining current, accurate contact information with NYCDEP.
NYCDEP is responsible for USPS delivery errors or lost mail.
   (g)   Refusal. Rejected applications will be returned to the applicant,
accompanied by a letter or e-mail identifying the reason(s) for refusal,
generally within two weeks of application receipt, except in unusual
circumstances, directly to the address submitted on the application. Within ten
days of receipt of the communication, the applicant may send an appeal of
NYCDEP's refusal to issue an Access Permit to the NYCDEP Deputy Chief of City
Land Stewardship. Such appeal must include any relevant information pertaining
to the basis for the refusal. Upon examination of the circumstances and
generally within two weeks of receipt, the NYCDEP Deputy Chief City Land
Stewardship will either uphold the refusal or revise its prior decision and
issue an Access Permit upon such terms and conditions as may be appropriate.
The applicant will be notified of NYCDEP's determination in writing. Grounds
for refusal of an Access Permit include but are not limited to the following:
      (1)   Incomplete or illegible application;
      (2)   Failure to meet application eligibility requirements;
      (3)   Submission of false information.
   (h)   Term. An Access Permit is valid for five (5) years, or the period
indicated thereon, if different, expiring on the permit holder's day and month
of birth, unless revoked, suspended or altered by NYCDEP.
   (i)   Renewal. NYCDEP will send an Access Permit renewal application by
electronic or USPS mail to the address on file for each valid Access Permit
holder generally two months before the Access Permit expiration date. The
Access Permit renewal application will require confirmation of the permit
holder's information on file, as well as user survey questions, if any. Access
Permit renewal processing will be as provided for in the initial application.
Applicants may renew their Access Permits by returning the application by USPS
mail or through the NYCDEP website.
   (j)   Replacement. To replace lost or destroyed Access Permits the permit
holder must send a written request to NYCDEP by USPS, electronic mail or
through the NYCDEP website. Electronically requested replacements may be
printed immediately upon NYCDEP's approval, whereas replacements requested by
USPS mail will generally be issued within two weeks of receipt of the request.
   (k)   Notifications. Notices to Access Permit holders will be sent to the
address on record with NYCDEP. It is the Access Permit holder's responsibility
to inform NYCDEP of any changes to the address and information submitted on a
permit application or renewal form.
   (l)   Updating Contact Information. It is the Access Permit holder's
responsibility to inform NYCDEP of any changes to the contact information
submitted on his or her application or renewal form. Access Permit holders must
notify NYCDEP in writing, either by electronic or USPS mail, of any such
changes. Failure to do so may result in the Access Permit holder not receiving
important notifications, such as Fishing or Recreational Boat Tag renewal
notices, area closure notices or Access Permit renewal notices. Access Permit
holders may use the Access Permit Update Form to submit contact changes or
update their information on the NYCDEP website. This form is available for
download from or completion on the NYCDEP website and for pick-up at certain
NYCDEP facilities in New York City, NYCDEP offices throughout the Watershed and
such other locations as indicated on the NYCDEP website.
   (m)   Transferability. An Access Permit is not transferable and may be used
only by the person to whom it has been issued.
   (n)   Fishing and Recreational Boat Tags. NYCDEP may revoke an individual's
Fishing or Recreational Boat Tag(s) upon Access Permit revocation or
expiration.
   (o)   Limitation. All Access Permits and other permits and tags provided for
in these rules are limited to the purposes and time periods for which they are
issued, and convey no interest in or right over property of NYCDEP or the City.
(Added City Record 5/31/2019, eff. 6/30/2019)
§ 16-04.2 Vehicle Tag.
All vehicles parked on City Property for Recreational Uses other than at DUAs
and PAAs must have the driver's valid Vehicle Tag prominently displayed in
their vehicle so that it is visible from the front of the vehicle.
   (a)   Issuance. Any person who has been issued an Access Permit will be
issued a Vehicle Tag.
   (b)   Term. A Vehicle Tag is valid only if and for so long as the person's
Access Permit is valid. If an expired Access Permit is renewed, the Vehicle Tag
becomes valid again upon renewal of the Access Permit.
   (c)   Use of a Vehicle Tag. The driver's Vehicle Tag must be prominently
displayed so that it is visible from the front of the vehicle, typically
hanging from the rear view mirror whenever a person is accessing City Property
for Recreational Use, except in DUAs and PAAs. Only one Vehicle Tag is required
to be displayed if multiple Access Permit holders are visiting Access Permit
Areas in the same vehicle. Motorcycle drivers may display a photocopy of their
Vehicle Tag on the motorcycle.
   (d)   Transferability. Vehicle Tags are not transferable to another person
but may be used by the permittee on any vehicle.
   (e)   Replacement. Lost or destroyed Vehicle Tags will be replaced upon the
holder's written request to NYCDEP by USPS, electronic mail or the NYCDEP
website. Electronically requested replacements may be printed immediately upon
NYCDEP's approval, whereas replacements requested by USPS mail will generally
be issued within two weeks of receipt of the request.
(Added City Record 5/31/2019, eff. 6/30/2019)
§ 16-05 Guest Pass.
Guest Passes are for temporary access for the Recreational Use of certain City
Property. Guests may participate in all Watershed recreational opportunities
while accompanied by a person who has a valid Access Permit. A Guest Pass
cannot be used to obtain a Fishing or Recreational Boat Tag. Access Permit
holders are responsible for their Guests and must ensure their Guests follow
all Recreational Rules.
   (a)   Application. The Guest Pass is a fully completed Guest Pass
application signed by the Guest, or signed by the Guest's parent or legal
guardian if the Guest is under 18, and carried by the Guest. No Guest Pass is
necessary for individuals under 16 years of age, or for groups of up to 6 under
16 years of age, provided they are accompanied by an Access Permit holder aged
18 or older. No application fee is required.
   (b)   Required Information. A valid Guest Pass application must be filled
out by the Guest and includes:
      (1)   Guest's name, mailing address, phone number, electronic mailing
address, and date of birth;
      (2)   Guest's gender, height, eye color and hair color;
      (3)   Guest's driver's license number and state of issuance, or non-
driver's identification number and state of issuance, or IDNYC identification
card, any valid passport or any school-issued identification;
      (4)   Acknowledgement of risks and waiver of liability;
      (5)   Guest's signature and date of signature;
      (6)   Parent or legal guardian's signature and date of signature if Guest
is under 18.
   (c)   Eligibility. The sponsoring Access Permit holder must be aged 18 years
or older. An individual aged 16 years and older, without an Access Permit, must
use a Guest Pass. Individuals under 18 years of age must have the signature of
a parent or guardian on the Guest Pass. Individuals under 16 years of age, and
groups of up to 6 individuals under 16 years of age, do not need a Guest Pass
provided an Access Permit holder 18 or older accompanies them while they are on
City Property where an Access Permit is required.
   (d)   Term. A Guest Pass is valid for 7 consecutive days starting on and
including the date the Guest Pass was signed. A Guest Pass without a signature
date is invalid.
   (e)   Using a Guest Pass. The following is required for proper use of a
Guest Pass:
      (1)   Guests must fully complete the Guest Pass and carry it with them at
all times while on City Property.
      (2)   Guests must produce their Guest Pass and identification upon
request of any law enforcement officer or NYCDEP representative.
      (3)   All Guests must be accompanied at all times while on City Property
by the valid Access Permit holder sponsoring the Guest. Access to City property
by a Guest unaccompanied by the sponsor Access Permit holder constitutes
trespass. The sponsoring Access Permit holder may sponsor and accompany up to 6
Guests at any one time on City Property.
      (4)   Guests must comply with these Rules.
      (5)   Guest Passes cannot be used to obtain a Fishing or Recreational
Boat Tag.
   (f)   Transferability. A Guest Pass is non-transferable and may only be used
by the person identified thereon.
   (g)   Renewal. A Guest Pass is not renewable.
(Added City Record 5/31/2019, eff. 6/30/2019)
§ 16-06 Group Access Permit.
Group Access Permits of limited duration are available for Groups of between 7
and 30 individuals to conduct such activities as would normally be available to
individual Access Permit holders and will be issued in writing if approved by
NYCDEP. Groups larger than 30 people are not permitted. Any individual members
of a Group accessing NYCDEP land pursuant to a Group Access Permit must possess
all applicable NYSDEC hunting, fishing and trapping licenses as required by the
NYSDEC Environmental Conservation Law.
   (a)   Uses. Group Access Permits may be used for all activities allowed by
these Rules in addition to other recreational opportunities approved by NYCDEP,
including but not limited to Reservoir clean-ups, nature and outdoor
educational walks and talks and school field trips.
   (b)   Eligibility. A Group Leader must be 18 years of age or older. Group
Members may be any age but individuals under 18 years of age must have the
signature of a parent or guardian on the Group Access Permit.
   (c)   Term. Group Access Permits may be issued for a term of 1 day to 3
consecutive months.
   (d)   Application. An application for a Group Access Permit must be fully
completed by the assigned Group Leader and submitted to the mail or email
address on the application. Group Access Permit applications shall be available
by calling 1-800-575-LAND (5263). No application fee is required.
   (e)   Required Information. The following information must be provided on or
with the Group Access Permit application:
      (1)   Application date;
      (2)   Group name and address;
      (3)   Group Leader's name, date of birth, address, primary telephone,
electronic mail address, driver's license or non-driver's identification number
and state of issuance, any valid passport or IDNYC identification card;
      (4)   Signed and dated statement by Group Leader accepting all
responsibility for Group and Group Member activity and safety while on City
Property and indemnifying the City of New York, as well as waiver of liability
and acknowledgement of risk for Group Leader and Group Members, with parent or
guardian signature for those under 18 years of age;
      (5)   Description of the purpose for which the Group is applying for
access;
      (6)   Date(s) and duration(s) for which the Group is seeking access;
      (7)   Location of City Property for which Group access is being
requested, including township, adjacent roadways, and description of intended
entrance and exit points;
      (8)   Names, ages, addresses and telephone numbers of up to twenty-nine
Group Members in addition to the Group Leader;
   (f)   Issuance Criteria. NYCDEP will deny Group Access Permit applications
that fail to meet the issuance criteria listed below. NYCDEP will consider the
following criteria when evaluating a Group Access Permit application:
      (1)   Completeness of the application;
      (2)   Consistency of proposed use with allowable activities;
      (3)   Eligibility of Group or Group Leader to receive an Access Permit;
      (4)   Availability and public access status of City Property proposed for
use;
      (5)   Consistency with water quality protection, Water Supply security,
strong neighborhood relations, and available City resources;
      (6)   Compatibility with the City's land management goals;
      (7)   Compatibility with existing uses, rights, easements, or facilities
requirements on the portion of City Property for which Group access is
requested.
   (g)   General Conditions. Group Access Permit Leaders and Group Members must
comply with these Rules. Group Access Permit Leaders and Group Members must
also comply with the following conditions:
      (1)   Access to City Property by the Group is only allowed for the dates,
locations and Group Members stated on the approved Group Access Permit;
      (2)   Use of City Property by the Group is only permitted for those uses
stated on the approved Group Access Permit;
      (3)   The Group Leader must carry the approved Group Access Permit or a
legible photocopy of the permit at all times while on City Property;
      (4)   Group Members must be accompanied by a Group Leader at all times
while on City Property;
      (5)   All vehicles used by the Group to access City Property must be
identified by a photocopy of the approved Group Access Permit in or on the
vehicle such that it is clearly visible from the exterior front of the vehicle.
   (h)   Responsibility. Use of and activities on City Property under the Group
Access Permit by Group Members is the sole responsibility of the Group Leader
who must accept responsibility for the conduct, activities, and safety of all
Group Members. The Group Leader must accompany the Group at all times while on
City Property.
(Added City Record 5/31/2019, eff. 6/30/2019)
**** Subchapter B: Recreational Activities ****
§ 16-07 Fishing.
   (a)   Fishing Activities. Fishing is allowed consistent with NYSDEC
regulations. A valid NYSDEC fishing license is required.
   (b)   Designation. Areas that allow Fishing will be designated by NYCDEP on
sign postings, the NYCDEP website, and on NYCDEP maps.
   (c)   Season. Access for Fishing is allowed during applicable New York State
fishing seasons as established in NYSDEC fishing regulations, as amended,
except as otherwise restricted by these Rules or by NYCDEP postings or notices.
   (d)   Allowable Species. Fishing is allowed for any species allowed under
New York State law, during and in accordance with all available NYSDEC fishing
seasons and City Property designations unless otherwise posted by NYCDEP.
   (e)   Means. Angling is the only permissible means of Fishing on City
Property, except that pursuant to and in conformance with NYSDEC regulations,
(i) tip-ups may be used for ice fishing, and (ii) bow and arrow may be used for
carp fishing. Anglers must be in immediate attendance when their lines are in
the water.
   (f)   Bait and Bait Disposal. The use of terrestrial bait such as worms and
crickets is allowed. Live aquatic bait, which may include but is not limited
to, alewives, shiners, leeches, and crawfish, may be used for Fishing unless
such bait has been taken from waters infested with zebra and/or Quagga mussels
or other invasive species, including, but not limited to: Lake Champlain, Lake
Erie, Lake Ontario, the Finger Lakes, the Erie Canal, the Niagara River, the
Mohawk River, the St. Lawrence River, the Susquehanna River and the Hudson
River. A complete list of Zebra and Quagga mussel-infested waters may be found
at:http://nas.er.usgs.gov/mollusks/zebramussel/. Neither bait nor the water
from aquatic bait containers shall be disposed of on City Property. NYCDEP, at
its sole discretion, may prohibit the use of specified bait. Any such
prohibitions shall be indicated by NYCDEP on sign postings, on the NYCDEP
website, and on NYCDEP maps. Use of bait must also be consistent with all
applicable provisions of New York State law and NYSDEC regulations, as amended,
including those regarding the use and transport of certified baitfish.
   (g)   Fishing Equipment. Fishing equipment must comply with the following:
      (1)   Waterproof waders must be used when entering Reservoirs or
Controlled Lakes for the purposes of Fishing. Due to the potential threat of
invasive species being transferred from waders into the NYC Water Supply,
NYCDEP reserves the right to restrict the use of certain types of waders and/or
prohibit use on City Property. A list of waders and/or boots prohibited for
use, if and when determined, shall be posted on the NYCDEP website. As an
alternative to prohibition of certain waders, NYCDEP may require waders be
cleaned as per NYCDEP guidelines, if and when such guidelines are developed.
      (2)   Temporary, portable, fabric fishing shelters and windbreaks may be
used for ice fishing on City Property. Shelters must contain the occupant's
name, telephone number and Access Permit number. Wood or metal shelters are not
permitted.
      (3)   Ice fishing equipment, including fabric fishing and shelters and
windbreaks, must remain within view of the equipment owner and must be removed
from City Property by the occupant when not in use or at the end of each day,
whichever is sooner.
      (4)   Use of float tubes or inflatable waders is prohibited in Reservoirs
or Controlled Lakes.
      (5)   Motorized fishing equipment is prohibited on City Property,
including but not limited to gasoline or propane-powered motors or ice augers
except as allowed in 15 RCNY §
16-07(g)(6).
      (6)   Electric ice augers with rechargeable batteries contained within
the auger housing or hand-held power drills to power ice augers may be used.
Small 12-volt sealed batteries may be used for portable fish finders. No
automotive-type batteries are allowed on City Property.
      (7)   Propane bottles to heat portable heating units or ice augers are
not allowed for use on Reservoirs or Controlled Lakes.
   (h)   Fish Entrails. Fish entrails may not be deposited on City Property
that is in or within 100 feet of a Reservoir, Controlled Lake, pond,
Watercourse, public access point, or public road.
   (i)   Shoreline Fishing. Shoreline Fishing is allowed at Access Permit
Areas, Public Access Areas, and certain Day Use Areas as indicated by NYCDEP on
sign postings, on the NYCDEP website, and on NYCDEP maps.
   (j)   Fishing from Bridges. Fishing from vehicular bridges located on City
Property is not permitted except where designated by NYCDEP and as indicated by
NYCDEP on sign postings, on the NYCDEP website, and on NYCDEP maps.
   (k)   Ice Fishing. Ice Fishing is allowed, in conformance with NYSDEC
regulations, only on the Amawalk, Bog Brook, Boyds Corner, Cross River,
Diverting, East Branch, Muscoot, Titicus, West Branch, Croton Falls and Middle
Branch Reservoirs, on Lake Gilead and Lake Gleneida and on ponds located in
Access Permit Areas and Public Access Areas as indicated by NYCDEP on sign
postings, on the NYCDEP website, and on NYCDEP maps. Ice fishing is prohibited
in all other Reservoirs for safety and operational reasons.
(Added City Record 5/31/2019, eff. 6/30/2019)
§ 16-08 Hunting.
   (a)   Hunting Activities. Hunting is allowed consistent with applicable
NYSDEC regulations.
   (b)   Designation. Areas that allow Hunting will be designated by NYCDEP on
sign postings, the NYCDEP website, and on NYCDEP maps. NYCDEP may designate
specific Hunting activities or restrictions (e.g. no rifle use, bow Hunting-
only), or implement special Hunting programs (deer culls) on Recreational Areas
that allow Hunting.
   (c)   Season. Access for Hunting is allowed during applicable New York State
Hunting seasons, except as otherwise restricted by these Rules or by NYCDEP
postings or notices.
   (d)   Allowable Species. Hunters may hunt for any species allowed under New
York State law, during and in accordance with all available NYSDEC Hunting
seasons and City Property designations unless otherwise posted by NYCDEP on its
website. Waterfowl Hunting is not allowed in, over, or within 500 feet of
Reservoirs or Controlled Lakes.
   (e)   Game Pursuit. Hunters should respect the rights of owners of
neighboring properties and not trespass on private lands. If an animal wounded
by a hunter travels onto neighboring property, the hunter should obtain the
property owner's permission in accordance with applicable law to enter the
property for retrieval. If an animal wounded by a hunter travels onto City
Property that is not open for Hunting, the hunter must obtain permission to
enter the area from NYCDEP Police before entering by calling (888) 426-7433.
   (f)   Hunter Behavior. Hunters must abide by the principles of the NYSDEC
hunter education training program and conduct themselves in a safe and
courteous manner in relation to other hunters and recreational users, NYCDEP
employees and representatives, neighboring land owners and community members.
Failure to do so may result in the loss of individual Hunting opportunities,
Recreational Area closures, and loss of Access Permit.
   (g)   Game Cleaning Practices. Hunters are encouraged to remove all game
entrails from City Property and to use gloves while cleaning harvested game in
order to hinder the spread of disease and possible water contamination.
Entrails must not be deposited in or within one hundred (100) feet of any
Reservoir, lake, pond, Watercourse, public access point, public road, or
private property.
   (h)   Tree Stands, Hunting Blinds and Trail Cameras. Temporary tree stands,
Hunting blinds and trail cameras may be used during Big Game Hunting seasons in
Public Access Areas and Access Permit Areas provided that they do not cause
damage to trees. The following conditions apply:
      (1)   The use of screws, nails or foot pegs in trees on City Property is
prohibited.
      (2)   Tree stands, Hunting blinds and trail cameras may be placed on City
Property up to two weeks prior to the opening of the archery deer Hunting
season.
      (3)   Hunters may leave tree stands, Hunting blinds and trail cameras on
City Property at their own risk on a first-come, first-served basis during Big
Game Hunting seasons.
      (4)   Any tree stand, Hunting blind or trail camera on City Property must
be clearly and legibly labeled with the user's name, Access Permit number (if
applicable) and telephone number.
      (5)   Tree stands, Hunting blinds and trail cameras must be removed from
City Property by midnight of the last day of the Big Game Hunting season.
      (6)   Tree stands, Hunting blinds and trail cameras unlabeled or left on
City Property after Big Game Hunting season are subject to confiscation and
disposal by NYCDEP pursuant to 15 RCNY §
16-12(e).
   (i)   Shooting Lanes. Hunters may cut limbs not greater than two inches in
diameter and not further than twenty-five yards from a tree stand with a hand
tool for purposes of clearing shooting lanes. The use of chainsaws is
prohibited. Any vegetation removed for shooting lanes must be cut flush with
the vegetation's main stem. All vegetation cut must be scattered and not
stacked to a height greater than 2 feet off of the ground.
   (j)   Use of Dogs. Dogs may be used for Hunting Small Game species in
compliance with NYSDEC regulations. Dogs must be under the control of their
handler at all times. Dog training activities are allowed on Public Access
Areas consistent with NYSDEC regulations. Dogs must not be used for tracking
injured deer or bear without express permission from NYCDEP Police as provided
for in 15 RCNY §
16-12(j). Any tracking of injured deer or bear permitted by NYCDEP must comply
with NYSDEC conditions for tracking injured deer or bear with dogs.
   (k)   Discharge of Firearms. Firearms may not be discharged over or into the
waters of any Reservoir or Controlled Lake.
   (l)   Back Tags. Back Tags must be displayed while Hunting on City Property
as required by NYSDEC.
(Added City Record 5/31/2019, eff. 6/30/2019)
§ 16-09 Hiking.
   (a)   Hiking Activities. Hiking activities permitted are: foot travel
including Hiking, walking, running, cross-country skiing, snowshoeing, bird
watching, nature observation, and photography.
   (b)   Designation. Areas that allow Hiking will be designated by NYCDEP on
sign postings, the NYCDEP website, and on NYCDEP maps.
   (c)   Season. Access for Hiking is year-round except as otherwise restricted
by these Rules or by NYCDEP postings or notices.
(Added City Record 5/31/2019, eff. 6/30/2019)
**** Subchapter C: Boats ****
§ 16-10.1 Fishing Boats.
People with valid Access Permits may fish on City Property from Fishing Boats
with valid Fishing Boat Tags in accordance with the following Rules.
   (a)   Use. Fishing Boats with valid Fishing Boat Tags must be used at Access
Permit Areas only for purposes of Fishing. All Fishing Boat occupants must be
in possession of minimum Fishing equipment including a pole, line, and a hook
and bait or a lure; and must be plausibly engaged in the activity of Fishing
while using a Fishing Boat in Access Permit Areas.
   (b)   Eligible Boats. Boats eligible for Fishing Boat Tags shall be metal
row boats, except boats on record as having had valid Fishing Boat Tags that
were issued before March 31, 2006 may be wooden or fiberglass row boats. Only
rowboats that are (1) a minimum of 11'6" in length and 42" in width and (2) a
maximum of 16' in length are permitted on City Property. Other vessels,
including but not limited to sailboats, motorized boats, inflatable boats,
guide/river boats, and collapsible boats are prohibited as Fishing Boats.
   (c)   Mooring. Mooring of Fishing Boats, including to buoys, is prohibited.
A temporary anchor is allowed.
   (d)   Fishing Boat Season. On the Amawalk, Bog Brook, Boyds Corner, Cross
River, Croton Falls, Diverting, East Branch, Kensico, Middle Branch, Muscoot,
New Croton, Titicus, and West Branch Reservoirs, and on Lake Gilead and Lake
Gleneida, Fishing Boats with valid Fishing Boat Tags may be placed on the water
during any Ice Free Period. On all other New York City Reservoirs, Fishing
Boats with valid Fishing Boat Tags may be placed on the water between April 1st
and November 30th of each year during any Ice Free Period.
   (e)   Condition and Maintenance. Fishing Boat owners are responsible for the
sanitary condition and seaworthiness of their vessels and for all activities
that occur thereon. Any supplies used for Fishing Boat maintenance may not
enter a water body and must be removed from City Property immediately following
maintenance activities.
   (f)   Safety. Every Fishing Boat used on City Property must have at least
one U.S. Coast Guard approved wearable personal flotation device in good
condition for each person on board. Each person on board who is under the age
of 12 must wear a securely fastened U.S. Coast Guard approved wearable
flotation device of an appropriate size at all times. All boaters must comply
with U.S. Coast Guard, New York State, and any other applicable laws and
regulations.
      (1)   Fishing Boats used after sunset must have a device (e.g. headlamp,
flashlight, or lantern) at the ready capable of producing a white light, which
must be temporarily exhibited in sufficient time to prevent collision. Fishing
Boats users must wear U.S. Coast Guard approved wearable personal flotation
devices after sunset.
   (g)   Capacity. Each Fishing Boat may carry no more than three occupants,
unless the Fishing Boat has a U.S. Coast Guard approved "Maximum Capacities"
plate or label affixed by the manufacturer that identifies a greater occupancy
capacity.
   (h)   Winter Storage. Between December 1st and March 31st, Fishing Boats
must be stored at a point above the High Water Mark within the assigned Boat
Storage Area.
   (i)   Steam Cleaning and Storage. Due to the threat of Water Supply
contamination by invasive species organisms that may be introduced to City
Reservoirs and Controlled Lakes by boats previously used in contaminated
waters, all Fishing Boats and equipment (i.e. anchors, anchor lines, paddles,
etc.) used on City Reservoirs and Controlled Lakes must be registered and steam
cleaned by NYCDEP or its designees, when available, as listed on the NYCDEP
website, and stored on-site in Boat Storage Areas designated by NYCDEP. All
Fishing Boats stored and used on City Reservoirs, Controlled Lakes and adjacent
City Property must have a valid Fishing Boat Tag affixed thereto.
   (j)   Application. Fishing Boat Tag applications will be available for
download on the NYCDEP website or for pick-up at NYCDEP facilities in New York
City, NYCDEP offices throughout the Watershed and such other locations as
indicated on the NYCDEP website.
   (k)   Fishing Boat Tag Application Required Information. A Fishing Boat Tag
application will require the following information:
      (1)   Applicant's valid Access Permit number;
      (2)   Applicant's name, mailing address, phone number, electronic mail
address, if available, and date of birth;
      (3)   Boat make, model, serial number, color, width, length, material,
and hull shape;
      (4)   Designated Open Boat Storage Area requested;
      (5)   Applicant's acknowledgement of risk and waiver of liability;
      (6)   Applicant's acknowledgement and acceptance that NYCDEP or its
designee has the right to allocate storage space for the Fishing Boat in
accordance with 15 RCNY §
16-10.1(v); confiscate and store a Fishing Boat that NYCDEP determines is in
violation of these regulations; to dispose of the Fishing Boat in accordance
with 15 RCNY §
16-10.3; waives any right to assert a claim against NYCDEP and/or its designee
or hold either liable under any circumstances including, but not limited to,
damage to, or loss of, a boat or accessories such as, but not limited to,
chains, locks and oars during its confiscation, storage or disposition.
      (7)   Applicant's signature and date of signature; and
      (8)   Parent or legal guardian's signature and date of signature if
applicant is under 18.
   (l)   Eligibility. Valid Access Permit holders 16 years of age and older and
who own the rowboat that they are registering are eligible to receive a Fishing
Boat Tag for the boat documented on the application. Applicants ages 16-17 need
parental or legal guardian consent. Each Fishing Boat Tag will be issued to a
single Fishing Boat owner only. Access Permit holders may apply for Fishing
Boat Tags for more than one Fishing Boat subject to the limitations included in
these Rules under 15 RCNY §
16-10.3(7).
      (1)   With express written permission from NYCDEP as provided for in 15
RCNY §
16-12(j), an organization that implements boat-sharing among its members, with
a valid NYCDEP Access Permit, may be eligible to receive a Fishing Boat Tag for
each of its Fishing Boats.
         (i)   Organizations must submit a request for DEP to review and
approve a boat-sharing program. The organization shall appoint a responsible
party who shall be NYCDEP's main point of contact and responsible for each
Fishing Boat Tag issued in the organization's name.
   (m)   Application Submission and Appointment. A Fishing Boat Tag application
must be submitted to NYCDEP or its designee, when available, as listed on the
NYCDEP website, at the boat registration appointment on the day the Fishing
Boat is to be placed on an Open Boat Storage Area. The appointment must be made
in advance by contacting the NYCDEP office nearest the Reservoir where the
Fishing Boat will be located, or the NYCDEP designee, when available, as listed
on the NYCDEP website. A completed application must be submitted in person at
the processing appointment. A Fishing Boat Tag application may be completed in
advance of the appointment. A cancelled appointment may be rescheduled to a
later date as available.
   (n)   Boat Processing and Tag Issuance. A Fishing Boat owner must attend the
processing appointment for his or her boat in person and must bring his or her
boat, valid Access Permit, and government-issued photo identification. A boat
processing appointment consists of the following steps:
      (1)   The Fishing Boat owner must submit the completed Fishing Boat Tag
application in person or via the NYCDEP website, when available.
      (2)   Access Permit data on file shall be confirmed with the applicant.
This information shall include contact information and Access Permit status.
      (3)   Boat type, shape, size, color, make, model, serial number, absence
of possible contaminants, boat condition (i.e. peeling paint) and apparent
seaworthiness shall be confirmed and entered into the file.
      (4)   Boats and equipment will be steam cleaned by NYCDEP or its designee
on all surfaces to remove any possible Water Supply contaminants such as zebra
mussel larvae.
      (5)   A unique Fishing Boat number will be assigned and affixed to the
boat by NYCDEP.
      (6)   Upon completion of the boat cleaning and processing appointment,
the Fishing Boat owner shall be given a Reservoir map and/or directions to the
designated Open Boat Storage Area and must immediately place the registered
Fishing Boat at the assigned Open Boat Storage Area.
      (7)   Fishing Boat owners may be restricted from placing their Fishing
Boat in certain Boat Storage Areas, as determined by NYCDEP. A Fishing Boat
owner may submit a Waiting List application to NYCDEP which shall maintain and
utilize such list as described in 15 RCNY §
16.10.1(v)(1)(ii) below.
   (o)   Rejection. Grounds for rejection of a Fishing Boat Tag application
include the following:
      (1)   Incomplete application;
      (2)   Failure to meet application eligibility requirements;
      (3)   Submission of false information;
      (4)   Illegible application; and/or
      (5)   Failure of Fishing Boat to meet inspection and cleaning standards;
   Rejected applications will be returned immediately to the applicant,
accompanied by an explanation of the reason(s) for rejection, and an
opportunity provided for the immediate resubmission of the corrected
application, if applicable. Within 10 days of applicant's receipt of NYCDEP's
rejection notification, the applicant may send an appeal of NYCDEP's refusal to
issue a Fishing Boat Tag to the NYCDEP Deputy Chief of City Land Stewardship.
Such appeal must include any relevant information pertaining to the basis for
the refusal. Upon examination of the circumstances and generally within two
weeks of receipt, the NYCDEP Deputy Chief City Land Stewardship will either
uphold the refusal or revise NYCDEP's prior decision and issue a Fishing Boat
Tag upon such terms and conditions as may be appropriate. The applicant will be
notified of NYCDEP's determination in writing.
   (p)   Term. Fishing Boat Tags are valid for 4 years, or until the expiration
date indicated thereon, if different, unless revoked, or altered by NYCDEP. If
a Fishing Boat Tag is expired or revoked, the Fishing Boat owner must remove
the boat from City Property promptly. NYCDEP may remove the Fishing Boats per
15 RCNY §
16-10.3. Fishing Boat Tag holders with an expired or suspended Access Permit
may not use their Fishing Boat.
   (q)   Display. Fishing Boat Tags must be affixed to the upper port-side
exterior bow of the corresponding registered Fishing Boat. The Fishing Boat Tag
holder must keep a Fishing Boat Tag affixed and clearly legible at all times.
The Fishing Boat owner must ensure that the NYCDEP-issued Fishing Boat numbers
are clearly legible and visible. Fishing Boats with missing or illegible
NYCDEP-issued Fishing Boat Tags and/or boat numbers are subject to confiscation
by NYCDEP. Other non-NYCDEP issued numbers may need to be removed at NYCDEP's
discretion.
   (r)   Replacement. Lost or destroyed Fishing Boat Tags may be replaced upon
the boat owner's written request to NYCDEP by USPS or electronic mail.
Replacements will generally be issued within two weeks.
   (s)   Renewal. A renewal Fishing Boat Tag notice or application will be sent
via USPS or electronic mail to the address on file for each valid Fishing Boat
owner, generally in the spring of the Fishing Boat Tag expiration year. Content
of the renewal Fishing Boat Tag application will include confirmation of boat
owner and boat information on file. Upon return of the application to NYCDEP by
the applicant, a renewed Fishing Boat Tag will be updated and/or sent to the
address on file for the Fishing Boat owner.
   (t)   Non-Transferability. Fishing Boat Tags are not transferable to either
another person or another boat.
   (u)   Transfer of Fishing Boat Ownership. When an owner of a Fishing Boat
with a valid Fishing Boat Tag ("Boat Seller") transfers ownership of his or her
Fishing Boat to another valid Access Permit holder ("Boat Purchaser"), the Boat
Seller must submit a Boat Tag Surrender Form to NYCDEP listing the number of
his or her Fishing Boat Tag either by mail or in person, noting the Boat
Purchaser's name and address. The Boat Purchaser must complete a Fishing Boat
Tag application for the Fishing Boat, in accordance with 15 RCNY §
16-10.1(k), indicating the name of the Boat Seller from whom the Boat Purchaser
purchased the boat.
      (1)   NYCDEP will issue and mail a new Fishing Boat Tag and other
materials to the accepted Boat Purchaser at the address on file, generally
within 2 weeks of the Boat Purchaser's Fishing Boat Tag application if the new
Fishing Boat will be placed in an Open Boat Storage Area. New Fishing Boat Tags
will not be issued in Closed Boat Storage Areas.
      (2)   The new Fishing Boat Tag issued to the Boat Purchaser will
supersede any prior Fishing Boat Tag issued for the Fishing Boat, including the
Boat Seller's Fishing Boat Tag which is null and void upon the Fishing Boat's
transfer to the Boat Purchaser. The Boat Purchaser must remove any prior
Fishing Boat Tag(s). The Fishing Boat Tag issued to the Boat Purchaser must be
affixed in accordance with 15 RCNY §
16-10.1(q) above.
   (v)   Fishing Boat Storage Areas. Each registered Fishing Boat will be
assigned by NYCDEP and/or its designee to a Fishing Boat Storage Area that has
a space available as determined by NYCDEP. Assignment of a Fishing Boat to a
Fishing Boat Storage Area is valid for the duration of the Fishing Boat Tag.
The Fishing Boat must be stored in the assigned Boat Storage Area when not in
use on the water. A Fishing Boat not stored within its assigned Fishing Boat
Storage Area will be subject to confiscation by NYCDEP.
   NYCDEP may grant a Fishing Boat Tag holder a storage space in either a:
      (1)   Closed Boat Storage Area: a Boat Storage Area designated by NYCDEP
that requires protection to prevent damage to City Property such as erosion,
soil compaction or loss of vegetation. The number of Fishing Boats stored in a
Closed Boat Storage Area may not exceed the number of Fishing Boats NYCDEP
reasonably determines as the limit for that area, in view of conditions in and
around such area. Fishing Boat owners may request to be on a Waiting List,
described below, to store his or her Fishing Boat in a Closed Boat Storage
Area. Provided the Fishing Boat owner remains in good standing and has resolved
any violation of these regulations to NYCDEP's satisfaction, upon submission of
a renewal for a Fishing Boat Tag that was previously assigned to a Closed Boat
Area, NYCDEP will assign the same Fishing Boat to the Closed Storage Area it is
located in provided the Fishing Boat has not been transferred to a new owner
since the prior Fishing Boat Tag was issued by NYCDEP.
         (i)   If a Fishing Boat Owner transfers ownership of a Fishing Boat
that is stored in a Closed Boat Storage Area, the Boat Purchaser must remove
the Fishing Boat from the Closed Boat Storage Area. The Boat Purchaser may
submit a Fishing Boat Tag application to store the boat in an Open Boat Storage
Area on the same Reservoir. If there is no Open Boat Storage Area on that
Reservoir, the Boat Purchaser must remove the Fishing Boat from City Property.
The Boat Purchaser may submit a Fishing Boat Tag application to place the
Fishing Boat in an Open Boat Storage Area on another Reservoir and, in
addition, may submit a Waiting List Application for a Reservoir with a Closed
Boat Storage Area.
         (ii)   Waiting List: NYCDEP will maintain and utilize a Waiting List
for each Reservoir with a Closed Boat Storage Area in order to allocate Fishing
Boat storage spaces in such areas. A person may request to be placed on a
Reservoir's Closed Boat Storage Area Waiting List by requesting a Waiting List
application from NYCDEP or its designee, completing the Waiting List
application, and returning it to NYCDEP either by mail or in person. NYCDEP
will place the name on the Waiting List based upon the order in which the
completed Waiting List application was received except that a Fishing Boat
owner who has exceeded the boat limits established by NYCDEP pursuant to 15
RCNY §
16-10.3(7) will not be placed on a Waiting List.
      (2)   Open Boat Storage Area: a Fishing Boat storage area designated by
NYCDEP that has suitable storage space as determined by NYCDEP for a Fishing
Boat with a Fishing Boat Tag without overcrowding or damaging City Property.
NYCDEP will assign each applicant who receives a Fishing Boat Tag a storage
space in an Open Boat Storage Area on the requested Reservoir, if available. If
there is no Open Boat Storage Area on the requested Reservoir, the applicant
may submit a Waiting List application as described in 15 RCNY §
16-10.1(v)(1)(i) and (ii) above.
   A Fishing Boat owner may request a change of an assigned Boat Storage Area
for their Fishing Boat on the same water body once per calendar year by
contacting NYCDEP. NYCDEP will grant a change of an assigned Boat Storage Area
provided that the requested Boat Storage Area is open to additional Fishing
Boats.
   (w)   Fishing Boat Storage. When not in use on the water for Fishing, a
Fishing Boat must be stored in its assigned Boat Storage Area at all times.
From December 1st to April 1st, a Fishing Boat must be stored above the High
Water Mark within its assigned Boat Storage Area. It is recommended that a
Fishing Boat owner store their Fishing Boat back from the shoreline so as not
to obstruct other anglers' access to the water. DEP, at its sole discretion,
may delineate by signage or on maps, shoreline buffer zones, which are within
10 feet of the High Water Mark of the shoreline. A shoreline buffer zone may be
delineated on a new and/or an expanded Boat Storage Area or in an existing Boat
Storage Area that is considered to have soil compaction, vegetation loss, or
erosion. Fishing Boats found within a NYCDEP-delineated shoreline buffer zone
are subject to removal by NYCDEP.
   Where manufactured hitching posts, stanchions or boat racks are supplied and
have available space, a Fishing Boat must be secured to them. A Fishing Boat
must not be stored on or against other stored Fishing Boats, as this may make
some Fishing Boats inaccessible to their owners.
   A Fishing Boat must not be stored leaning against a tree unless there is no
space available on a hitching post or other securing mechanism as provided by
NYCDEP. Storage against a tree must be in a manner that does not damage the
tree or may result in the boat being blown over into a hull-down position. A
Fishing Boat must not be secured to a dead tree or a tree marked with blue
paint by NYCDEP.
   Improper stored boats may be subject to removal by NYCDEP or Access Permits
holders may be subject to the penalties in 15 RCNY §
16-15.
   (x)   Fishing Boat Placement and Securing. To prevent the creation of insect
breeding grounds in water-filled Fishing Boats, each Fishing Boat must, except
as provided in this subdivision, be stored hull-up (upside down) and flat
against the ground at all times.
   A Fishing Boat owner may store on site such fishing equipment as may be
secured under their overturned, stored Fishing Boat. Equipment or items left on
City Property and not secured under a Fishing Boat is subject to NYCDEP
confiscation and disposal. A Fishing Boat owner is encouraged to secure their
stored Fishing Boat to reduce the possibility of theft and scattering. Improper
stored boats may be subject to removal by NYCDEP or Access Permits holders may
be subject to the penalties in 15 RCNY §
16-15.
   (y)   Owner Removal of a Fishing Boat. Fishing Boat owners may remove their
Fishing Boats from City Property at any time. Fishing Boat owners must notify
the appropriate NYCDEP Boat Office before removing their Fishing Boat from City
Property. Upon removal of a Fishing Boat from City Property, its Fishing Boat
Tag is immediately rendered invalid and the boat can no longer be stored or
used on City Property. Fishing Boat owners wishing to return a once-registered,
removed Fishing Boat to a City Reservoir or Controlled Lake must make a
registration and processing appointment with the appropriate NYCDEP Boat
Office, or designee, as listed on the NYCDEP website.
   (z)   Change of Reservoir or Controlled Lake. Fishing Boat owners with a
valid Access Permit may change the location of their Fishing Boat from one
Reservoir or Controlled Lake to another Reservoir or Controlled Lake provided
there is an Open Boat Storage Area. Such change will be treated the way a new
boat would be treated. This will require an application, boat processing
appointment, and a new Fishing Boat Tag. It is prohibited for a boat owner to
move their boat away from the assigned Reservoir or Controlled Lake without
first notifying and securing approval from the appropriate NYCDEP Boat Office.
It is prohibited for a Fishing Boat owner to place any boat on a Reservoir or
Controlled Lake without a valid Fishing Boat Tag for that location. The Fishing
Boat must be steam cleaned and receive a new Fishing Boat Tag for the new Boat
Storage Area.
   (aa)   Loaning a Fishing Boat. Fishing Boats with a valid Fishing Boat Tag
may be loaned to other valid Access Permit holder(s) with written permission
from the Fishing Boat owner, which includes the term of the loan. The person
being loaned the Fishing Boat must carry such written permission while using
the Fishing Boat.
(Added City Record 5/31/2019, eff. 6/30/2019)
§ 16-10.2 Recreational Boats.
Recreational Boating is allowed on the Cannonsville, Neversink, Pepacton and
Schoharie Reservoirs in NYCDEP designated Recreational Boating Areas and in
NYCDEP's discretion. The Recreational Boating Areas may be entered and used for
Recreational Boating by persons with valid Access Permits and Recreational
Boating Tags as provided in these Rules. Recreational Boating Areas and launch
sites will be designated by NYCDEP on sign postings, on the NYCDEP website, on
NYCDEP maps, and/or in other publications and notices available from NYCDEP and
at local sporting outfitters.
   (a)   Season. Access to Recreational Boating Areas begins at sunrise on May
1st and ends at sunset on October 31st or as otherwise determined by NYCDEP,
and is 7 days a week from sunrise to sunset, except as otherwise restricted on
NYCDEP sign postings, on the NYCDEP website, on NYCDEP maps, and/or in other
publications or notices.
   (b)   Recreational Boat Tags. All boats used in Recreational Boating Areas
must be registered and steam cleaned by NYCDEP's designees, as listed on
NYCDEP's website, and must have a valid Recreational Boat Tag affixed to the
upper port side exterior bow.
      (1)   Eligibility. Boats eligible for Recreational Boat Tags include but
are not limited to canoes, sculls, metal jonboats, rowboats and kayaks that
measure no less than 9 feet in length. Inflatable boats, collapsible boats,
swim and paddle boards, stand up kayaks, kayaks with pedal drive systems and or
sails, sailboats and motorized boats are prohibited. NYCDEP may, at its
discretion, add to or delete from the list of boats eligible for Recreational
Boat Tags. Changes to the list will be designated by NYCDEP on sign postings,
on the NYCDEP website, on NYCDEP maps, and/or in other publications and notices
available from NYCDEP and at local sporting outfitters.
      (2)   Term. Seasonal Recreational Boat Tags will be valid for the full
season as defined in subparagraph (a) of this section. NYCDEP, at its
discretion, may issue a temporary tag valid for 1 to 7 days. Recreational Boat
Tags only remain valid so long as the boat owner's Access Permit is valid.
Recreational Boat Tag holders with an expired, suspended or revoked Access
Permit may not use their Recreational Boat.
      (3)   Application. Recreational Boat Tag applications will be available
at the same locations as Access Permit applications, including the NYCDEP
website, and will also be available at vendors/designees as approved by NYCDEP
for processing Recreational Boats for use in Recreational Boating Areas.
      (4)   Required Information. A Recreational Boat Tag application requires
the following information:
         (i)   Applicant's valid Access Permit number;
         (ii)   Applicant's name, mailing address, phone number, electronic
mail address, if available, and date of birth;
         (iii)   Boat make, model, color, width, length, material, and hull
shape and if known, serial number;
         (iv)   Selection of Recreational Boat Tag term;
         (v)   Applicant's acknowledgement of risk and waiver of liability;
         (vi)   Applicant's acknowledgement and acceptance that NYCDEP or its
designee has the right to confiscate and store a boat that NYCDEP determines is
in violation of these regulations and to dispose of the boat in accordance with
15 RCNY §
16-10.3; waives any right to assert a claim against NYCDEP and/or its designee
or hold either liable under any circumstances for damage to, or loss of, a boat
or accessories such as, but not limited to, chains, locks and oars during its
confiscation, storage or disposition.
         (vii)   Applicant's signature and date of signature; and
         (viii)   Parent or legal guardian's signature and date of signature if
the applicant is aged 16 or 17.
      (5)   Boat Processing, Registration, Steam Cleaning and Recreational Boat
Tag Issuance. Recreational Boat Tag applications may be completed in advance of
submission, except for the portions which must be completed when the boat is
registered, steam cleaned and placed on the Reservoir. Prior to entering
Recreational Boating Areas, all Recreational Boats and equipment (i.e. anchors,
anchor lines, paddles, etc.) must be steam cleaned by one of NYCDEP's designees
at the appropriate office as listed on the NYCDEP website. Recreational Boat
Tags cannot be transferred from one person to another.
   (c)   Recreational Boat Launch Sites. Recreational Boats may only be placed
in or taken out of Recreational Boating Areas at Recreational Boat launch sites
designated by NYCDEP.
   (d)   Recreational Boat Storage Areas and Recreational Boat Storage.
NYCDEP's designee will assign an available Boat Storage Area as determined by
NYCDEP for all Recreational Boats. No Recreational Boat may be stored in a
shoreline buffer zone, which is within 10 feet of the shoreline. A Recreational
Boat not stored within its assigned Boat Storage Area, or is in a Boat Storage
Area closed by NYCDEP, or to which it was not assigned, will be subject to
confiscation by NYCDEP.
   Where manufactured hitching posts, racks and/or stanchions are supplied by
NYCDEP and have available space, a Recreational Boat must be secured to one of
them. NYCDEP may also designate certain locations within the Boat Storage Areas
for Recreational Boat Storage, which will be delineated at the storage area by
NYCDEP.
   A Recreational Boat may not be stored on or against another stored boat. A
Recreational Boat must not be stored leaning against a tree unless there is no
space available on a hitching post or other securing mechanism as provided by
NYCDEP. Storage against a tree must be in a manner that does not damage the
tree or may result in the boat being blown over into a hull-down position. A
Recreational Boat must not be secured to a dead tree or a tree marked with blue
paint by NYCDEP.
   A Recreational Boat must be stored, at the owner's risk, in the vicinity of
the Recreational Boating Area's launch sites above the High Water Mark back
from the shoreline so as not to obstruct access to the water, and in a hull up
(upside down) position so as not to collect water.
   To prevent the creation of insect breeding grounds in water-filled
Recreational Boats, each Recreational Boat must, except as provided in this
subdivision, be stored hull up (upside down) and flat against the ground at all
times.
   A Recreational Boat owner may store on site such boating equipment as may be
secured under their overturned, stored Recreational Boat. Equipment or items
left on City Property and not secured under a Recreational Boat is subject to
NYCDEP confiscation and disposal. A Recreational Boat owner is encouraged to
secure their stored Recreational Boat to reduce the possibility of theft and
scattering.
   Improper stored boats may be subject to removal by NYCDEP or Access Permits
holders may be subject to the penalties in 15 RCNY §
16-15.
   (e)   Owner Removal of Recreational Boat. Recreational Boats with
Recreational Boat Tags may be removed from Recreational Boat Areas by their
owners at any time before the Recreational Boat Tag's expiration date.
Recreational Boat owners with a Seasonal Recreational Boat Tag must notify the
appropriate NYCDEP Boat Office before such removal. Upon removal of a
Recreational Boat from a Recreational Boating Area, its Recreational Boat Tag
is immediately rendered invalid. Recreational Boat owners wishing to return a
once-registered, removed Recreational Boat to a Recreational Boating Area must
secure a new Recreational Boat Tag.
   (f)   Safety. Every Recreational Boat used on City Property must have at
least one U.S. Coast Guard approved wearable personal flotation device in good
condition for each person on board. Each person on board who is under the age
of 12 must wear a securely fastened U.S. Coast Guard approved wearable
flotation device of an appropriate size. All boaters must comply with U.S.
Coast Guard, New York State, and any other applicable laws and regulations
regarding personal flotation device use.
   (g)   Capacity. Each Recreational Boat may only carry the occupants as
recommended by the manufacturer unless the Recreational Boat has a U.S. Coast
Guard approved "Maximum Capacities" plate or label affixed by the manufacturer
that identifies a greater occupancy capacity.
   (h)   Condition and Maintenance. Recreational Boat owners are responsible
for the sanitary condition and seaworthiness of their vessels and for all
activities that occur thereon.
   (i)   Use. Fishing is a permissible, but not required, use of Recreational
Boats.
(Added City Record 5/31/2019, eff. 6/30/2019)
§ 16-10.3 Confiscation, Storage, Disposal, and Limitations of all Boats.
   (1)   NYCDEP Confiscation of any Boat. Any boat left in the water
unattended; found on land outside of the boat's assigned Boat Storage Area;
found in a closed Boat Storage Area to which it was not assigned; found without
a valid Fishing or Recreational Boat Tag or with illegible boat numbers; found
on City Property after expiration or revocation of the owner's Fishing or
Recreational Boat Tag or Access Permit; found in a Restricted Area, or
abandoned or otherwise not in compliance with these Rules is subject to
confiscation and storage by NYCDEP or its designee at the owner's expense.
   By accepting a Fishing or Recreational Boat Tag, the owner of the tagged
boat acknowledges and accepts NYCDEP's and its designee's right to confiscate
and store a boat that NYCDEP determines is in violation of these regulations;
NYCDEP's right to dispose of the boat in accordance with this section; and
waives any right to assert a claim against NYCDEP and/or its designee for such
confiscation and/or disposal or hold either liable under any circumstances for
damage to, or loss of, a boat or accessories such as, but not limited to,
chains, locks and oars during its confiscation, storage or disposition.
   When a boat is confiscated by NYCDEP or its designee, a record of the boat's
condition will be prepared and maintained including the following information:
a boat description, date of confiscation, storage location, condition,
equipment with the boat, if any, estimated value, and whether it appears
seaworthy or not. Such record will be maintained until NYCDEP or its designee
disposes of said boat in accordance with these Rules.
   When a boat is confiscated, a one-time confiscation penalty of $120.00 will
be assessed per boat. A storage fee of $1.00 per day will also be assessed per
boat until the boat is claimed by its owner, or until the storage fee adds up
to $90. Together the confiscation penalty and storage fees will not exceed
$210.00 in total per boat.
   NYCDEP or its designee will send a written notice to attempt to contact the
owner of a NYCDEP confiscated boat within 30 days from the date NYCDEP deems
the boat confiscated in order to notify such owner of the boat's status. This
written notice will be documented by NYCDEP or its designee and may be by USPS
mail, or electronic mail using the contact information on file for the Access
Permit/Boat Tag holder. If a confiscated boat has no record of ownership with
NYCDEP, the boat will be held for 3 months and if unclaimed, disposed of in
accordance with 15 RCNY §
16-10.3(4).
   (2)   Storage of NYCDEP-Confiscated Boats. NYCDEP or its designee will
secure a confiscated boat on NYCDEP or its designee's property until the
confiscated boat is claimed by its owner or until 3 months have passed from the
date of notice of confiscation by NYCDEP or its designee. Storage may include a
boat being left in place and secured on City Property until it can be disposed
of by NYCDEP or its designee.
   (3)   Owner Claim of Confiscated Boats. All boats confiscated and stored by
NYCDEP or its designee will be available for claim and pick up within the 3
month storage period by the boat owner of record, by appointment with NYCDEP or
its designee. NYCDEP or its designee's staff will confirm that the person
claiming the boat is the boat owner of record. Any accumulated confiscation
penalty and storage fees must be paid to the order of NYCDEP by certified
check, bank check, or money order and must be tendered to NYCDEP or its
designee in order for the boat to be released. An owner must pay any
accumulated penalties and fees and remove their claimed boat at the same
appointment; NYCDEP or its designees will not hold claimed boats or allow
deferred payment. NYCDEP, or its designee after consulting with NYCDEP, may in
extreme circumstances (such as death or a debilitating illness of a boat
owner), waive any accumulated penalties and/or fees.
   (4)   Disposal of confiscated property. When necessary, NYCDEP will dispose
of boats and other property confiscated by NYCDEP through any of the following
means:
      (i)   Sale by the New York City Department of Citywide Administrative
Services; or
      (ii)   Public auction by NYCDEP or its designee.
   (5)   Boat Relinquishment. Boat owners or their representatives may
relinquish ownership of their boat stored on City Property to NYCDEP directly
or through NYCDEP's designee according to the following process:
      (i)   The boat owner or his or her representative must write a letter
stating that he or she relinquishes ownership of his or her boat to NYCDEP. The
letter must contain the following information:
         (a)   boat owner name, address, telephone number, and Access Permit
number;
         (b)   boat number and Boat Storage Area;
         (c)   if written by the boat owner, the signature of the boat owner;
and
         (d)   date of signature.
      (ii)   If the letter is written by the representative of a boat owner,
the representative must affirm in writing his or her ability to act on behalf
of the boat owner for the purposes of relinquishing ownership to NYCDEP.
      (iii)   The relinquishment letter must be mailed to NYCDEP at 71 Smith
Avenue Kingston, NY 12401 or its designee, if applicable.
   (6)   Lost and Stolen Property. Property owners must report all property
believed to be lost or stolen to the appropriate NYCDEP Boat Office and the
NYCDEP Police upon discovery. A boat owner whose boat has been stolen and has
filed a report with NYCDEP Police may replace the boat at the same Boat Storage
Area within 90 days of the Police report filing date. This will be allowed even
if the Boat Storage Area is closed.
   (7)   Limitations. To limit potential adverse water quality or natural
resource impacts, overcrowding, and for other such other reasons as NYCDEP may
deem necessary or appropriate, NYCDEP may:
      (i)   Limit the number of valid Fishing or Recreational Boat Tags any
individual can hold at one time;
      (ii)   Limit the number of Reservoir-specific valid Fishing or
Recreational Boat Tags any individual can hold at one time;
      (iii)   Limit the total number of Fishing or Recreational Boat Tags
issued for a particular Reservoir or Controlled Lake; and/or,
      (iv)   Limit the number of boats stored at a particular Reservoir or
Controlled Lake, Boat Storage Area or boat launch site.
      (v)   If and when limits are determined to be necessary by NYCDEP, they
shall be posted on the NYCDEP website and be available at NYCDEP offices, and
its designees' boat steam cleaning sites, if applicable.
      (vi)   Any limitations proposed per above shall apply to new Fishing Boat
or Recreational Boat Tag holders.
(Added City Record 5/31/2019, eff. 6/30/2019)
§ 16-11 Restricted Areas.
   (a)   General. NYCDEP may, in its discretion, temporarily limit or forbid
access to any or all City Property at any time and from time to time as may be
necessary for Water Supply security, for public safety or resource protection.
Such limitation on or prohibition of access will be indicated by posting signs
and, when applicable, on the NYCDEP website and/or by publishing announcements.
   (b)   Location. Unless otherwise posted, all persons other than NYCDEP
employees and contractors on City business, on-duty law enforcement personnel
and others with express written permission from NYCDEP as provided for in 15
RCNY §
16-12(j) are prohibited from entering City Property that is:
      (1)   On or within 500 feet of any dikes, dams, tunnel outlets,
spillways, buildings and other "significant" Water Supply structures as may be
designated by NYCDEP in its sole discretion. Other distances within which
access is prohibited may be applied at NYCDEPs discretion. These larger
Restricted Areas will be delineated by signs and on public maps on the NYCDEP
website.
      (2)   Any area not officially designated as a Access Permit Area, Public
Access Area, Day Use Area, or an area not specifically designated for access;
and
      (3)   Any other area posted with signs such as "No Trespassing" or
otherwise designated as a Restricted Area.
(Added City Record 5/31/2019, eff. 6/30/2019)
**** Subchapter D: General Provisions and Prohibitions ****
§ 16-12 General Rules.
The following general requirements apply to all Recreational Use on City
Property:
   (a)   Personal Identification. All visitors to City Property 16 years and
older must carry government (or school-issued, for individuals 18 and younger)
photo identification while on City Property and must produce such
identification upon request of any law enforcement officer or NYCDEP
representative.
   (b)   Signs and Instruction. All persons on City Property must observe all
instructions and warnings on posted signs and notices and from NYCDEP
representatives.
   (c)   Trespass. All persons entering City Property should respect the rights
of owners of adjacent property and must not trespass onto private lands.
   (d)   Property Use and Designation. NYCDEP will designate and list
Recreational Areas by posting signs and, when applicable, by publishing
announcements on the NYCDEP website, on NYCDEP maps, and/or in other
publications and notices.
   (e)   Abandoned and Confiscated Property Other than Boats. Abandoned or
prohibited equipment found on City Property will be confiscated by NYCDEP. The
property will be stored by NYCDEP for 3 months. If the abandoned property
remains unclaimed after 3 months, it will be disposed of in accordance with 15
RCNY §
16-10.3(4).
   (f)   Other licenses. While on City Recreational Areas, individuals must
possess all applicable NYSDEC Hunting, Fishing and Trapping licenses as
required by the NYSDEC Environmental Conservation Law.
   (g)   Recreational Area Closures. NYCDEP may close Recreational Areas or any
parts thereof, to public access and may limit the number of recreational users
permitted in a Recreational Area as it deems necessary. Possible considerations
for Recreational Area closure include but are not limited to Water Supply
protection, management and security concerns and user conflicts. Closures will
be indicated on the NYCDEP website and/or sign postings.
   (h)   Season. Recreational Area seasons are year-round except as otherwise
restricted by these Rules and/or NYCDEP sign postings, on the NYCDEP website,
on NYCDEP maps, and/or in other publications or notices.
   (i)   Hours. NYCDEP may limit or restrict the hours for any Recreational
Area or any parts thereof that may be accessed and used by the public. Hour
restrictions will be indicated on the NYCDEP website and/or sign postings.
   (j)   Express Written Permission. Where provided for by these Rules, NYCDEP
may grant permission on a case-by-case basis for certain activities on City
Property, when considering, among other factors, compatibility with water
quality protection, site constraints, administrative burdens, public safety and
security, site management considerations such as universal access and whether
the use will serve a significant public purpose.
(Added City Record 5/31/2019, eff. 6/30/2019)
§ 16-13 Regulated Activities.
The provisions of this section apply to the specified activities and uses on
all City Property.
   (a)   Injury, Destruction or Abuse of Natural Resources or Property. No
person shall disturb, deface, remove or injure any vegetation, trees, wildlife,
soil, stone or other cultural or natural resources located on City Property,
including, but not limited to equipment, sampling stations, fences, gates,
stone walls, boundary markers, monuments, blaze marks, NYCDEP signs, roads,
trails or other improvements, without prior written permission from NYCDEP as
provided for in 15 RCNY §
16-12(j) or as otherwise allowed by these Rules.
   (b)   Firearms, Weapons, Explosives. Rifles, shotguns, handguns/pistols, air
rifles, crossbows, bows and arrows and muzzleloaders may only be carried while
actively Hunting as allowed by these Rules and in accordance with NYSDEC
regulations. As provided above, handguns/pistols may only be carried by those
who hold a valid handgun license or pistol permit. Hunting or pocket knives may
be carried and used by those engaged in Hiking, Fishing, Hunting or Trapping.
All other weapons, fireworks, and explosives are prohibited.
   (c)   Animals. Animals are prohibited from City Property except for:
      (1)   Dogs under the control of the owner on PAAs.
      (2)   Dogs actively used for Hunting on APAs.
      (3)   Leashed dogs on designated trails and DUAs as posted on signs.
      (4)   Service dogs may be used in all PAAs, APAs and DUAs.
   Dog owners must remove their dog's feces from City Property. Dogs are not
permitted to enter any water body except in Public Access Areas.
   (d)   Posting of Notices or Signs. The posting of signs or notices is
prohibited except for:
      (1)   Flagging Tape. Temporary marking with flagging tape is allowed for
Hiking, bushwhacking, game tracking or to mark a Hunting location. Flagging
must be removed by the end of the activity or the end of Big Game season, as
applicable.
   (e)   Tents and Other Structures. Tents and other temporary or permanent
structures, except for temporary tree stands, temporary Hunting blinds,
temporary trail cameras for Hunting and temporary ice fishing windbreaks, are
not allowed on City Property and are subject to confiscation by NYCDEP at the
owner's expense and risk.
   (f)   Motor Vehicle Access. Trucks, automobiles, all-terrain vehicles,
motorcycles, snowmobiles and all other motorized vehicles, including aircraft,
are prohibited on all City Property unless allowed by NYCDEP on postings,
NYCDEP maps and/or notices or by express written permission from NYCDEP as
provided for by 15 RCNY §
16-12(j). Vehicles that are: (1) blocking gates or entryways, (2) found in
areas posted with "No Parking" signs, (3) found in any unauthorized area on
City Property, or (4) found without a valid NYCDEP Vehicle Tag on any City
Property other than a Public Access Area or a Day Use Area, may be subject to
confiscation and storage by NYCDEP at the owner's expense and risk.
(Added City Record 5/31/2019, eff. 6/30/2019)
§ 16-14 Prohibitions.
The activities and uses listed in this section are prohibited on all City
Property in the Watershed.
   (a)   Littering, Polluting, Dumping. No person shall in any manner cause any
rubbish, garbage, solid waste, hazardous waste, trash, refuse, organic or
inorganic waste, cremated remains, diseased or dead animal or other offensive
matter or any abandoned property or material to be placed or left on City
Property. Upon leaving City Property, recreation users must remove any and all
equipment, supplies, or other items brought onto the City Property. This
includes but is not limited to: equipment packaging, fishing line, bait, bait
containers, lures, hooks, sinkers, bobbers, shell casings, scent bottles, food
and drink containers, bags, chairs, and clothing. Recreation users are
encouraged to carry trash bags with them and remove trash and litter left by
others to help protect the Water Supply, wildlife and the scenic appearance of
City Property.
   (b)   Bathing, Swimming, Washing of Objects. No bathing, swimming or washing
of any objects is permitted on City Property.
   (c)   Unauthorized Presence on City Property. No person shall enter upon and
remain on City Property unless participating in a Recreational Use activity as
allowed by these Rules.
   (d)   Target Shooting. Target or clay bird shooting is not permitted on City
Property.
   (e)   Camping. Camping is not permitted on City Property.
   (f)   Fires. The causing, building or maintaining of fires on City Property
is prohibited except as otherwise allowed per NYCDEP or NYSDEC signage.
   (g)   Smoking. Smoking, including electronic cigarettes (e-cigarettes), is
prohibited on all City Property at all times.
   (h)   Motorized Equipment. The use or possession of motorized equipment on
City Property is prohibited except as allowed in 15 RCNY §
16-07(g)(6) and unless specifically designated by NYCDEP on sign postings,
NYCDEP maps, or on notices, or unless NYCDEP grants express written permission
for such use or possession as provided for by 15 RCNY §
16-12(j).
   (i)   Commercial Activities. The use of City Property for any commercial
activity or as part of any commercial enterprise is prohibited unless NYCDEP or
its designee grants express written permission for such use as provided for by
15 RCNY §
16-12(j).
   (j)   Other Activities. Any recreational or other activity not expressly
allowed by these Rules, including but not limited to bicycle riding, horseback
riding, ice-skating, sleigh riding, and downhill skiing, is prohibited on City
Property unless specified by NYCDEP on sign postings and, where applicable, on
other notices, or unless NYCDEP grants express written permission for such use
as provided for by 15 RCNY §
16-12(j).
   (k)   Manned and Unmanned aircraft. No person shall Voluntarily take off or
land any contrivance now or hereafter invented for flight in the air, including
drones, aircraft and model aircraft, within any lands or waters administered by
NYCDEP except with prior written permission from NYCDEP as provided for by 15
RCNY §
16-12(j).
   (l)   Horses. Horses are not permitted on City Property.
   (m)   Biking. The use of bicycles and similar non-motorized vehicles on City
Property is prohibited except in DUAs as posted by NYCDEP.
(Added City Record 5/31/2019, eff. 6/30/2019)
§ 16-15 Rule Infractions.
Any violation of these Rules by an Access Permit holder or by any person
accompanying an Access Permit holder is cause for confiscation, suspension or
revocation of such Access Permit and any related Tags. Such violation may also
affect issuance of future Access Permits and/or Tags as determined by NYCDEP
and may also subject the violator to prosecution to the fullest extent of the
law.
   (a)   Confiscation. Upon request of a NYCDEP representative or law
enforcement officer, an Access Permit holder or Guest Pass holder must
surrender his or her Access Permit and/or Guest Pass and/or any related Tag to
the requestor and must immediately leave the City Property.
   (b)   Notification Procedure. Upon examination of the circumstances, NYCDEP
will make a determination to suspend, revoke or return the Access Permit, Guest
Pass, and/or Tag. DEP will send its written determination within 45 days of the
alleged violation. NYCDEP will send a letter of suspension, revocation, or
reinstatement via USPS or electronic mail to the individual's address on file.
This letter will specify:
      (1)   Date, location, and nature of the alleged infraction;
      (2)   The alleged violator's name, address, and Access Permit or Tag
number(s), as applicable;
      (3)   Citation of the alleged violation as per these Rules;
      (4)   Notification of penalty imposed and Access Permit or Tag status;
      (5)   Notification of the opportunity and timeline for appeal.
   (c)   Suspension. If NYCDEP determines that the Access Permit and Tag should
be suspended, a letter including the basis for the suspension, the period of
suspension and the expiration date of the suspension period will be sent to the
Access Permit holder at the address on file.
      (1)   Access Permits and Tags may be renewed while suspended; however,
the suspended Access Permit holder will not receive a new Access Permit or Tag
(s) during the suspension period. Suspended Access Permits may only be renewed
by using the NYCDEP Access Permit Update Form. The Access Permit Update Form
will be available for download on the NYCDEP website. NYCDEP online renewals
will not be allowed for suspended Access Permits. The completed NYCDEP Access
Permit Update Form must be mailed to the address on the NYCDEP website. The
renewed Access Permit will remain in NYCDEP custody during the suspension
period.
      (2)   The suspended Access Permit holder may not enter upon City Property
for Recreational Uses until the period of suspension has ended and NYCDEP
returns the Access Permit and related Tags, as applicable.
      (3)   Depending on the severity of the violation and record of previous
violations, Access Permit/Tag suspension may be from 2 months to 5 years from
the date of the violation.
      (4)   Persons with a suspended Access Permit may be permitted, at
NYCDEP's discretion, to leave valid Fishing Boats on a Reservoir; however, they
may not access or use the Fishing Boat without a Valid Access Permit.
      (5)   When Access Permits expire under suspension and are not renewed,
all Tags automatically expire and all boats operated under these Tags must be
removed from City Property.
   (d)   Penalty Schedule. First offenses of the Rules will result in
suspension that is one-third the maximum suspension term as specified in the
penalty table for the specific violation. Second offenses will result in a
suspension that is one-half the maximum suspension period for the specific
violation, and third offenses will result in the maximum suspension period for
the specific violation. Two or more violations in one incident shall result in
the minimum penalty for the most egregious violation. Violations of 3 or more
sections of the Rules during a single incident or individual offenses which
have seriously threatened public safety, Water Supply safety or security, or
the personal safety of individuals will result in the maximum penalty for the
single most egregious violation. In addition, certain violations of the Rules
may result in the issuance of a summons for trespass and/or other applicable
violations of law and/or arrest.
      (1)   Fishing and Recreational Boat Tag holders whose boats are
confiscated 3 times within a 5 year period by NYCDEP may be subject to Access
Permit suspension and loss of future Tag privileges.
      (2)   The maximum penalty for violation of the Rules is a 3 year
suspension for holders of Access Permits or a 3 year suspension from applying
for an Access Permit, except for those infractions listed in the table below.
   Individuals who have committed 4 or more offenses within a 5 year period, or
who have seriously threatened public safety, Water Supply safety or security,
or the personal safety of individuals through means not specifically enumerated
in this penalty schedule may be subject to the revocation of all public access
privileges.
   (e)   Revocation. If NYCDEP determines that the Access Permit and/or Tag
should be revoked due to significant or repeated violations, a letter including
the basis for revocation will be sent to the former Access Permit holder. Upon
such determination, all Tags held by the former Access Permit holder will also
be revoked. All boats must be removed by the owner promptly, and in any event,
within the time limits specified in the NYCDEP revocation letter. The length of
time allowed for boat removal in such revocation letter will be based on (i)
weather and (ii) administrative considerations. The boats under the name of the
former Access Permit holder must be removed from City Property in the presence
of a NYCDEP representative. If the boats are not removed by the owner, NYCDEP
may remove the boats per 15 RCNY §
16-10.3. The former Access Permit holder may not apply for a new Access Permit
and/or Tag until the date specified in the letter, if any.
 
 
                                                                            Access
Applicable    Violation Description                                         Permit
Rules Section                                                               Suspension
                                                                            Term
15 RCNY §§  Tree stands, Hunting Blinds and Trail Cameras (15 RCNY §
16-04.2,      16-08(h)); Shooting lanes (15 RCNY §                         2 - 6
16-08,        16-08(i)); Vehicle Tags (15 RCNY §                           months
16-14         16-04.2); Smoking (15 RCNY §
              16-14(g))
              Season (15 RCNY §
              16-07(c)), (15 RCNY §
              16-08(c)), (15 RCNY §
              16-10.1(d), (15 RCNY §
              16-10.2(a)); (15 RCNY §
              16-12(h); Means (15 RCNY §
              16-07(e)); Equipment (15 RCNY §
              16-07(g), 15 RCNY §
15 RCNY §§  16-14(h)); Entrails (15 RCNY §
16-07,        16-07(h); Game Cleaning Practices (15 RCNY §
16-08,        16-08(g)); Boat Safety/Capacity (15 RCNY §                   4 months -
16-10.1,      16-10.1(f), (g); 15 RCNY §                                   1 year
16-10.2,      16-10.2(f), (g)); Ice Fishing (15 RCNY §
16-12         16-07(k)); Hunter Behavior/Safety (15 RCNY §
              16-08(f)); Fishing Boat Tag (15 RCNY §
              16-10.1(a), (b), (i), (p), (q), (t), (u)); Fishing Boat
              Storage, Placement, and Securing (15 RCNY §
              16-10.1 (v), (w), (x)); Recreational Boat Tag (15 RCNY §
              16-10.2(b)); Recreational Boat Launch Sites, Storage Areas,
              and Storage (15 RCNY §
              16-10.2(c), (d)); General Rules (15 RCNY §
              16-12)
15 RCNY §§  Public Access Areas (15 RCNY §
16-03.1,      16-03.1); Day Use Areas (15 RCNY §                           1 - 3
16-03.2,      16-03.2); Special Event Areas (15 RCNY §                     years or
16.03.3,      16-03.3); Access Permit Areas (15 RCNY §                     revocation
16-04         16-04)
              Restricted Areas (15 RCNY §
              16-11); Injury, Destruction or Abuse of Natural Resources or
              Property (15 RCNY §
              16-13(a)); Firearms, Weapons, Explosives (15 RCNY §
              16-13(b)); Animals (15 RCNY §
              16-13(c)), Tents and Other Structures (15 RCNY §
              16-13(e)); Motor Vehicle Access (15 RCNY §
15 RCNY §§  16-13(f)); Littering, Polluting, Dumping (15 RCNY §          18 months
16-11,        16-14(a)); Bathing, Swimming, Washing of Objects (15 RCNY §  - 5 years
16-13,        16-14(b)); Target Shooting (15 RCNY §                        or
16-14,        16-14(d)); Camping (15 RCNY §                                revocation
16-16         16-14(e)); Fires (15 RCNY §
              16-14(f)); Motorized Equipment (15 RCNY §
              16-14(h)); Commercial Activities (15 RCNY §
              16-14(i)); Manned and Unmanned aircraft (15 RCNY §
              16-14(k); Horses (15 RCNY §
              16-14(l)), Biking (§
              16-14(m)); Conformance with State and Local Laws (15 RCNY §
              16-16).
 
   (f)   Appeals. Individuals may appeal the suspension or revocation of their
Access Permit privileges and/or ability to apply for public access privileges
by submitting to the Deputy Chief of City Land Stewardship, within 30 days of
the date of the NYCDEP letter of suspension or revocation, a written request
explaining why the penalty should be changed. In support of an appeal, an
individual must submit:
      (1)   an explanation as to why the penalty imposed is not justified by
the circumstances presented;
      (2)   a statement indicating his or her commitment to abide by all Rules,
policies, and conditions in the future.
   The Deputy Chief of City Land Stewardship will respond to all appeals in
writing within 45 days of receipt. In response to a written appeal, NYCDEP may
reduce the duration of suspension or revocation period. Factors NYCDEP will
consider in determining whether to grant or deny an appeal request include
whether the individual has committed any other Rule infractions within the
previous 5 years and whether the infraction at issue threatened or compromised
Water Supply quality or security, public safety or led to property damage or
injury to any individual. Court dispositions of any summons issued or arrests
made for reasons other than a violation of these rules will not negate any such
violations, but may be considered during an appeal review by NYCDEP.
Individuals dissatisfied with the first appeal response may elect to submit a
final written appeal to the Deputy Commissioner for the NYCDEP Bureau of Water
Supply for a final determination.
   (g)   Reinstatement. Upon conclusion of the suspension period for a
suspended Access Permit and/or Tags, NYCDEP will send notification of
reinstatement via USPS or electronic mail to the Access Permit holder at the
address on file. This notification will include the return of any confiscated
Access Permit or Tag that is still valid or an application for a replacement.
   (h)   Group Infractions. Any violation of these Rules and/or the Group
Access Permit conditions by a Group Member may result in:
      (1)   Expulsion of the Group and/or Group Member from the property;
      (2)   Revocation of the Group Access Permit;
      (3)   Loss of general privileges to access City Property including loss
of eligibility to apply for an Access Permit, suspension or revocation of
Access Permits; and
      (4)   Arrest and prosecution of the Group Members, Group Leader, and/or
organization sponsoring the Group and/or which the Group represents.
   (i)   Public Access Area and Day Use Area Infractions. Failure to comply
with these Rules, postings or notices in a Public Access Area or a Day Use Area
may result in, but not be limited to, one or more of the following:
      (1)   Expulsion from City Property;
      (2)   Suspension or revocation of Access Permit and/or Tag privileges, if
applicable
      (3)   Prohibition from obtaining an Access Permit or Tag;
      (4)   Suspension from access to some, any or all City Property;
      (5)   Arrest and prosecution.
(Added City Record 5/31/2019, eff. 6/30/2019)
§ 16-16 Conformance with State and Local Laws.
All persons using City Property for Recreational Uses are subject to the New
York State Environmental Conservation Law and all other statutes, ordinances
and Rules applicable and the Rules set forth herein. Access Permits are not
substitutes for any NYSDEC Fishing, Hunting or Trapping Licenses required by
law.
(Added City Record 5/31/2019, eff. 6/30/2019)
§ 16-17 Enforceability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section, Rule or other part of
this chapter shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be
invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder
thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence,
paragraph, subdivision, section, Rule or other part thereof directly involved
in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
(Added City Record 5/31/2019, eff. 6/30/2019)
Chapter 17: [Occupation or Use of New York City Property (Lands, Water Bodies,
Reservoirs and Infrastructure) in the Counties of Delaware, Dutchess, Greene,
Orange, Putnam, Schoharie, Sullivan, Ulster, and Westchester]
§ 17-01 Scope and Purpose.
The following rules apply to any permitted occupation or use of New York City
property (lands, water bodies, reservoirs and infrastructure) in the counties
of Delaware, Dutchess, Greene, Orange, Putnam, Schoharie, Sullivan, Ulster, and
Westchester. These rules are for the benefit of municipalities, utilities,
government agencies, organizations exempt from federal taxation pursuant to 26
U.S.C. § 501(c)(3), individuals and commercial enterprises who may want to
access or to occupy City owned property. The New York City Department of
Environmental Protection is the City agency designated as the issuing authority
for Revocable Land Use Permits ("Permits").
§ 17-02 Definitions.
   (a)   Commercial Use. "Commercial Use" means a use which is undertaken
primarily for the purpose of making a profit. Commercial Use does not include
use by any utility company.
   (b)   Commissioner. "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of the New York
City Department of Environmental Protection or a Deputy Commissioner authorized
to act for such Department pursuant to law.
   (c)   Low-Impact Uses. "Low-impact uses" mean those uses with little or no
soil, vegetation, stream, or wetland disturbances and no siting of impervious
surfaces or structures. The term "low-impact uses" does not include any
alterations that would increase the rate or volume of stormwater runoff.
   (d)   Property Value. "Property Value" means the assessed value (land only)
of property adjacent to or similar to the City property subject to a Permit, in
proportion to the acreage of City property subject to a Permit, adjusted by the
New York State equalization rate.
   (e)   Public Corporation. "Public Corporation" means a municipal
corporation, a district corporation or a public benefit corporation, as defined
in Section 66 of the General Construction Law.
   (f)   Reimbursement of Taxes. "Reimbursement of taxes" means the
reimbursement of actual real property taxes and assessments paid by the City of
New York, and includes the total assessed value, if any, paid by the City of
New York for the acreage of City property that is subject to a Permit.
   (g)   Rural Electric Cooperative. "Rural Electric Cooperative" means any
corporation organized under the New York State Rural Electric Cooperative Law.
§ 17-03 Applications and Application Fees.
   (a)   Applications may be obtained from the DEP website, from any authorized
DEP employee or on request by calling DEP at (914) 742-2076. Prior to
submission of the application, applicants must discuss their Permit request at
the telephone number above with a staff member of the Land Use Permit Office or
any other authorized DEP employee. Applications may then be hand-delivered to
an authorized DEP employee or submitted by United States Postal Service (USPS)
mail to: NYC Department of Environmental Protection Land Use Permit Office 465
Columbus Avenue Valhalla, NY 10595
   Notification of the availability of internet application submission will be
posted on the DEP website.
   (b)   All applications for Permits must be accompanied by a non-refundable
application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) payable to the order of "The
City of New York" by money order or check unless such fee is waived pursuant to
15 RCNY §
17-07(c). Notification of the availability of payment by credit card will be
posted on the DEP website.
   (c)   Applications must contain all materials related to the Permit request,
including but not limited to detailed plans, sketches, maps and surveys that
show the areas of the proposed uses and adjacent City property boundaries. If
DEP deems necessary, the applicant will be required to provide additional
plans, engineering drawings or other documents.
   (d)   Permit fees are set forth in 15 RCNY §
17-07.
§ 17-04 Term and Renewal.
   (a)   The issuance and renewal terms of the permits shall not exceed five
(5) years. Permits may be renewed for additional five (5) year terms upon DEP's
approval of an updated application for renewal, and any additional plans,
engineering drawings or documents required by DEP. DEP will send Permit renewal
applications to permittees.
   (b)   If a Permit is not renewed, use of City property must cease at the
conclusion of the term of the Permit. The property must be restored to DEP's
satisfaction within thirty (30) days of the date of the expiration of the
Permit. DEP will determine, based on the nature and location of the area
requiring restoration, whether DEP or the former permittee will perform such
restoration. The former permittee is responsible for all restoration costs
regardless whether the permittee or DEP performs such restoration. If DEP
allows the permittee to undertake the restoration, the former permittee must
secure a permit prior to beginning the restoration work. Failure to complete
such restoration to the satisfaction of DEP may result in the exercise of any
legal remedies available to DEP.
§ 17-05 Conditions.
All Permits will include standard conditions and may also include special
conditions specific to the use of the City property, as deemed necessary. The
permittee must sign an acknowledgment before a Notary Public accepting all
conditions including Permit fees set forth by DEP as a requirement of Permit
issuance.
§ 17-06 Right of Entry.
DEP reserves the rights of its employees, contractors and other persons
approved by DEP to enter City property at any time for any purpose without
notice to, or permission of, the permittee.
§ 17-07 Permit Fees and Waivers.
   (a)   Except as set forth in subdivision (c) of this section, Permit fees
for all Permits are equal to the greater of the total amount determined in
accordance with subdivision (e) of this section or $25.00.
   (b)   DEP will invoice all renewable Permits annually. Payment is due within
30 days of the invoice date.
   (c)   DEP will waive application fees and Permit fees for Permits in
connection with the following:
      (1)   DEP-funded or supported projects or projects servicing DEP
facilities;
      (2)   Projects for highway purposes in which adjacent City land is needed
for work within existing municipal rights of way and/or easements;
      (3)   Projects or uses by a Public Corporation, federal or state agency
that involve Low-Impact Uses and water-quality improvement projects such as,
but not limited to, the following:
         •   replacing a failing culvert to reduce flooding,
         •   emergency road repairs or installation of ground water monitoring
wells to assess contamination.
         •   Such projects shall not include improvements that are likely to
increase the tax assessment of City land;
      (4)   Projects or uses by a Public Corporation, federal or state agency
that involve certain Low-Impact Uses related to recreation such as, but not
limited to, the following:
         •   hiking,
         •   snowshoeing,
         •   cross-country skiing,
         •   bird watching,
         •   educational programs, and,
         •   nature study and interpretation;
      (5)   Projects or uses by a Public Corporation, federal or state agency,
or a utility providing a public benefit, on property where the City has
determined to grant an easement to the permittee for such project or use;
      (6)   Court-ordered uses of City property;
      (7)   Projects or uses by a Public Corporation, federal or state agency
or any organization exempt from federal taxation pursuant to 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)
(3) that involve Low Impact Uses of limited duration such as, but not limited
to, the following:
         •   nature or natural resources studies,
         •   fund-raising events,
         •   posting and removal of temporary signs or markers for an event,
and
         •   temporary storage or staging; and
      (8)   Emergency use of City property by a Public Corporation, federal or
state agency or any organization exempt from federal taxation pursuant to 26
U.S.C. § 501(c)(3) to respond to an imminent threat to the health and safety of
humans, or to respond to a substantial imminent threat to water quality or to
property. DEP must be notified by telephone and questions about the emergency
must be answered on the business day following the date of the emergency.
   (d)   Application and Permit fees shall not be waived for any projects that
include requests for Commercial or individual uses.
   (e)   The schedule of Permit fees is listed below.
Category Permit Fee
Category                                                                    Permit Fee
Access over City Property This includes, but shall not be limited to, temporary or
permanent physical access ways such as driveways, logging roads and construction
entranceways.
�Each 300 feet in length, or part thereof, for widths less than or equal   $95.03
  to 10 feet, Non-Commercial uses
�Each 300 feet in length, or part thereof, additional fee per foot of
  width over 10 feet, Non- Commercial uses $19.00
�Each 300 feet in length, or part thereof, for widths less than or equal   $190.08
  to 10 feet, Commercial Uses
�Each 300 feet in length, or part thereof, additional fee per foot of      $38.03
  width over 10 feet, Commercial Uses
�General access over City property other than driveways (one-time Permit   $100.00
  fee)
Fencing 
�Each 300 feet, or part thereof, Non-Commercial uses                       $95.03
�Each 300 feet, or part thereof, Commercial Uses                           $190.08
Walkways 
�Non-Commercial uses                                                       $95.03
�Commercial Uses                                                           $190.08
Bridges 
�Bridges or crossings for access/driveways or walkways for Non-Commercial  $95.03
  use
�Bridges or crossings for access/driveways or walkways for Commercial Use  $190.08
Commuter Parking
                                                                            33 1/3% of
                                                                            gross
                                                                            receipts
                                                                            derived from
�Paved or unpaved surfaces                                                 commuter
                                                                            parking fees
                                                                            plus
                                                                            reimbursement
                                                                            of taxes
Non-Commuter Parking 
�Municipal/Organizations Exempt from Federal Taxation – paved or unpaved Reimbursement
  surfaces                                                                  of taxes
                                                                            10% of
                                                                            property
�Commercial Uses – paved or unpaved surfaces                             value of area
                                                                            used plus
                                                                            reimbursement
                                                                            of taxes
Signs including supports 
�Non-Commercial uses                                                       $25.00
Subsurface Sewage Treatment Systems (SSTS)
�Individual sewage treatment systems serving single family homes           $190.08
�All other subsurface sewage treatment systems                             $380.14
Drainage Pipe/Culvert Pipes 
�Each 10 feet in length, or part thereof, for each 1 inch in diameter of   $1.67
  pipe
Water Pipes 
�Pipes for private use, each 300 feet in length, or part thereof, any size $95.03
  diameter
�Pipes for Commercial Use, each 300 feet in length, or part thereof, any   $190.06
  size diameter
Water Connection/Pump Houses (Public use) 
�Each connection, plus cost for pipes and appurtenances plus reimbursement $475.27
  of taxes
�A separate Water Supply Agreement with specific costs for water
  withdrawal may also be required
Subsurface Utilities or Facilities (Public Service Corp.) 
�Each 10 feet in length, or part thereof, for each 1 inch in diameter of   $1.67
  pipe
Dry Wells 
�Each                                                                      $47.53
Manholes and other Underground Structures 
�Per cubic foot                                                            $2.65
Utility Installation Charge for Utility Poles (One-time Permit fee) 
�Each pole, including anchor                                               $11.39
Utility Poles and Supports for Utility Poles 
�Each pole                                                                 $7.55
�Each support, guy wire, pull, anchor or other appurtenance                $7.55
Utility Attachments to Another Utility's Existing Permitted Pole(s) 
�Each attachment                                                           $2.26
Utility Structures (Transformers and switching substations, small substations, gas
metering connections and treatment chambers, etc.)
�Less than or equal to 5,000 square feet                                   $950.62
�Greater than 5,000 and less than or equal to 10,000 square feet           $1,901.26
�Greater than 10,000 and less than or equal to 15,000 square feet          $2,851.86
�Greater than 15,000 and less than or equal to 20,000 square feet          $3,802.49
�Greater than 20,000 and less than or equal to 30,000 square feet          $4,753.13
�Greater than 30,000 square feet                                           $5,703.76
Other Utility Uses 
�Interface Cabinets (Telephone), each                                      $38.03
�Telephone Platforms, each                                                 $76.03
�Utility Pedestals and Slabs, each                                         $47.53
�Shield Wires, each                                                        $19.00
Aerial, Buried, or Submarine Electric Cable 
�Each 300 feet in length, or part thereof, for each wire transmitting less $76.03
  than or equal to 5,000 volts
�Each 300 feet in length, or part thereof, for each wire transmitting more $114.06
  than 5,000 volts and less than or equal to 13.2 kilovolts
�Each 300 feet in length, or part thereof, for each wire transmitting 13.2 $152.06
  kilovolts or more
Transmission Lines 
�Each circuit transmitting less than 345 kilovolts                         $638.71
�Each circuit transmitting 345 kilovolts or more                           $821.24
                                                                            10% of
                                                                            property
�Additional Permit fees for Aqueduct Crossings                             value of area
                                                                            used plus
                                                                            reimbursement
                                                                            of taxes
Small Transformers and Regulators 
�Each unit transmitting less than or equal to 13.2 kilovolts               $76.03
�Each unit transmitting more than 13.2 kilovolts and less than or equal to $152.06
  34.5 kilovolts
�Each unit transmitting more than 34.5 kilovolts                           $228.09
Other Electric 
�Anodes and Rectifiers, each                                               $38.03
�Splice Boxes, each                                                        $7.59
Aerial, Buried, or Submarine Cable, other than Electric
�Each 300 feet in length, or part thereof, for each wire                   $76.03
�Aerial, Buried, or Submarine Fiber Optic Cable (any size)
�Each 300 feet in length, or part thereof, for each wire                   $76.03
Ducts (Electric, Telephone, etc.) 
�Each 300 feet in length, or part thereof, for each duct, 8 inches or less $76.03
  in diameter
�Each 300 feet in length, or part thereof, for each duct, greater than 8   $152.06
  inches in diameter
Municipal Maintenance/Organizations Exempt from Federal Taxation
�Site maintenance and/or repair                                            $25.00
�General municipal use for official business                               $25.00
Natural Resource Extraction 
�Agricultural Uses such as planting/harvesting crops and livestock (per    $5.00
  acre)
�Harvesting hay (per acre)                                                 $2.50
�Brush-hogging (flat Permit fee)                                           $50.00
Recreation 
  High-impact uses that call for major physical improvement (e.g. ball      Reimbursement
�fields, soccer fields) by municipalities or organizations exempt from     of taxes
  federal taxation
�Moderate-impact uses and related structures (e.g. paved trails,           $30.00
  snowmobiles trails, horse trails)
�Low-Impact Uses and related small-scale amenities such as informational   $25.00
  kiosks
Wall Breaks (One-time Permit fee)
�This includes removing/opening sections of City walls for access or other $95.03
  uses as needed
Investigatory Work for a period not to exceed one (1) year (One-time Permit fee) 
�Flat rate for any test borings, wells, pits, etc. (regardless of          $475.27
  quantity)
�Each structure for storage (trailers, sheds, gas tanks, etc.)             $190.08
Investigatory Work for a period to exceed one (1) year 
�Additional annual Permit fee for investigatory work exceeding one (1)     $100.00
  year
Staging Area (One-time Permit fee) 
�Flat Rate                                                                 $190.08
Miscellaneous 
�Dry Hydrants                                                              $34.68
�Street Poles and Lights (each)                                            $10.00
�Other Non-Commercial uses (Permit fee double for commercial use):
�   Less than or equal to 5,000 square feet                             $250.00
�   Greater than 5,000 and less than or equal to 10,000 square feet     $500.00
�   Greater than 10,000 and less than or equal to 15,000 square feet    $1,000.00
�   Greater than 15,000 and less than or equal to 20,000 square feet    $1,500.00
�   Greater than 20,000 and less than or equal to 30,000 square feet    $2,000.00
�   Greater than 30,000 square feet                                     $2,500.00
The following Permit Fees shall apply to Rural Electric Cooperatives
Access/Driveways
�Each 300 feet in length, or part thereof, for widths less than or equal   $39.62
  to 10 feet
�Each 300 feet in length, or part thereof, additional Permit fee per foot  $7.92
  of width over 10 feet
Fencing 
�Each 300 feet in length, or part thereof                                  $39.62
Manholes and Other Underground Structures 
�Per cubic foot                                                            $.95
Utility Installation Charge for Utility Poles (One-time Permit fee) 
�Each pole, including anchor                                               $4.75
Utility Poles and Supports for Utility Poles 
�Each pole                                                                 $3.17
�Each support, guy wire, anchor, pull or other appurtenance                $3.17
Utility Attachments to Another Utility's Existing Permitted Pole(s) 
�Each attachment                                                           $.95
Utility Structure (Transformers and switching substations, small substations, gas
metering connections and treatment chambers, etc.) 
�Less than or equal to 5,000 square feet                                   $396.34
�Greater than 5,000 and less than or equal to 10,000 square feet           $792.66
�Greater than 10,000 and less than or equal to 15,000 square feet          $1,189.00
�Greater than 15,000 square feet and less than or equal to 20,000 square   $1,585.33
  feet
�Greater than 20,000 square feet and less than or equal to 30,000 square   $1,981.67
  feet
�Greater than 30,000 square feet                                           $2,378.00
Aerial, Buried or Submarine Electric Cable
�Each 300 feet in length, or part thereof, for each wire transmitting less $31.70
  than or equal to 5,000 volts
�Each 300 feet in length, or part thereof, for each wire transmitting more $47.56
  than 5,000 volts and less than 13.2 kilovolts
�Each 300 feet in length, or part thereof, for each wire transmitting 13.2 $63.40
  kilovolts or more
Transmission Lines 
�Each circuit transmitting less than 345 kilovolts                         $266.30
�Each circuit transmitting 345 kilovolts or more                           $342.40
                                                                            In addition
                                                                            to applicable
                                                                            circuit fees,
                                                                            10% of
�Additional Permit fees for Aqueduct Crossings                             property
                                                                            value of area
                                                                            used plus
                                                                            reimbursement
                                                                            of taxes
Small Transformers and Regulators 
�Each unit transmitting less than or equal to 13.2 kilovolts               $31.70
�Each unit transmitting more than 13.2 kilovolts and less than or equal to $63.40
  34.5 kilovolts
�Each unit transmitting more than 34.5 kilovolts                           $95.10
Ducts 
�Each 300 feet of length, or part thereof, for each duct, 8 inches or less $31.70
  in diameter
�Each 300 feet of length, or part thereof, for each duct, greater than 8   $63.40
  inches in diameter
Other 
�Anodes and Rectifiers, each                                               $15.86
�Splice Boxes, each                                                        $3.17
�Utility Pedestals and Slabs, each                                         $19.83
�Shield Wires, each                                                        $7.92
 
§ 17-08 Damage to Persons or Property.
   (a)   The permittee shall indemnify and save the City harmless from all
damages resulting from injury to persons or property arising from the use of
City land, structures or other property under this Permit. Insurance policies
naming the City, together with its officials and employees and the New York
City Water Board as additional insureds must be provided as follows:
      •   All individuals and Not-for-Profit Organizations: Personal or General
Liability or Homeowners' Insurance with minimum limits of $500,000;
      •   All Commercial entities: Commercial General Liability Insurance with
minimum limits of $2,000,000 per occurrence, $5,000,000 aggregate;
      •   All Utilities and Municipalities: Commercial General Liability
Insurance with minimum limits of $2,000,000 per occurrence, $5,000,000
aggregate.
In lieu of such insurance policies, municipal permittees may provide proof of
self-insurance in an amount satisfactory to DEP and municipal and Commercial
entities may provide other forms of undertakings, such as, but not limited to,
letters of credit in amounts satisfactory to DEP. All permittees must provide
proof of insurance, self-insurance or other undertaking annually.
   (b)   The permittee shall be required to furnish a surety bond in a minimum
amount of $250,000 in favor of the City of New York to be continued during the
period that City property is occupied by the permittee for siting major
improvements or infrastructure, including, but not limited to, the following:
      •   pump stations,
      •   filtration plants, and
      •   other improvements of a similar nature.
The purpose of such bond is to cover the cost of any repairs or remediation
necessitated by the permittee's use of City property or for removal of
permittee's improvements remaining on City property after Permit revocation or
termination and restoration of the property to its original conditions after
such removal. Such bond shall be continued in force by the permittee until City
property is cleared of all encumbrances placed there by permittee and shall not
limit in any way the liability of the permittee for damage to life or property
resulting from the use or occupancy of City property.
   (c)   In the event any City infrastructure or lands are damaged by the
permittee's use of City property, DEP will determine, based on the nature and
location of the damage, whether DEP or the permittee will perform such repair.
Regardless of whether DEP or the permittee performs such repairs, the permittee
shall be responsible for any and all costs for such repairs to the satisfaction
of DEP. If DEP allows the permittee to undertake such repairs, failure to
complete these repairs to the satisfaction of DEP may result in revocation of
the Permit and any additional legal remedies available to DEP.
   (d)   In case of emergency, insurance verification must be submitted to DEP
within ten (10) business days of the date of emergency Permit issuance.
§ 17-09 Revocation.
Permits are revocable at the will of the Commissioner upon thirty (30) days'
written notice of the proposed revocation, except in the case of emergencies
that present immediate risks to water quality, City infrastructure(s) or to the
health of employees or members of the public. Reasons for revocation include,
but are not limited to, the following:
   •   violation by the permittee of any regulation or condition(s) of the
Permit,
   •   failure to pay Permit fees,
   •   failure to maintain improvement or structure allowed by such Permit,
   •   failure to provide proof of insurance, and
   •   DEP's need to use its land for water supply operations.
Such revocation, other than for DEP's need to use its land for water supply
purposes, may be cured by the permittee within the thirty (30) day written
notice period. Failure by DEP to revoke a Permit shall not prohibit DEP from
exercising any other legal remedies available.
§ 17-10 Permittee's Improvements to be Removed and City Property Restored on
Notice of Permit Revocation or Permit Termination.
Upon Permit revocation, any improvements belonging to the permittee must be
removed from City property, at the permittee's expense, within thirty (30) days
of such revocation unless otherwise authorized by DEP in writing. The property
must be restored by the permittee or DEP in accordance with 15 RCNY §
17-08(c) within thirty (30) days of revocation or as otherwise agreed upon. Any
improvement(s) remaining on City property beyond thirty (30) days of the
written notice shall be considered abandoned and title to such improvement(s)
shall become vested in the City, at the City's option. Should the City elect to
take title, the improvement(s) shall be disposed as the Commissioner may direct
in lieu of any other procedure for the disposition of abandoned property
required or permitted by law, and the former permittee waives any right to
assert a claim against DEP pursuant to the provisions of the New York State
Personal Property Law, Abandoned Property Law or any such other procedure. DEP
shall seek reimbursement for any costs incurred for the removal of any such
improvement(s) and shall also seek forfeiture of any bond provided.
§ 17-11 Title of Property.
Title and ownership of all City property, including all natural resources
above, on and beneath the property, such as, but not limited to, minerals,
soils, trees and metals upon, in or under the land shall remain and be vested
in the City of New York. Removal of City resources from any Permitted location,
unless approved in writing in advance by DEP, is strictly prohibited and will
be prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law.
§ 17-12 Unenforceability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section, rule or part of this
chapter shall be adjudged by any court or competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but
shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph,
subdivision, section, rule or part thereof directly involved in the controversy
in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 17-13 Repeal.
These rules are intended to repeal those rules entitled Issuance of Temporary
Permits for the Occupation of City Property, effective September 2, 2001;
provided, however, that with respect to Permits issued before the effective
date of these rules, all restrictions, conditions and requirements upon the
permittee contained in the earlier rules shall remain in effect until such
Permit is renewed, cancelled, terminated or revoked.
Chapter 18: Protection from Contamination, Degradation and Pollution of the New
York City Water Supply and Its Sources
**** Subchapter A: General Provisions ****
§ 18-11 Preface.
   (a)   The health, welfare and economic well-being of nearly nine million
residents in the five counties of New York City ("the City"), and of an
increasing number of upstate New York communities is inextricably tied to the
quality of the source waters in the watersheds of the New York City Water
Supply located in Westchester, Putnam, Dutchess, Delaware, Ulster, Greene,
Sullivan and Schoharie Counties, and Fairfield County in Connecticut. The high
quality of these waters faces a continuing threat from the cumulative and
episodic impacts of pollution sources generated by certain land uses and
activities in the watersheds. It is the duty of the Commissioner of the New
York City Department of Environmental Protection (the "Department") to protect
the high quality of waters from which the City's water supply is drawn and
preserve it from degradation for the purpose of protecting the health and
general welfare of its consumers.
   (b)   These rules and regulations repeal in their entirety and supersede the
Rules and Regulations for the Department of Water Supply, Gas and Electricity
of the City of New York enacted the 11th day of June, 1953.
   (c)   These rules and regulations are hereby enacted pursuant to the
authority vested in the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental
Protection, as set forth in 15 RCNY §
18-13.
§ 18-12 Purpose and Findings.
   (a)   The quality of the drinking water supplied to the City and upstate
communities which draw from the New York City water supply depends primarily on
the quality of the source waters which feed the reservoirs. The source waters
and reservoirs are vulnerable to degradation and contamination from various
sources and activities, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Wastewater discharges to surface water and groundwater;
      (2)   Urban, suburban, rural, mining, silvicultural and agricultural land
use practices that result in nonpoint source runoff of pollution and/or in
adverse changes in the natural rate at which water flows into and through a
delineated drainage basin; and
      (3)   Improper use, handling, storage, transport and/or disposal of
substances, including but not limited to, hazardous substances, radioactive
materials, pesticides, fertilizers, winter highway maintenance materials, solid
wastes, and animal wastes.
   (b)   The Department finds that such sources and activities, either alone or
in conjunction with any other related activities, may constitute a source of
contamination to or degradation of the water supply, may cause a contravention
of the State water quality standards set forth in 6 NYCRR Parts 701-705, and
Subchapter D of these rules and regulations, and may result in the impairment
of the use of the water supply for drinking, culinary or food processing
purposes.
   (c)   In response to the Safe Drinking Water Act Amendments of 1986, the
United States Environmental Protection Agency has begun implementing a
significant expansion of regulatory requirements for public water systems. In
order to protect the public health, and to satisfy the legislative mandates of
the Safe Drinking Water Act Amendments and the rules and regulations in 40
C.F.R. Parts 141 and 142, the New York State Department of Health has amended
the State Sanitary Code, 10 NYCRR Part 5, Subpart 5-1, Public Water Systems,
which contains New York State's Surface Water Treatment Rule. Although both
Federal and State law propose filtration as a method for water quality
treatment for pathogen control, the effectiveness of the filtration process and
complexity of plant operation is dependent upon the quality of the water
entering the filtration plant. In addition, many contaminants are not removed
by conventional filtration. Therefore, it is clear that enhancement of the
City's existing watershed rules and regulations would be necessary even if the
City were to build filtration plants to filter its entire water supply.
   (d)   It is the goal and intent of these rules and regulations to protect
the public health by averting future contamination to and degradation of the
water supply and by remediating existing sources of pollution or degradation of
the New York City water supply. These rules and regulations implement the
Department's intention to minimize the discharge of pollutants into the source
waters from both point and nonpoint sources, minimize the adverse impacts of
erosion, limit the discharge of phosphorus to source waters which may
accelerate the eutrophication process, and provide notification to the City of
ongoing or proposed activities, which either alone or in conjunction with other
existing and proposed regulated activities, may cause contamination to or
degradation of the water supply.
   (e)   It is the purpose of these rules and regulations to insure compliance
with the Federal and State standards by providing a comprehensive watershed
protection program. Furthermore, these rules and regulations articulate an
antidegradation policy for the New York City water supply system. These rules
and regulations are promulgated to govern those activities in the watershed
that threaten the quality of the water supply of the numerous upstate
communities and the City of New York. While bound by its responsibility to
protect the public health, the City has also taken the needs of the communities
and businesses in the New York City watershed into consideration in drafting
and promulgating these rules and regulations.
   (f)   The City reserves the right to re-examine these rules and regulations
periodically to insure that they continue to further the goal and intent
referred to in paragraph (d) of this subdivision and the purposes referred to
in paragraph (e) of this subdivision.
(Amended City Record 10/30/2019, eff. 11/29/2019)
§ 18-13 Authority.
These rules and regulations are promulgated pursuant to Article 11 of the New
York State Public Health Law and § 24-302 of the New York City Administrative
Code, and have been duly promulgated by the Commissioner of the Department of
Environmental Protection of the City of New York and approved by the
Commissioner of the New York State Department of Health. These rules and
regulations shall become effective upon completion of any conditions set forth
in the approval issued by the New York State Department of Health pursuant to §
1100(1) of the Public Health Law; publication of these rules and regulations
pursuant to § 1100(2) of the Public Health Law; and upon completion of the
requirements of the New York City Administrative Procedure Act.
§ 18-14 Applicability.
   (a)   These rules and regulations apply to all persons undertaking, or
proposing to undertake, the activities in the categories listed below, where
such activities are specifically regulated in these rules and regulations and
occur in the New York City watershed:
      (1)   Discharge or storage of pathogenic materials.
      (2)   Discharge or storage of hazardous substances and hazardous wastes.
      (3)   Discharge or storage of radioactive materials.
      (4)   Discharge or storage of petroleum products.
      (5)   Discharge or transport of human excreta and use of holding tanks.
      (6)   Design, construction and operation of wastewater treatment plants.
      (7)   Design, construction and operation of sewer systems and service
connections.
      (8)   Design, construction and operation of intermediate sized and
individual sewage treatment systems.
      (9)   Discharge of stormwater and sediment, and preparation and
implementation of stormwater pollution prevention plans.
      (10)   Construction of impervious surfaces.
      (11)   Discharge from miscellaneous point sources.
      (12)   Discharge of solid waste, including the siting of junkyards and
solid waste management facilities.
      (13)   Discharge from agricultural activities.
      (14)   Discharge or storage of pesticides.
      (15)   Application and storage of fertilizers.
      (16)   Snow disposal and application and storage of winter highway
maintenance materials.
   (b)   These rules and regulations apply to substantial alterations or
modifications of the activities described in subdivision (a) of this section.
   (c)   These rules and regulations apply to a substantial alteration or
modification of any noncomplying regulated activity, as set forth in these
rules and regulations.
   (d)   These rules and regulations apply to noncomplying regulated activities
that are required to come into compliance with these rules and regulations as
set forth in these rules and regulations.
   (e)   The boundaries of the New York City watershed have been delineated on
United States Geological Survey maps, which are available for inspection at the
offices of the local representatives of the Department listed in 15 RCNY §
18-15. A map of the watershed is provided in
Appendix 18-A of this Part for reference purposes only.
§ 18-15 Local Representatives.
   (a)   Information about these rules and regulations and application and
other forms required by these rules and regulations may be obtained from the
following offices of the Department or on the Department's website at
www.nyc.gov/dep. Applications for Department approval of a regulatory activity
must be submitted to one of these offices or online in accordance with
instructions that may be provided on the Department's website. Petitions
appealing from a determination issued by the Department or requesting a hearing
on a cease and desist order issued by the Department must be submitted to the
offices listed in subdivision (b) or online in accordance with instructions
that may be provided on the Department's website.
      (1)   New York City Department of Environmental Protection Regulatory and
Engineering Programs
         465 Columbus Avenue
         Valhalla, New York 10595
         Telephone: (914) 742-2028
      (2)   New York City Department of Environmental Protection Regulatory and
Engineering Programs
         71 Smith Avenue
         Kingston, New York 12401
         Telephone: (845) 340-7215
   (b)   Petitions for a hearing on a determination by the Department to
revoke, suspend, or modify a determination or variance in accordance with 15
RCNY §
18-26, petitions for appeal of a determination issued by the Department in
accordance with 15 RCNY §
18-28, and petitions for a hearing on a cease and desist order issued by the
Department in accordance with 15 RCNY §
18-29 must be submitted to the address listed in paragraph (1), with a copy to
the address listed in paragraph (2).
      (1)   New York City Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings
         100 Church Street, 12th floor
         New York, New York 10007
         Telephone: (844) 628-4692
      (2)   New York City Department of Environmental Protection
         General Counsel
         59-17 Junction Boulevard
         19th Floor
         Flushing, New York 11373-5107
         Telephone: (718) 595-6555
   (c)   For communications with the Department regarding any known or
suspected violations of these rules and regulations or notification of
potential contamination of the water supply occurring anywhere in the
watershed:
      (1)   New York City Water Supply Watershed Police Telephone:
         1-888-H20-SHED (1-888-426-7433)
   (d)   Addresses and phone numbers contained in this section are
informational and persons subject to these rules and regulations must utilize
addresses and phone numbers specified herein, or successor addresses and phone
numbers where appropriate.
(Amended City Record 10/30/2019, eff. 11/29/2019)
§ 18-16 Definitions.
   (a)   The following terms shall have the stated meanings when used in this
Chapter, except where otherwise specifically provided:
      (1)   Absorption area means the area to which wastewater is distributed
for infiltration to the soil.
      (2)   Absorption field means the area to which sewage is distributed for
infiltration to the soil by means of a network of pipes. A gravelless
absorption system is a type of absorption field.
      (3)   Access road means an impervious private or public road, other than
a driveway, which connects a parcel to an existing public or private road and
which is necessary in order to enable the parcel to be developed.
      (4)   Affiliate means any agency or person controlled by, controlling, or
under common control with an applicant.
      (5)   Agency means any local, state or federal department, agency, board,
public benefit corporation, public authority, commission, district, or
governing body, including any city, county, and other political entity of the
State.
      (6)   Agricultural activity means (i) an activity that occurs on "land
used in agricultural production" as that term is defined in § 301(4) of the
Agriculture and Markets Law, or (ii) an activity which is covered by a whole
farm plan approved by the Watershed Agricultural Council, or by a New York
State Agricultural Environmental Management Plan, or by another federal, state,
or other conservation plan determined by the Department to provide water
quality protection equivalent to whole farm plans approved by the Watershed
Agricultural Council.
      (7)   Alteration or modification means any change in physical
configuration, intensity of use, location, plans, design, site, capacity,
treatment standard or method, or other change in a regulated activity or in a
noncomplying regulated activity. This term shall not include remediation,
routine repairs or maintenance of structures and equipment.
      (8)   Approval means any final decision by an agency to issue a permit,
certificate, license, lease, renewal or other entitlement or to otherwise
authorize a proposed project or activity.
      (9)   Area zoned for commercial or industrial uses means a commercial or
industrial zoning district, hamlet zoning district, or highway business zoning
district. Areas zoned for commercial or industrial uses shall not include
agricultural zoning districts.
      (10)   Base flow means visible sustained or fair weather runoff of water,
including groundwater.
      (11)   Best management practices (BMPs) means methods, measures or
practices determined to be the most practical and effective in preventing or
reducing the contamination to or degradation of the water supply. Best
management practices include, but are not limited to, structural and
nonstructural controls and operations and maintenance procedures, that can be
applied before, during or after regulated activities to achieve the purposes
stated herein.
      (12)   Best treatment technology (BTT) means methods, measures or
practices determined to be the most practical and effective in reducing amounts
of phosphorus in both surface and subsurface point source discharges which
occur within the New York City watershed. BTT will vary with the size of the
wastewater treatment plant, but is generally understood to consist of secondary
treatment and chemical removal (usually accomplished by the addition of
aluminum salts, iron salts, polymers, or pH adjustments with lime), with media
filtration as a final step if necessary to achieve higher removal rates.
      (13)   C.F.R. means the Code of Federal Regulations.
      (14)   City means the City of New York.
      (15)   Clear cutting means cutting all of the trees, not just selected
trees, within a specified boundary designated by the owner of the property.
      (16)   Coliform restricted basin means the drainage basin of a reservoir
or controlled lake in which the coliform standards as set forth in 15 RCNY §
18-48(c) or (d) are exceeded as determined by the Department pursuant to its
annual review conducted under 15 RCNY §
18-48(e).
      (17)   Combined sewer system means a structure used for conveying both
sewage and stormwater.
      (18)   Commissioner means the Commissioner of the New York City
Department of Environmental Protection or its successors or a deputy
commissioner authorized to act for such Department pursuant to law.
      (19)   Construction or construction activity means any building,
demolition, renovation, replacement, restoration, rehabilitation or alteration
of any structure or road, or land clearing, land grading, excavation, filling
or stockpiling activities that result in soil disturbance.
      (20)   Construction and demolition debris means uncontaminated solid
waste resulting from the construction, remodeling, repair and demolition of
structures and roads; and uncontaminated solid waste consisting of vegetation
resulting from land clearing and grubbing, utility line maintenance and
seasonal and storm related cleanup.
      (21)   Contamination means the introduction of any pollutant to the water
supply.
      (22)   Controlled lake means a lake from which the City may withdraw
water pursuant to rights acquired by the City or as a right of ownership. The
controlled lakes are: Kirk Lake, Lake Gleneida and Lake Gilead.
      (23)   Croton System means Middle Branch, Bog Brook, East Branch, Croton
Falls, Diverting, Titicus, Amawalk, Muscoot, New Croton, and Cross River
Reservoirs, Kirk Lake, Lake Gleneida and Lake Gilead, and their respective
drainage basins.
      (24)   Degradation means a process of reduction or deterioration of the
water quality of the water supply, including the process of eutrophication.
      (25)   Department means the New York City Department of Environmental
Protection or its successors.
      (26)   Design capacity means the approved flow limit of the physical
apparatus of a wastewater treatment plant as specified in its SPDES permit.
      (27)   Design point means a point where stormwater runoff enters a
watercourse or wetland or leaves the site of an activity for which a stormwater
pollution prevention plan must be prepared pursuant to this Chapter.
      (28)   Design professional means a professional engineer or a registered
architect who is licensed to practice in the State of New York, or a land
surveyor with an exemption under § 7208(n) of the Education Law.
      (29)   Designated Main Street Area means a defined area of limited size
located within the East of Hudson Watershed which is an existing center of
commercial, industrial, residential, or mixed use. Designated Main Street Areas
were proposed by local governments in the East of Hudson Watershed in 1997 and
approved by the Department pursuant to these rules and regulations.
      (30)   Designated Village Center means an area in the Croton System
described by the metes and bounds of a village center, whether or not located
in an incorporated village, designated by a local government(s) in a
Comprehensive Croton Water Quality Protection Plan prepared and agreed to in
accordance with 15 RCNY §
18-82 by submitting to the Department a description of the metes and bounds of
such proposed Designated Village Center, a map of the described area, and a
statement of the features which qualify the area as a Designated Village
Center. A Designated Village Center must be an existing center of commercial,
residential or mixed uses.
      (31)   Discharge means the intentional or unintentional disposal,
deposit, injection, emission, application, dumping, spilling, leaking, washing
off, release, running off, draining or placing of any solid, semi-solid,
liquid, or any other non-gaseous waste or other substance into or onto any land
or water or into any sewer system so that such waste or other substance may
directly or indirectly enter into any watercourse, wetland, reservoir,
reservoir stem, controlled lake or groundwater.
      (32)   Discontinuation means an interruption in the use of a regulated
activity including a noncomplying regulated activity. The period of
discontinuation shall commence on the date when regular or seasonal use ceases.
Incidental or illegal use of an unoccupied structure shall not be sufficient to
interrupt a period of discontinuation.
      (33)   Disturbed area means the portion of a site for which the
imperviousness of the ground has changed from pre-construction conditions as a
result of any land clearing, land grading or construction activity. Disturbed
areas may include lawns and landscaped areas.
      (34)   Drainage Area means all land and water area from which runoff may
run to a common design point.
      (35)   Drainage basin means the land area which contributes surface water
to a reservoir or controlled lake.
      (36)   Driveway means a route accessible by a motor vehicle between an
individual residence and a public or private road to provide ingress and egress
from the individual residence.
      (37)   East of Hudson Watershed means West Branch, Boyd's Corner, Bog
Brook, East Branch, Croton Falls, Diverting, Titicus, Amawalk, Muscoot, New
Croton, Cross River, Middle Branch and Kensico Reservoirs, Kirk Lake, Lake
Gleneida and Lake Gilead, and their respective drainage basins.
      (38)   Effective Date means May 1, 1997.
      (39)   Effluent means water or wastewater that flows out from a
wastewater treatment plant or other treatment process.
      (40)   Enhanced subsurface sewage treatment system means a subsurface
sewage treatment system that provides enhanced treatment of wastewater to
reduce the amount of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and total suspended solids
(TSS) of wastewater effluent prior to distribution to an absorption field.
Enhanced subsurface sewage treatment systems include, but are not limited to,
aerobic treatment units, peat filters, and textile filters.
      (41)   Epilimnion means the uppermost, warmest, well-mixed layer of a
lake during thermal stratification.
      (42)   Erosion means the wearing away or the movement of soil by such
physical agents as wind or water, that is exacerbated by such practices as the
disturbance of ground cover by stripping or removing vegetation, construction
activity, or tilling.
      (43)   Exfiltration means wastewater that leaks out of a sewer system
into the surrounding environment, through faulty joints, defective pipes,
cracks in pipes, connections, or at manholes.
      (44)   Existing, where used to describe storage of hazardous substances,
storage of petroleum products, or the siting of junkyards and solid waste
management facilities, means physically constructed, functioning and
operational prior to May 1, 1997.
      (45)   Expansion means an increase in the permitted flow limit for a
wastewater treatment plant as specified in the SPDES permit and/or an increase
in the design capacity of a wastewater treatment plant.
      (46)   Facility means a structure, room or other physical feature
designed to perform a particular function and that makes possible some
activity.
      (47)   Fertilizer means any commercially produced mixture, generally
containing phosphorus, nitrogen and/or potassium, except compost, that is
applied to the ground to increase the supply of nutrients to plants.
      (48)   Galley System means any subsurface system for treating sewage that
employs structural chambers in a horizontal or vertical arrangement for the
storage of effluent until it can be absorbed into the soil, that is utilized
following a septic tank as an alternative to a standard absorption field, and
that did not have all discretionary approvals necessary for construction and
operation before June 30, 2002.
      (49)   Gasoline station means an establishment at which gasoline is sold
or offered for sale to the public for use in motor vehicles.
      (50)   Gravelless absorption system means an absorption field using a
wastewater distribution system designed to be installed without gravel or stone
aggregate. Gravelless absorption systems may involve the use of geotextile,
sand, or other media.
      (51)   Groundwater means any water beneath the land surface in the zone
of saturation. The zone of saturation is where water fills all available pore
spaces.
      (52)   Hamlet means a population center designated as a hamlet by a Town
Board in the West of Hudson watershed and described as a hamlet in a Water
Supply Permit duly issued by the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation or in any written agreement among the affected parties to the 1997
New York City Watershed Memorandum of Agreement, including the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation.
      (53)   Hazardous substance means any substance defined or listed in 6
NYCRR Part 597 except that hazardous substance does not mean any petroleum
product, including those listed in 6 NYCRR § 597.2, Table 1, and also does not
mean any hazardous waste.
      (54)   Hazardous waste means any solid waste, defined or listed as a
hazardous waste in 6 NYCRR Part 371.
      (55)   Holding tank means a tank or vault, with no outlet, used for
holding sewage before it is pumped out and transported elsewhere for treatment
or disposal.
      (56)   Hot spot runoff means runoff from an area where land use or
activities generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of
pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater, such as vehicle
service and maintenance facilities, fleet storage areas, industrial sites,
marinas, and facilities that generate or store hazardous materials. Runoff from
residential, institutional, and office development, non-industrial rooftops,
roads, and pervious surfaces is not generally hot spot runoff.
      (57)   Hydrologic soil group means the designation of soils based on the
National Engineering Handbook, Part 630, Chapter 7, Hydrologic Soil Groups,
U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Resources Conservation Service, 2009
in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups, ranging from
A soils, with high permeability and little runoff production, to D soils, which
have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff.
      (58)   Hypolimnion means the lower, cooler layer of a lake during thermal
stratification.
      (59)   Impervious surface means an area which is either impervious to
water or which substantially prevents the infiltration of water into the soil
at that location. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, paving,
concrete, asphalt, rooftops, and other hard surfacing materials, and do not
include dirt, crushed stone, gravel surfaces, or other surfacing materials
determined by the Department to be pervious for their intended purpose.
      (60)   Individual residence means a building consisting of one or two
residential units.
      (61)   Individual sewage treatment system means an on-site subsurface
sewage treatment system serving one or two family residential properties and
receiving sewage without the admixture of industrial wastes or other wastes, as
defined in the Environmental Conservation Law § 17-0701.
      (62)   Industrial waste means any liquid, gaseous, solid or waste
substance or a combination thereof resulting from any process of industry,
manufacturing, trade or business, or from the development or recovery of any
natural resources, which may cause or might reasonably be expected to cause
contamination to or degradation of the water supply.
      (63)   Infiltration means water, other than wastewater, that enters a
sewer system, including sewer service connections, from the ground through such
means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manholes. Infiltration
does not include, and is distinguished from, inflow and from treatment of
runoff by stormwater infiltration practices.
      (64)   Inflow means water other than wastewater that enters a sewer
system, including sewer service connections, from sources such as, but not
limited to, roof leaders, cellar drains, yard drains, area drains, foundation
drains, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections
between storm sewers and sanitary sewers, catch basins, cooling towers, storm
waters, surface runoff, street wash waters, or drainage. Inflow does not
include, and is distinguished from, infiltration.
      (65)   In situ soil means naturally occurring glacial soil; it does not
include fill or stabilized fill.
      (66)   Intake means the points in the New York City water supply located
prior to the point of disinfection where the water is no longer subject to
surface runoff.
      (67)   Intermediate sized sewage treatment system means an on-site
subsurface sewage treatment system serving an industrial, institutional,
municipal, commercial, or multi-family residential facility, and receiving
sewage without the admixture of industrial wastes or other wastes, as defined
in the Environmental Conservation Law § 17-0701.
      (68)   Intermittent stream means a watercourse that during certain times
of the year goes dry or whose lowest annual mean discharge during seven
consecutive days with a recurrence interval of ten years (MA7CD/10) is less
than 0.1 cubic foot per second and which periodically receives groundwater
inflow. A drainage ditch, swale or surface feature that contains water only
during and immediately after a rainstorm or a snow melt shall not be considered
to be an intermittent stream.
      (69)   Junkyard means any place of storage or deposit, whether in
connection with another business or not, where four or more unregistered, old,
or second hand motor vehicles, no longer intended or in condition for legal use
on the public highways, are held, whether for the purpose of resale of used
parts, for the purpose of reclaiming for use some or all of the materials such
as metal, glass, or fabric for the purpose of disposing of the same, or for any
other purpose.
      (70)   Land clearing means the exposure of soil by devegetation or the
exposure of soil to the forces of erosion.
      (71)   Land grading means the removal, addition or alteration of surface
or subsurface conditions of land by excavation or filling.
      (72)   Limiting distance means the shortest horizontal distance from the
nearest point of a structure or object to the edge, margin or steep bank
forming the ordinary high water mark of a watercourse, wetland, reservoir,
reservoir stem or controlled lake or to the contour line coinciding with the
reservoir spillway elevation.
      (73)   Mapped stream means a protected stream as defined in 6 NYCRR §
608.1.
      (74)   Metalimnion means an intermediate zone between the epilimnion and
hypolimnion where the water temperature drops rapidly with increasing depth.
      (75)   Microfiltration means a process in which treated effluent passes
through a membrane filter having a nominal pore diameter of 0.2 microns or
less.
      (76)   Multi-family residence means a building containing three (3) or
more residential units.
      (77)   Municipal solid waste landfill means a landfill, as defined in 6
NYCRR § 360.2, which is owned or operated by a municipality.
      (78)   New, where used to describe storage of hazardous substances,
storage of petroleum products, and the siting of junkyards and solid waste
management facilities, means undertaken, constructed, installed, or implemented
after May 1, 1997.
      (79)   Noncomplying regulated activity means any regulated activity or
existing activity which does not conform to the standards set forth in these
rules and regulations, but has obtained all discretionary approvals necessary
for construction and operation, prior to the effective date of these rules and
regulations and/or prior to the effective date of an amendment to these rules
and regulations that made the activity noncomplying.
      (80)   Nonpoint source pollution means pollution sources which are
diffuse and do not have a single point of origin or are not introduced into a
receiving stream from a point source.
      (81)   NYCRR means the Official Compilation of Codes, Rules and
Regulations of the State of New York.
      (82)   Offset means a reduction in the discharge of phosphorus into a
drainage basin which is surplus, quantifiable, permanent, and enforceable, as
defined herein:
         (i)   Surplus means that the reduction in phosphorus is not otherwise
required by federal, state or local law, including these rules and regulations,
or pursuant to the terms of any judgment, decree or order of any court,
administrative tribunal or governmental agency, or pursuant to any watershed
protection program funded by the Department, except as provided in 15 RCNY §§
18-83(a)(3) and
18-84(a)(3).
         (ii)   Quantifiable means that a reasonable basis exists for
calculating and verifying the amount of the reduction in phosphorus.
         (iii)   Permanent means that the reduction in phosphorus is ongoing
and of unlimited duration, as opposed to a temporary reduction.
         (iv)   Enforceable means that the actions and performance standards
proposed by the applicant leading to the reduction in phosphorus are
incorporated into a legally valid and binding agreement which may be enforced
by the City in a court of competent jurisdiction.
      (83)   One hundred-year, twenty-four hour storm means the storm, with a
twenty-four hour duration, that statistically has a one percent chance of
occurring in any given year, as set forth in the "New York State Stormwater
Design Manual," New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (2015).
      (84)   One-year, twenty-four hour storm means the storm, with a twenty-
four hour duration, that statistically has a 100 percent chance of occurring in
any given year, as set forth in the "New York State Stormwater Design Manual,"
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (2015).
      (85)   Operator means any person who leases, operates, controls or
supervises a facility.
      (86)   Owner means any person who has legal or equitable title to a
facility.
      (87)   Pathogenic means capable of causing disease from organisms,
including but not limited to: bacteria, fungi, viruses, and protozoa (such as
Giardia and Cryptosporidium).
      (88)   Person means any individual, public or private corporation,
political entity, agency, municipality, industry, co-partnership, association,
firm, trust, estate or any other legal entity whatsoever, except that person
shall not mean the State of New York or any State department, agency, board,
public benefit corporation, public authority or commission.
      (89)   Perennial stream means a watercourse that flows throughout the
year from source to mouth.
      (90)   Pesticide means (i) any substance or mixture of substances
intended for preventing, destroying, repelling, or mitigating any insects,
rodents, fungi, weeds, or other forms of plant or animal life or viruses,
except viruses on or in living humans, or other animals, which the Commissioner
of the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation shall declare to
be a pest or (ii) any substance or mixture of substances intended as a plant
regulator, defoliant or desiccant.
      (91)   Petroleum product means oil or petroleum of any kind and in any
form including, but not limited to, oil, petroleum, fuel oil, oil sludge, oil
refuse, oil mixed with other wastes and crude oils, gasoline and kerosene.
      (92)   Phosphorus restricted basin means (i) the drainage basin of a
source water reservoir in which the phosphorus load to the reservoir results in
the phosphorus concentration in the reservoir exceeding 15 micrograms per
liter, or (ii) the drainage basin of a reservoir other than a source water
reservoir or of a controlled lake in which the phosphorus load to the reservoir
or controlled lake results in the phosphorus concentration in the reservoir or
controlled lake exceeding 20 micrograms per liter in both instances as
determined by the Department pursuant to its annual review conducted under 15
RCNY §
18-48(e).
      (93)   Photic zone means the region of a lake that receives light, where
photosynthesis takes place. The photic zone extends down to a depth where
photosynthetic activity and respiration are balanced due to the available
light, or to one percent surface illumination.
      (94)   Point source means any discernible, confined and discrete
conveyance, including but not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel,
conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, or vessel or other
floating craft, or landfill leachate collection system, from which pollutants
are or may be discharged.
      (95)   Pollutant means unpermitted dredged spoil, solid waste,
incinerator residue, sewage, effluent, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical waste, biological material, radioactive material, heat, wrecked or
discarded equipment, rock, sand, and industrial and municipal waste discharged
into water.
      (96)   Portable toilet means a non-waterborne sewage system with offsite
residual disposal, as identified in 10 NYCRR Appendix 75-A.
      (97)   Principal means an agency or person that owns 10 percent or more
of the voting stock or has the ability to control a corporation, partnership or
other entity.
      (98)   Qualifying municipal sewer use law means a local law or ordinance
that includes provisions substantially similar to Articles 1 - 3, 5 - 7, 11 -
14 and the Appendix of the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation Model Sewer Use Law, dated 1994, or which the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation has otherwise accepted pursuant to the
SPDES permit for the wastewater treatment plant served by a municipal sewer
system.
      (99)   Radioactive material means any material in any form that emits
radiation spontaneously.
      (100)   Redevelopment means the reconstruction or modification of any
previously developed land such as residential, commercial, industrial, or road/
highway, which involves soil disturbance. Redevelopment is distinguished from
new development in that new development refers to soil disturbance on land
which has not been developed. The term "redevelopment" specifically applies to
areas previously developed with impervious surfaces.
      (101)   Regulated activity means any activity to which these rules and
regulations apply, as described in subdivisions (a) - (d) of 15 RCNY §
18-14.
      (102)   Remediation means the repair or replacement, other than routine
repair or maintenance as described in 15 RCNY §
18-38(b)(5)(iii) of Subchapter C, of a subsurface sewage treatment system.
Remediation does not include alteration or modification as defined in these
rules and regulations.
      (103)   Reserve absorption field means an area identified in the design
for a subsurface sewage treatment system as suitable for infiltration of sewage
to the soil by means of a network of pipes.
      (104)   Reservoir means any natural or artificial impoundment of water
owned or controlled by the City which is tributary to the City Water supply
system.
      (105)   Reservoir stem means any watercourse segment which is tributary
to a reservoir and lies within 500 feet or less of the reservoir.
      (106)   Residential lot(s) means any parcel of land of five acres or
less, any point on the boundary line of which is less than one-half mile from
any point on the boundary line of another such lot in the same tract, unless
any such lot may not legally be used for residential purposes. Without limiting
the generality of the foregoing, the term "residential" shall include
temporary, seasonal and permanent residential use.
      (107)   Sediment means organic or mineral solids or colloids that are
transported by the process of hydrologic, hydraulic, or atmospheric transport,
including but not limited to erosion.
      (108)   Sewage means the water-carried human or animal wastes from
residences, buildings, industrial establishments or other places, together with
such groundwater infiltration and surface water as may be present. The
admixture of sewage with industrial waste or any other waste as herein defined,
shall also be considered "sewage" within the meaning of these rules and
regulations.
      (109)   Sewer connection means the connection between a building,
residence, or other structure and a sewer system except that any connection
designed and intended to convey 2,500 gallons per day or more of sewage,
industrial waste or other wastes shall be considered a sewer extension. Sewer
connections designed to facilitate additional sewer connections, which are
proposed on or after November 29, 2019, shall be considered sewer extensions.
      (110)   Sewer extension means newly constructed sewer pipe lines or
conduits, and pumping stations and other constructions appurtenant thereto,
designed to serve one or more sewer connections and to convey sewage,
industrial waste or other wastes to a sewer system.
      (111)   Sewer system means pipe lines or conduits, pumping stations, and
force mains, and all other constructions, devices, and appliances appurtenant
thereto, including sewer extensions, used for conducting sewage, industrial
waste or other wastes to a treatment facility.
      (112)   Silvicultural activity means the removal of selected trees within
a specified boundary designated by the owner of the property so that adequate
numbers of trees are left to provide seed and partial shade for the development
of new tree seedlings, and when such activity is in accordance with Federal,
State and local laws.
      (113)   Small quantity generator has the meaning set forth in 6 NYCRR §
370.2(b)(154).
      (114)   Solid waste means all putrescible and non-putrescible materials
or substances that are discarded, abandoned, or rejected as being spent,
useless, worthless or in excess to the owners at the time of such discard or
rejection, including but not limited to garbage, refuse, industrial and
commercial waste, sludges from air or water treatment facilities, rubbish,
tires, ashes, contained gaseous material, incinerator residue, construction and
demolition debris, discarded automobiles and offal, except where exempt from
compliance with 6 NYCRR Part 360 as described in 6 NYCRR § 360.2(a)(3).
      (115)   Solid waste management facility means any facility employed
beyond the initial solid waste collection process and managing solid waste, as
defined in 6 NYCRR § 360.2.
      (116)   Source water reservoir means Ashokan, Cross River, Croton Falls,
Kensico, New Croton, Rondout, and West Branch Reservoirs.
      (117)   SPDES flow parameter violation means two or more violations of a
permitted State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) flow parameter
limit during a consecutive six month period. A facility that operates less than
6 months per year will be deemed to have a SPDES flow parameter violation if
the permitted SPDES flow parameter limit is violated one or more times during
any consecutive four month period.
      (118)   State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) permit means
a permit issued pursuant to Titles 7 and 8 of Article 17 of the Environmental
Conservation Law.
      (119)   Stormwater means that portion of precipitation that is in excess
of the evaporative or infiltrative capacity of soils, or the retentive capacity
of surface features, that flows off the land by surface runoff or by subsurface
interflow to watercourses, wetlands, reservoirs, reservoir stems and controlled
lakes, i.e., that portion of the water supplied to surface drainage that is not
groundwater or base flow.
      (120)   Stormwater bioretention practice means a stormwater management
practice that uses landscaping and soils to treat stormwater runoff by
collecting it in shallow depressions, before filtering through a fabricated
planting soil media.
      (121)   Stormwater conveyance measure means a swale, drainage ditch,
pipe, spillway, or other structure located outside a stormwater management
practice that is used solely to transport water between stormwater management
practices or to a watercourse or wetland. A stormwater conveyance measure
constructed to convey stormwater, on a temporary basis, during active
construction, which will not be used as a stormwater conveyance measure after
construction is complete, is not considered a watercourse under this Chapter. A
stormwater conveyance measure that contains water only during and immediately
after a rainstorm or a snowmelt is not considered a watercourse.
      (122)   Stormwater infiltration practice means a stormwater management
practice designed to collect and temporarily store runoff and to distribute
that runoff to the underlying soil for treatment.
      (123)   Stormwater management practice means a stormwater pond,
stormwater wetland (also known as a constructed wetland), infiltration system,
filter practice, or open channel used primarily for managing and/or treating
stormwater, including a Department approved alternative stormwater management
practice.
      (124)   Stormwater Project Review Committee ("Committee") means a
Committee formed in each Town or Village in the watershed to assist the
Department in implementing 15 RCNY §
18-39(b) and (c), and consisting of the following four Committee members: a
representative of the Department, who shall act as chairperson; a
representative of the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
from the region in which the activity requiring a stormwater pollution
prevention plan is proposed to be located; a representative of the Town or
Village in which the activity requiring a stormwater pollution prevention plan
is proposed to be located or if no one is designated by the Town, or if the
activity is proposed for a village, the Village, a representative of the
appropriate County Planning Department, provided, however, that a Town, or if
the activity is proposed for a village, the Village, may at any time designate
a representative to replace the one designated by the County Planning
Department; and a representative of the County Department of Health from the
County in which the activity requiring a stormwater pollution prevention plan
is proposed to be located, or in a County without a County Department of
Health, a representative of the County Soil and Water Conservation Service.
      (125)   Stormwater retrofit means any construction of a structural
stormwater management practice in a previously developed area, the modification
of a structural stormwater management practice, or the implementation of a
nonstructural practice to improve stormwater management and/or stormwater
treatment over current conditions.
      (126)   Stratification means the physical condition caused primarily by
temperature-created differences in water density, which results in the
formation of a warm, surface layer (epilimnion), a zone of transition
(metalimnion), and a cooler, deep layer of water (hypolimnion).
      (127)   Subdivision means any tract of land which is divided into five or
more parcels of five acres or less, along an existing or proposed street,
highway, easement or right-of-way, for sale or for rent as residential lots. A
tract of land shall constitute a subdivision upon the sale, rental or offer for
sale or lease of the fifth residential lot therefrom within any consecutive
three year period.
      (128)   Subsurface discharge means discharge to an absorption area, i.e.,
a process designed to allow filtered, treated sewage effluent to be discharged
into the ground as a means of ultimate disposal.
      (129)   Subsurface sewage treatment system means any underground system
used for collecting, treating, and disposing of sewage into the ground
including, but not limited to, individual and intermediate sized sewage
treatment systems, as defined in these rules and regulations.
      (130)   Superintendent, where used in connection with a municipality with
a qualifying municipal sewer use law, means "superintendent" as defined in that
law.
      (131)   Ten-year, twenty-four hour storm means the storm, with a twenty-
four hour duration, that statistically has a ten percent chance of occurring in
any given year, as set forth in the "New York State Stormwater Design Manual,"
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (2015).
      (132)   Terminal reservoir means Kensico, West Branch, New Croton,
Ashokan and Rondout Reservoirs.
      (133)   Two-year, twenty-four hour storm means the storm, with a twenty-
four hour duration, that statistically has a fifty percent chance of occurring
in any given year, as set forth in the "New York State Stormwater Design
Manual," New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (2015).
      (134)   Ulster County Fill System means a subsurface sewage treatment
system used in Ulster County which has been approved by the New York State
Department of Health for use in Ulster County and which is built upon two (2)
feet of in situ soil that has a percolation rate between 3 to 60 minutes/inch,
and which uses at least four (4) feet of fill material, including at least
three (3) feet between the bottom of the trench and the in situ soil, that has
a percolation rate between 3 and 10 minutes/inch. Ulster County Fill Systems
may be used on individual lots or in subdivisions in Ulster County and may also
be used in a county other than Ulster if the New York State Department of
Health has approved the system for use in such other county.
      (135)   Village means a territory which has been incorporated as a
village pursuant to Article 2 of the New York State Village Law.
      (136)   Village extension means an area immediately adjoining a main road
extending outside an existing village which has been designated as a village
extension by a Town Board in the West of Hudson watershed and described in a
Water Supply Permit duly issued by the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation or in any written agreement among the affected
parties to the 1997 New York City Watershed Memorandum of Agreement, including
the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
      (137)   Wastewater treatment plant means any facility which treats sewage
or discharges treated effluent not intended to receive further treatment in the
watershed, and which requires a permit under Titles 7 or 8 of Article 17 of the
Environmental Conservation Law. A wastewater treatment plant is installed for
the purpose of treating, neutralizing, stabilizing or disposing of sewage by
removal of contaminants accomplished by unit operations or processes or by a
combination of such operations and processes as may be applicable to a given
design for a wastewater treatment plant. Wastewater treatment plants shall not
include intermediate sized sewage treatment systems as defined in these rules
and regulations.
      (138)   Water Quality Volume (WQv) means the storage needed to capture
and treat 90% of the average annual stormwater runoff volume. WQv is calculated
as follows:
         WQv = (P)(Rv)(A) 
            12
         where:
            WQv = water quality volume (in acre-feet)
            P = 90% Rain Event Number as set forth in the "New York State
Stormwater Design Manual," New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation (2015).
            Rv = 0.05 + 0.009(I), where I is percent impervious cover
            A = site area in acres
      (139)   Water supply means the New York City public water supply system,
and includes all watercourses, wetlands, reservoirs, reservoir stems and
controlled lakes tributary thereto.
      (140)   Watercourse means a visible path through which surface water
travels on a regular basis, including an intermittent stream, which is
tributary to the water supply. A drainage ditch, swale or surface feature that
contains water only during and immediately after a rainstorm or a snowmelt
shall not be considered to be a watercourse.
      (141)   Watershed means the land area contributing surface water to the
New York City water supply.
      (142)   Watershed Agricultural Council means the Watershed Agricultural
Council for the New York City Watershed, Inc., a not-for-profit organization
with its principal place of business at 33195 State Highway 10, Walton, New
York 13856.
      (143)   West of Hudson watershed means the Ashokan, Cannonsville,
Pepacton, Neversink, Rondout, and Schoharie Reservoirs and their drainage
basins.
      (144)   Wetland means an area in the watershed that was mapped by the New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation as a regulated wetland on
or before December 31, 2024.
      (145)   Winter highway maintenance materials means the solid compounds or
the solutions that are commonly used for traction on, or for the abatement of,
winter road ice, including, but not limited to, chloride compounds, and
mixtures of sand and chloride compounds.
(Amended City Record 10/30/2019, eff. 11/29/2019; Amended City Record 1/29/
2025, eff. 2/28/2025)
§ 18-17 References.
The following laws, guidance documents, regulations or technical material have
been incorporated by reference in this 15 RCNY
Chapter 18. These references are available online at the web pages listed below
and for physical inspection and copying at the Department of Environmental
Protection, Bureau of Water Supply, Division of Water Quality, 465 Columbus
Avenue, Valhalla, New York, 10595, and at the New York State Department of
Health, Office of Regulatory Affairs, Tower Building, Room 2415, Empire State
Plaza, Albany, NY 12237, or can be directly obtained from the sources listed
for the given reference.
      (1)   Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards, 40 C.F.R. Part 403,
1992, Superintendent of Documents, United States Government Printing Office,
Washington, D.C. 20402, available at https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-40/
chapter-I/subchapter-N/part-403.
      (2)   USDA Soil Conservation Service Soil Type Boundaries, USDA SCS, Room
771, Federal Building, 100 South Clinton Street, P.O. Box 7248, Syracuse, New
York 13261-7248, available at https://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/.
      (3)   National Engineering Handbook, Part 630, Chapter 7, Hydrologic Soil
Groups, U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Resources Conservation
Service, 2009, U.S. Department of Agriculture 1400 Independence Ave.,
Washington, D.C. 20250, available at https://efotg.sc.egov.usda.gov/references/
public/FL/FL7-3a-b.pdf.
      (4)   New York State Department of Environmental Conservation Technical
and Operational Guidance Series (TOGS) 1.1.1, Ambient Water Quality Standards
and Guidance Values and Groundwater Effluent Limitations (October 22, 1993,
Reissue Date June 1998, as modified and supplemented by the January 1999 Errata
Sheet and the April 2000 and June 2004 Addenda), New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation, 625 Broadway, Albany, New York 12233, available at
https://extapps.dec.ny.gov/docs/water_pdf/togs111.pdf.
      (5)   New York State Department of Environmental Conservation Technical
and Operational Guidance Series (TOGS) 1.3.1, Total Maximum Daily Loads and
Water Quality Based Effluent Limits (July 8, 1996, Revised February 1998),
including Amendments A through E (July 8, 1996), New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation, 625 Broadway, Albany, New York 12233.
      (6)   New York State Department of Environmental Conservation Technical
and Operational Guidance Series (TOGS) 1.3.1B, Total Maximum Daily Loads and
Water Quality-Based Effluent Limits, Amendments-Low and Intermittent Stream
Standards (July 8, 1996), New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation, 625 Broadway, Albany, New York 12233, available at https://
extapps.dec.ny.gov/docs/water_pdf/togsb96.pdf.
      (7)   New York State Department of Environmental Conservation SPDES
General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Construction Activity, Permit No.
GP-0-15-002, Effective January 29, 2015, New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation, 625 Broadway, Albany, New York 12233, available at
https://www.nyc.gov/site/dep/environment/regulations.page.
      (8)   New York State Design Standards for Intermediate Sized Wastewater
Treatment Systems, 2014, New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation, 625 Broadway, Albany, New York 12233, available at https://
extapps.dec.ny.gov/docs/water_pdf/2014designstd.pdf.
      (9)   New York State Stormwater Design Manual, 2015, New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation, 625 Broadway, Albany, New York 12233,
available at https://extapps.dec.ny.gov/fs/docs/pdf/
stormwaterdesignmanual2015.pdf.
      (10)   Model Sewer Use Law, 1994, New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation, 625 Broadway, Albany, New York 12233, available at
available at https://extapps.dec.ny.gov/docs/water_pdf/modelseweruselaw.pdf.
      (11)   Recommended Standards for Wastewater Facilities, Great Lakes-Upper
Mississippi River Board of State and Provincial Public Health and Environmental
Managers, 2014, Health Education Services, Health Education Services Division,
P.O. Box 7126, Albany, New York 12224, available at https://extapps.dec.ny.gov/
fs/projects/spdes/TenStateStrdsWastewater.pdf.
      (12)   Maps delineating New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation regulated wetlands in the watershed on or before December 31,
2024, available at https://www.nyc.gov/site/dep/environment/regulations.page.
(Amended City Record 10/30/2019, eff. 11/29/2019; Amended City Record 1/29/
2025, eff. 2/28/2025)
**** Subchapter B: Standards and Procedures for Regulated Activities and
Noncomplying Regulated Activities ****
§ 18-21 Standards for Regulated Activities.
   (a)   The following general standards apply to all regulated activities
unless specifically noted otherwise, whether or not the regulated activity also
requires the review and approval of the Department. In addition, certain
regulated activities must meet additional standards or procedures where
specifically set forth in this subchapter or in other subchapters:
      (1)   All regulated activities shall be planned, designed, scheduled and
conducted in such manner as to not constitute a source of contamination to or
degradation of the water supply.
      (2)   The Department shall base its review and approval of any regulated
activity on compliance with these rules and regulations, including the water
quality standards set forth in Subchapter D, and shall additionally take into
consideration the system specific water quality characteristics set forth in
Appendix 18-B.
      (3)   The burden of demonstrating compliance with the requirements of
these rules and regulations shall be on the person proposing to engage in a
regulated activity. In the event that any person finds that compliance with any
standard set forth in these rules and regulations is not possible, then she or
he may apply for a variance in accordance with the provisions of Subchapter F
of these rules and regulations. Variances may be granted provided that the
Department makes the findings required by Subchapter F of these rules and
regulations.
      (4)   Failure to comply with the conditions of any approval issued by the
Department under these rules and regulations shall be a violation of these
rules and regulations.
      (5)   The Department may order that a regulated activity cease, and/or a
facility where such regulated activity is taking place be closed or removed, if
such regulated activity is causing contamination to or degradation of the water
supply, such that the activity is a threat to the life, health, or safety of
water supply users that requires immediate corrective action. Any person who
receives such an order may request a hearing on such order in the manner
provided in 15 RCNY §
18-29.
§ 18-22 Procedures for Notification and/or Reporting.
Where any notification, application or reporting to the Department required by
these rules and regulations is to be made in writing, it shall be sent by
certified mail to both the local Department representative in the portion of
the watershed in which the regulated activity takes place and to the
Engineering Section. Addresses are listed in 15 RCNY §
18-15.
§ 18-23 Application Procedures and Requirements.
   (a)   These procedures shall apply to the following:
      (1)   Applications for review and approval of regulated activities,
including renewals of approvals of regulated activities. An application for
renewal of an approval of a regulated activity shall be submitted to the
Department no less than 180 days prior to the expiration of the approval. This
deadline shall apply unless stated otherwise in a special condition of the
approval.
      (2)   Applications for review and approval of a substantial alteration or
modification of any regulated activity;
      (3)   Applications for review and approval of any substantial alteration
or modification of a noncomplying regulated activity; and
      (4)   Applications for variances pursuant to Subchapter F of these rules
and regulations.
   (b)   The applicant shall meet the following requirements:
      (1)   No person shall undertake any activity listed in 15 RCNY §
18-14 which requires the review and approval of the Department without first
obtaining written approval from the Department, except where a temporary
emergency approval has been obtained from the Department pursuant to 15 RCNY §
18-24.
      (2)   Any person proposing to undertake any activity listed in 15 RCNY §
18-14 which requires the review and approval of the Department, shall submit to
the Department, at the address of the Department representative for the area
where the regulated activity is to be undertaken set forth in 15 RCNY §
18-15, an application for review and approval which includes a plan of the
activity which meets the requirements of this subchapter and any additional
requirements for the specific activity set forth in these rules and
regulations. Failure by the applicant to submit information to the Department
or to follow the Department procedures set forth in these rules and regulations
is sufficient grounds to deny the approval.
      (3)   Any person seeking approval of an activity may be subject to such
terms and conditions as the Department may require, including time limitations
and limitations on transfer of the approval given by the Department.
      (4)   (i)   An applicant shall affirmatively state in the application
whether any enforcement action has been commenced during the five (5) years
preceding the application against the applicant, or any principal or affiliate
of the applicant, for alleged violations of law related to the specific
regulated activity for which the approval is sought, or related to the facility
or site at which the activity is located. The applicant shall supply the
following information with respect to each enforcement action: the agency or
entity commencing the action, the date of commencement, the facility location
and address where the alleged violation occurred, and disposition of the
action.
         (ii)   Failure to fully and accurately disclose any material
information required to be disclosed pursuant to subparagraph 4(i) shall be a
basis for the Department to deny a permit application.
         (iii)   Failure to cure any adjudicated violation of this Chapter or
any law, rule or regulation enforced by the Department shall be a basis to deny
a permit application.
         (iv)   If the Department or the City has commenced an enforcement
action against the applicant for violations of law related to the facility or
site at which the activity for which the approval is sought is located, the
Department may suspend processing of the application until such alleged
violations are cured.
      (5)   Any property owner may request that the Department perform a site
visit and evaluation to determine and flag the presence of a watercourse,
reservoir, reservoir stem or controlled lake on the owner's property. If the
property owner supplies the Department with a surveyor's map of the property
which includes a representation of the flagged watercourses, reservoirs,
reservoir stems or controlled lakes identified by the Department, the
Department shall confirm or annotate the findings upon the surveyor's map as
soon as is practicable. A confirmed survey map shall be binding upon the
Department for five years following the date of the confirmation.
      (6)   If an applicant for Department review and approval of a regulated
activity requests that the Department conduct a site visit and evaluation to
determine and flag the presence of a watercourse, reservoir, reservoir stem or
controlled lake on the applicant's property the Department shall do so as soon
as is practicable. If the applicant supplies the Department with a surveyor's
map of the property which includes a representation of the flagged
watercourses, reservoirs, reservoir stems or controlled lakes identified by the
Department, the Department shall confirm or annotate the findings upon the
surveyor's map within 20 business days of receipt thereof. A confirmed survey
map shall be binding upon the Department for five years following the date of
the confirmation. The absence of a Department confirmed surveyor's map will not
cause an application to be considered incomplete.
   (c)   An application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   An application for the review and approval of any activity listed
in 15 RCNY §
18-14 shall provide a description of the activity, the location and topography
of the area of the activity, identification of any existing structures at the
location, and any engineering, construction or other plans which detail the
methods to be used in undertaking the activity such that it shall meet the
requirements of this subchapter and any additional requirements for the
specific activity set forth in these rules and regulations.
      (2)   An application for review and approval of any activity listed in 15
RCNY §
18-14 shall include a copy of any Environmental Assessment Form (EAF), and
either a Draft Environmental Impact Statement (DEIS) or a determination of
nonsignificance by the lead agency, where such documents are prepared pursuant
to Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law and the rules and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
      (3)   When a regulated activity requires a related approval from any
other agency or more than one approval from the Department, the application for
review and approval shall include a list of such approvals which the applicant
knows to be required, and a statement of the status of any required approval at
the time of filing of the application with the Department.
      (4)   An application for review and approval of any regulated activity
shall include the name, address, telephone number, email address, and fax
number of the applicant or the applicant's authorized representative, and of
the design professional(s), if any, involved in preparing the application.
   (d)   Review and Approval Procedures.
      (1)   The applicant proposing to engage in any activity listed in 15 RCNY
§
18-14 which requires the review and approval of the Department shall certify in
writing that she or he believes that the application is complete and in
compliance with the requirements of this subchapter and any additional
requirements for the specific activity set forth in these rules and
regulations.
      (2)   An application is complete when it is determined by the Department
to contain sufficient information for the purpose of commencing review of the
application. The Department retains the right to seek additional information in
order to enable the Department to make a determination pursuant to these rules
and regulations. Within ten (10) days of receiving an application for review
and approval of a conventional individual sewage treatment system to be
installed on an individual lot which is not within a subdivision, or within
twenty (20) days of receiving any other type of application for review or
approval, the Department shall either:
         (i)   Notify the applicant in writing that the application is complete
and that the Department shall commence its review; or
         (ii)   Notify the applicant in writing that the application is
incomplete and specifically request all additional information from the
applicant as the Department deems necessary. If additional information is
requested or comments are issued by the Department that need to be addressed by
the applicant, the twenty (20) day period described in paragraph (d)(4) of this
subdivision or the forty-five (45) day period described in paragraph (d)(5) of
this subdivision shall not commence to run. The Department shall notify the
applicant in writing within ten (10) days of receiving the additional
information that has been requested either that the application is complete and
that the Department has commenced its review or that further information is
required.
         (iii)   Except in cases where the applicant has submitted false or
misleading information or where a change in relevant law has occurred or
changes have been proposed for the project, the Department may require further
information based only upon the additional information submitted by the
applicant or new issues raised by such information. In addition, the Department
may also require further information based on a change in ownership of the
property, the identity of the applicant, or the identity of the applicant's
owners, principals, shareholders, directors, or officers.
      (3)   If the Department fails to notify an applicant in writing of its
determination as to the completeness or incompleteness of the application
within the time periods set forth in paragraph (d)(2) of this subdivision, the
applicant may notify the Department of its failure by means of certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the local Department representative identified in
15 RCNY §
18-15 who is responsible for processing the application and a copy to the
Engineering Section. If the Department fails to notify the applicant of its
determination as to the completeness or incompleteness of the application
within ten (10) business days of receiving the notice, the application shall be
deemed complete as of the eleventh day.
      (4)   The Department shall notify the applicant in writing of its
determination within twenty (20) days of determining that an application for
review and approval of a conventional individual sewage treatment system to be
installed on an individual lot which is not within a subdivision is complete
pursuant to the procedures set forth in paragraph (d)(2) of this subdivision
unless the Department and the applicant mutually agree in writing upon an
extension of the twenty (20) day review period. If, during the twenty (20) day
review period, the Department requests revisions to the application, the review
period shall be suspended from the date such request is made until the date on
which the Department receives such revisions, provided that the Department
shall have no fewer than ten (10) days from the date of receipt to issue a
determination.
      (5)   For all applications for review and approval, other than for a
conventional individual sewage treatment system to be installed on an
individual lot which is not within a subdivision, the Department shall notify
an applicant in writing of its determination within forty-five (45) days of
notifying the applicant that the application is complete pursuant to the
procedures set forth in paragraph (d)(2) of this subdivision unless the
Department and the applicant mutually agree in writing upon an extension of the
forty-five (45) day review period. If, during the forty-five (45) day review
period, the Department requests revisions to the application, the review period
shall be suspended from the date such request is made until the date on which
the Department receives such revisions, provided that the Department shall have
no fewer than ten (10) days from the date of receipt to issue a determination.
      (6)   If the Department fails to notify an applicant in writing of its
determination within the twenty (20) day time period as set forth in paragraph
(d)(4) of this subdivision or the forty-five (45) day time period as set forth
in paragraph (d)(5) of this subdivision, the applicant may notify the
Department of its failure by means of certified mail, return receipt requested
to the local Department representative identified in 15 RCNY §
18-15 who is responsible for processing the application and a copy to
Regulatory and Engineering Programs. The notice shall contain the applicant's
name, location of the proposed project, the office in which the application was
filed, and a statement that a decision is sought in accordance with this
subdivision. Any notice failing to provide this information will not invoke
this provision.
         (i)   If the Department fails to notify the applicant of its decision
within ten (10) business days of the receipt of such notice, the application
shall be deemed approved subject to the standard terms and conditions
applicable to such an approval.
      (7)   Notwithstanding the time period for notifying an applicant of the
Department's determination specified in paragraphs (d)(4), (d)(5) and (d)(6) of
this section, if a lead agency has determined that a project may have a
significant effect on the environment for purposes of the State Environmental
Quality Review Act (SEQRA), such time periods shall be suspended pending
receipt from the lead agency of either a Final Environmental Impact Statement
(FEIS) or a determination of nonsignificance. Upon receipt of either document,
the time periods shall resume, provided, however, that the Department shall
have at least twenty (20) days to notify an applicant of its determination.
      (8)   Notwithstanding the time periods for decisions specified in this
subdivision, the Department may condition an approval on the applicant
providing satisfactory proof of any bonds required by the Department within
thirty days of the applicant receiving the conditional approval from the
Department.
      (9)   Any notice required or permitted to be given by the Department
under this subchapter shall be given in such manner designed to reach the
applicant, as the Department deems appropriate, and may include, but is not
limited to, regular mail, certified mail return receipt requested, or
telecopier.
(Amended City Record 10/30/2019, eff. 11/29/2019)
§ 18-24 Emergency Procedures.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, where an
expedited review and approval of a regulated activity is necessary to respond
to an imminent threat to the health and safety of humans or animals, or to
respond to a substantial imminent threat to property, an applicant seeking such
review and approval shall notify the Department by telephone at the office of
the local representative listed in 15 RCNY §
18-15, and shall meet with the Department within 24 hours. At the meeting the
applicant shall present to the representative of the Department such available
information regarding the regulated activity as would otherwise be required in
a written application for review and approval of the regulated activity.
Additionally, the applicant shall provide an explanation of the nature of the
imminent threat that necessitates the expedited review. The Department shall
review the information supplied by the applicant and shall issue a temporary
determination to approve or disapprove the application within 24 hours of
receipt of the information required by this subdivision.
      (1)   An applicant shall not be required to notify the Department before
undertaking the routine repair and maintenance of a subsurface sewage treatment
system, including, but not limited to, the pump-out of a septic tank, the
repair of a broken lateral, the leveling of a distribution box, or the removal
of a blockage.
   (b)   An approval granted by the Department pursuant to the emergency
expedited review procedure shall be a temporary approval only, and shall not be
considered to be a final approval of the Department. The temporary approval may
contain conditions and time limitations and shall be limited to whatever
actions are necessary to abate the imminent threat. A final approval shall be
issued by the Department only after review and approval of a complete written
application submitted in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth
in subdivision (c) of this section, and any other applicable provisions of this
subchapter and these rules and regulations.
   (c)   An applicant who has received a temporary approval for a regulated
activity pursuant to the emergency expedited review procedure shall, within
twenty days of such approval, submit a written application to the Department
containing all of the information required to be provided by these rules and
regulations for the particular regulated activity.
§ 18-25 Optional Pre-application Conference.
   (a)   If a proposed regulated activity requires one or more Department
reviews or approvals, or the preparation of an Environmental Impact Statement
pursuant to the State Environmental Quality Review Act, the prospective
applicant may request an optional pre-application conference with the
appropriate Department staff as a means of clarifying application procedures to
be followed in order to comply with the requirements set forth in these rules
and regulations.
   (b)   The request for a pre-application conference should be made at the
earliest possible stage of the applicant's planning process. Such request shall
be made in writing to the Department representative for the area where the
regulated activity is to be undertaken, as set forth in 15 RCNY §
18-15. A mutually agreed upon time and place shall be scheduled for the pre-
application conference.
   (c)   In order to assist the prospective applicant, prior to the
preapplication conference, the prospective applicant shall submit to the
Department representative the following information:
      (1)   A description of the proposed regulated activity, a site plan or
sketch showing the location and topography of the area of the activity,
identification of any existing structures at the location, and any engineering,
construction or other plans which describe the methods to be used to meet the
requirements of these rules and regulations;
      (2)   A statement of the prospective applicant's timetable and financial
plans for carrying out the proposed regulated activity, if known;
      (3)   A statement of any governmental financial aid, facilities, or other
assistance which the prospective applicant expects to be provided or plans to
request for the regulated activity; and
      (4)   Such other information as the Department deems reasonably
necessary.
   (d)   At the pre-application conference, the proposed project will be
informally discussed. Based on information provided by the applicant, review
and approval requirements will be identified and the applicant will be provided
with guidance concerning the application and review process. Participation in
the preapplication process shall not relieve an applicant from the requirements
of obtaining all approvals otherwise necessary under these rules and
regulations or any other law or rules and regulations, prior to commencing the
regulated activity.
§ 18-26 Modification, Suspension or Revocation of Approvals and Variances.
   (a)   An approval or variance issued by the Department pursuant to these
rules and regulations may be modified, suspended or revoked at any time upon
the Department's initiative, on any of the grounds set forth in paragraphs (1)
through (5) of this subdivision.
      (1)   Materially false or inaccurate statements in the approval or
variance application or supporting documents;
      (2)   Failure by the person named in the approval or variance to comply
with any terms or conditions of the approval or variance;
      (3)   The scope of the project, as described in the application, is
exceeded;
      (4)   Newly discovered material information or a material change in
environmental conditions, relevant technology or applicable law or rules and
regulations since the issuance of the existing approval or variance; or
      (5)   Noncompliance with previously issued approval or variance
conditions, orders of the Commissioner, or with any provisions of the rules and
regulations of the Department related to the activity.
   (b)   The Department shall send a notice of intent to modify, suspend or
revoke an approval or variance to the person named in the approval or variance
by certified mail, return receipt requested or by personal service. The notice
shall specify the ground or grounds on which the modification, suspension, or
revocation is sought, as well as the alleged facts on which the modification,
suspension, or revocation is based.
   (c)   Within fifteen calendar days of receipt of a notice of intent, the
person named in the approval or variance may submit a written statement to the
Department, giving reasons why the approval or variance should not be modified,
suspended or revoked. Failure by such person to timely submit a statement shall
result in the Department's action becoming effective on the date specified in
the notice of intent.
   (d)   Within fifteen calendar days of receipt of such person's statement,
the Department shall either:
      (1)   Rescind the notice of intent based on a review of the information
provided by such person;
      (2)   Confirm the Department's intent to modify, suspend, or revoke the
approval or variance as stated in the notice of intent; or
      (3)   Amend the Department's notice of intent, specifying the
Department's revised intent to modify, suspend, or revoke the approval or
variance.
   (e)   If the Department confirms or amends its intent to modify, suspend, or
revoke the approval or variance, the person named in the approval or variance
may request a hearing on the Department's determination by submitting a
petition in writing to the Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings
("OATH"), and sending a copy of the petition to the Commissioner, within thirty
(30) days of receipt of confirmation of the Department's intent, in accordance
with the following:
      (1)   Form and content of petition. The petition must state the name,
address, and email address of the petitioner and must include a short and plain
statement of the matters to be heard by OATH. The following documents must be
included with the petition: the Department's notice of intent to modify,
suspend, or revoke the approval or variance; the petitioner's statement giving
reasons why the approval or variance should not be modified, suspended or
revoked; the Department's confirmation or amendment of its intent; and a
completed OATH intake sheet. Blank intake sheets are available from the
Department.
      (2)   Department response. Within twenty (20) days of receipt of the
petition, the Commissioner may respond to the petition. If the Commissioner
responds, the Commissioner must include the record on which the determination
was based. A copy of any response shall be sent to the petitioner.
      (3)   Proceedings before the OATH Trials Division. Upon receipt of the
petition for a hearing, OATH shall promptly schedule a hearing at a time and
date which shall not be less than thirty (30) days, nor exceed one hundred
twenty (120) days, from the date of receipt by OATH of the petition for a
hearing unless the parties and the ALJ agree to another date. The hearing may
be held in the district of the Department where the activity that is the
subject of the order is located, except that hearings may be held at the
Department's offices in Kingston, New York for petitions relating to regulated
activities in the East of Hudson watershed and at the Department's offices in
Kingston, New York for petitions relating to regulated activities in the West
of Hudson watershed. The hearing may also be held by video conferencing or
other electronic means, or as otherwise agreed to by the parties and the ALJ.
Notice of such hearing shall be provided in writing to the petitioner and to
the Department.
      (4)   Burden of proof. The Department shall have the burden of proving,
by a preponderance of the evidence, facts supporting the modification,
suspension or revocation.
      (5)   The hearing shall be held before an OATH ALJ. The ALJ shall cause a
record of the hearing to be made, and shall make a recommendation to the
Commissioner within thirty (30) days of the close of the hearing record,
setting forth the appearances, the relevant facts and arguments presented at
the hearing, findings of fact and conclusions of law, and a recommendation as
to whether approval or variance should be modified, suspended, or revoked and
the reasons therefor. A transcript of the record of the hearing shall be made
available at the petitioner's request and expense.
   (f)   Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the recommendation of the ALJ,
the Commissioner shall issue a final decision approving, rejecting, or
modifying the ALJ's recommendation and shall serve that decision on the parties
to the proceeding. If the Commissioner does not act within that time, the ALJ's
recommendation shall be deemed adopted by the Commissioner.
   (g)   Where the Department proposes to modify, suspend, or revoke an
approval or variance, and the person named in the approval or variance requests
a hearing on the proposed modification, suspension, or revocation, the original
conditions of the approval or variance shall remain in effect until a decision
has been issued by the Commissioner pursuant to subdivision (f) of this
section. At such time the modified conditions shall take effect.
   (h)   Nothing in this section shall preclude or affect the Department's
authority to use the remedy of summary abatement or to issue a cease and desist
order under these rules and regulations, or any other law or regulation or to
seek injunctive relief to enforce these rules and regulations, or any other law
or regulation, in a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Amended City Record 10/30/2019, eff. 11/29/2019)
§ 18-27 Noncomplying Regulated Activities.
   (a)   General requirements.
      (1)   A noncomplying regulated activity may be continued except where
specifically prohibited from continuing by these rules and regulations.
      (2)   A noncomplying regulated activity shall come into compliance with
these rules and regulations where specifically required to do so by these rules
and regulations.
      (3)   Should any noncomplying regulated activity cause contamination to
or degradation of the water supply, such that the activity is a threat to the
life, health, or safety of water supply users, the Commissioner may order that
such noncomplying regulated activity conform either in whole or in part to the
requirements of these rules and regulations, immediately or within a limited
period of time at the Commissioner's discretion, or be discontinued
immediately. Any person who receives such an order may request a hearing on
such order in the manner provided in 15 RCNY §
18-29.
      (4)   Any owner or operator of a noncomplying regulated activity who was
not required by these rules and regulations to notify the Department pursuant
to paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of this section, may request, in writing, a
determination from the Department that such property or activity is a
noncomplying regulated activity. The written request shall include a
description of the property or activity and its location, and the name,
telephone number, and email address of a contact person. The Department shall
determine, based upon the submission, whether the property or activity is a
noncomplying regulated activity, and shall notify the owner or operator of such
determination in writing.
   (b)   Subsurface Sewage Treatment Systems. The regulations applicable to
discontinuation, and the standards for alteration or modification, of
noncomplying regulated activities that are subsurface sewage treatment systems
are set forth in 15 RCNY §
18-38(b).
   (c)   Storage of hazardous substances, storage of petroleum products, and
the siting of junkyards and solid waste management facilities. 
      (1)   No noncomplying regulated activity involving storage of hazardous
substances, storage of petroleum products, or the siting of junkyards and solid
waste management facilities shall be substantially altered or modified without
the prior review and approval of the Department. The Department shall review
and approve such an alteration or modification in accordance with the standards
and procedures set forth in Subchapter F (variances).
         (i)   Such a noncomplying regulated activity may be reduced in size or
extent, or replaced with a regulated activity that complies with the provisions
of these rules and regulations, without such review and approval provided that
such reduction does not cause any increase in any existing discharge or any
increase in the potential for contamination to or degradation of the water
supply.
      (2)   In the case of storage of hazardous substances, storage of
petroleum products, and the siting of junkyards and solid waste management
facilities, a noncomplying regulated activity must come into compliance with
these rules and regulations if, for any reason, there is discontinuation for a
period of two consecutive years. If it cannot come into compliance, it must
permanently desist. A period of discontinuation shall commence on the date when
regular or seasonal use ceases. Incidental or illegal use of an unoccupied
structure shall not be sufficient to interrupt a period of discontinuation, and
intent to resume a noncomplying regulated activity shall not confer the right
to do so. The burden of proof for showing that a noncomplying regulated
activity has not been substantially discontinued shall be on the owner or
operator.
(Amended City Record 10/30/2019, eff. 11/29/2019)
§ 18-28 Appeals.
   (a)   An applicant may appeal a final determination issued by the Department
under these rules and regulations by filing a petition in writing with the
Department and with the New York City Office of Administrative Trials and
Hearings, Trials Division ("OATH") within thirty (30) days of the date the
determination was mailed. The petition shall state the name, address, and email
address of the petitioner and shall include a short and plain statement of the
matters to be adjudicated, identifying the approval or variance sought by the
petitioner with citation to the applicable provisions of these rules and
regulations, the regulated activity for which the Department issued the
determination, the proposed location of the activity, and the date of the
Department's determination. The petition should also indicate whether the
petitioner is requesting a hearing. A copy of the determination being appealed
shall be attached to the petition. In addition, a completed OATH intake sheet
shall be included with the petition. Blank intake sheets are available from the
Department.
   (b)   The following determinations of the Department are appealable:
      (1)   A denial of an application for approval of a regulated activity.
      (2)   A denial of an application for a variance.
      (3)   The imposition of a substantial condition in an approval of a
regulated activity.
      (4)   The imposition of a substantial condition in a grant of a variance.
   (c)   Petitions for appeal shall be referred to a City administrative law
judge (ALJ) for hearing, where allowed by this section, and determination as
defined in subdivision (g).
   (d)   The following issues are reviewable on appeal:
      (1)   Whether the regulated activity proposed by the petitioner will be
in compliance with the requirements of these rules and regulations.
      (2)   Whether the imposition of a substantial condition in an approval of
a regulated activity is appropriate to ensure that the regulated activity will
comply with the requirements of these rules and regulations.
      (3)   Whether the Commissioner has abused his or her discretion in
denying a request for a variance or in imposing a substantial condition in a
grant of a variance.
      (4)   Except where the Department has acted as lead agency, the ALJ shall
not review any issues relating to compliance with the State Environmental
Quality Review Act (SEQRA).
   (e)   Except for appeals from determinations relating to variances, the
petitioner shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence
that the proposed regulated activity is in compliance with the requirements of
these rules and regulations. For appeals from determinations relating to
variances, the petitioner shall have the burden of proving that the
Commissioner has abused his or her discretion.
   (f)   (1)   Appeals from determinations relating to individual sewage
treatment systems or variances shall be decided on the record before the
Department in its review of the application and any other written submissions
allowed by the ALJ.
      (2)   A petitioner may request a hearing on appeals from all other
determinations issued by the Department. If a petitioner does not request a
hearing, the petition shall be decided on the record before the Department in
its review of the application and any other written submissions allowed by the
ALJ.
         (i)   The hearing may be held in the district of the Department in
which the regulated activity was proposed to be located, except that hearings
may be held at the Department's offices in Valhalla, New York for appeals
relating to regulated activities in the East of Hudson watershed and at the
Department's offices in Kingston, New York for appeals relating to regulated
activities in the West of Hudson watershed. The hearing may also be held by
video conferencing or other electronic means, or as otherwise agreed to by the
parties and the ALJ.
   (g)   The ALJ shall submit a report to the Commissioner within 60 days after
the record on appeal is closed with a recommendation as to whether the
determination appealed from should be approved, modified or rejected. The
Commissioner shall issue a final decision approving, rejecting, or modifying
the ALJ's recommendation within 30 days of receipt of the ALJ's report. If the
Commissioner does not act within that time, the ALJ's recommendation shall be
deemed approved by the Commissioner.
   (h)   This section shall not apply to determinations made by local
governments administering provisions of these rules and regulations pursuant to
Subchapter G.
   (i)   An applicant shall have the option whether to file an appeal under
this section and nothing in this section shall preclude an applicant from
challenging the final determination issued by the Department in a court of
competent jurisdiction, including instituting a proceeding under Article 78 of
the Civil Practice Law and Rules, without first filing a petition for appeal
pursuant to this section.
(Amended City Record 10/30/2019, eff. 11/29/2019)
§ 18-29 Hearings on Cease and Desist Orders.
   (a)   Any person who receives a cease and desist order may request a hearing
on the order by submitting a petition in writing to the Commissioner and to the
Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings, Trials Division ("OATH") within
seven (7) days of receipt of the cease and desist order. The petition for a
hearing shall state the name, address, and email address of the petitioner and
shall include a short and plain statement of the matters to be adjudicated,
identifying the activity that is the subject of the order, the location of the
activity, and the date of the cease and desist order. A copy of the order shall
be attached to the petition. In addition, a completed OATH intake sheet shall
be included with the petition. Blank intake sheets are available from the
Department.
   (b)   Upon receipt of the petition for a hearing, OATH shall schedule a
hearing promptly in the district of the Department where the activity that is
the subject of the order allegedly occurred, and at a time and date which shall
not exceed fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt by OATH of the petition
for a hearing unless the parties and the ALJ agree to another location and
date, except that hearings may be held at the Department's offices in Valhalla,
New York for petitions relating to regulated activities in the East of Hudson
watershed and at the Department's offices in Kingston, New York for petitions
relating to regulated activities in the West of Hudson watershed. The hearing
may also be held by video conferencing or other electronic means. Notice of
such hearing shall be provided in writing to the petitioner and to the
Department.
   (c)   A petition for a hearing shall not stay compliance with the cease and
desist order, and it shall continue to be the duty of the petitioner to
discontinue the activity pursuant to the terms of the order. Failure to do so
shall be a violation of the order and these rules and regulations.
   (d)   At the hearing, the Department shall have the burden of proving by a
preponderance of the evidence, facts supporting the cease and desist order.
   (e)   The failure of the petitioner to appear at the time, date and place
set forth in the notice of hearing shall constitute a waiver of the right to a
hearing on the cease and desist order and the matter will be dismissed.
   (f)   The hearing shall be held before an OATH ALJ. The ALJ shall cause a
record of the hearing to be made, and shall make a report to the Commissioner
within ten (10) days of the close of the hearing record, setting forth the
appearances, the relevant facts and arguments presented at the hearing,
findings of fact and conclusions of law, and a recommendation as to whether the
order should be continued, modified or vacated and the reasons therefor. A
transcript of the record of the hearing shall be made available at the
petitioner's request and expense.
   (g)   Within ten (10) days of receipt of the recommendation of the ALJ, the
Commissioner may continue, vacate, or modify the order. If the Commissioner
does not act within that time, the ALJ's recommendation shall be deemed adopted
by the Commissioner.
   (h)   The results of the hearing on the cease and desist order do not affect
the right of a person to apply for an approval or variance for a regulated
activity under these regulations. In reviewing an application in connection
with a regulated activity that has been the subject of a cease and desist
order, however, the Department may take action on account of any violation of
law, rule, regulation or order arising out of the events, situations or
circumstances which led to the issuance of the order.
(Amended City Record 10/30/2019, eff. 11/29/2019)
§ 18-30 State Environmental Quality Review Act (SEQRA).
The following activities are deemed by the Department to be "Type II" actions
under SEQRA and its implementing regulations, and the Department shall not
require an environmental impact statement or any other determination or
procedure under SEQRA for these activities:
   (a)   Installation of a new individual sewage treatment system on an
individual lot which is not within a subdivision, or within a subdivision which
has been approved as of the effective date of these rules and regulations.
   (b)   Any alteration or modification of an existing individual sewage
treatment system.
**** Subchapter C: Regulated Activities ****
§ 18-31 Pathogenic Materials.
Unless otherwise permitted by these rules and regulations, a discharge, or
storage which is reasonably likely to lead to a discharge, of pathogenic
materials into the environment (including into groundwater), and which is
reasonably likely to cause degradation of surface water quality or of the water
supply, is prohibited. It shall be an affirmative defense under this section
that such discharge, or storage likely to lead to a discharge, is either
permitted or not prohibited under federal law, and is either permitted or not
prohibited under state law.
§ 18-32 Hazardous Substances and Hazardous Wastes.
   (a)   Unless otherwise permitted by these rules and regulations, a
discharge, or storage which is reasonably likely to lead to a discharge, of
hazardous substances or hazardous wastes into the environment (including into
groundwater), and which is reasonably likely to cause degradation of surface
water quality or of the water supply, is prohibited. It shall be an affirmative
defense under this subsection that such discharge, or storage likely to lead to
a discharge, is either permitted or not prohibited under federal law, and is
either permitted or not prohibited under state law.
   (b)   New storage facilities or new tanks at an existing facility for the
storage of hazardous substances regulated under 6 NYCRR Part 596, and new
process tanks, as defined in 6 NYCRR § 596.1(c)(35), which would be regulated
under 6 NYCRR Part 596 if not for the exemption of process tanks under 6 NYCRR
§ 596.1(b)(3)(i), are prohibited within the limiting distance of 100 feet of a
watercourse or wetland, or within the limiting distance of 500 feet of a
reservoir, reservoir stem, or controlled lake, except as provided in
subdivision (d) of this section.
   (c)   The owner or operator of a new facility, or a new or substantially
modified tank at an existing facility, for the storage of hazardous substances
which is regulated under 6 NYCRR Part 596 and which is located between the
limiting distance of 100 and 250 feet of a watercourse or wetland, must comply
with the following conditions:
      (1)   The owner or operator shall submit to the Department a copy of any
registration forms required by 6 NYCRR § 596.2(d) and (e) and any notification
forms required by 6 NYCRR § 596.2(f) at the time such forms are submitted to
the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation. When, on an
emergency basis, new storage tanks are installed or existing storage tanks are
substantially modified in order to protect public health, safety or the
environment, the owner or operator shall notify the Department no later than
two hours after the decision is made by the owner or operator to install or
substantially modify the tank.
      (2)   The owner or operator shall submit to the Department a copy of any
spill prevention report required to be prepared or updated by 6 NYCRR § 598.1
(k), within thirty (30) days of preparing or updating such report.
      (3)   Failure to comply with the provisions of 6 NYCRR § 596.6 (spill
response, investigation and corrective action) is a violation of these rules
and regulations.
      (4)   Failure to comply with 6 NYCRR Part 599 (Standards for New or
Modified Hazardous Substance Storage Facilities) is a violation of these rules
and regulations.
   (d)   Subdivision (b) of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   The storage of any hazardous substance that is a noncomplying
regulated activity, including the replacement in kind of an existing storage
tank provided that the replacement tank is designed and installed in compliance
with Federal, State and local law. To the extent practicable, the new tank
shall be located outside of the limiting distances of 100 feet of a watercourse
or wetland, or outside of the limiting distance of 500 feet of a reservoir,
reservoir stem, or controlled lake;
      (2)   The storage of hazardous substances where such storage is necessary
to operate a wastewater treatment plant approved by the Department; and
      (3)   The storage of hazardous substances where such storage is made
necessary by construction of a new facility or the alteration or modification
of an existing facility used in connection with the operation of a public water
supply system.
   (e)   [Repealed.]
§ 18-33 Radioactive Materials.
Unless otherwise permitted by these rules and regulations, a discharge, or
storage which is reasonably likely to lead to a discharge, of radioactive
materials into the environment (including into groundwater), and which is
reasonably likely to cause degradation of surface water quality or of the water
supply, is prohibited. It shall be an affirmative defense under this section
that such discharge, or storage likely to lead to a discharge, is either
permitted or not prohibited under federal law, and is either permitted or not
prohibited under state law.
§ 18-34 Petroleum Products.
   (a)   Unless otherwise permitted by these rules and regulations, a
discharge, or storage which is reasonably likely to lead to a discharge, of
petroleum products into the environment (including into groundwater), and which
is reasonably likely to cause degradation of surface water quality or of the
water supply, is prohibited. It shall be an affirmative defense under this
subsection that such discharge, or storage likely to lead to a discharge, is
either permitted or not prohibited under federal law, and is either permitted
or not prohibited under state law.
   (b)   New aboveground and underground petroleum storage facilities, which
require registration under 6 NYCRR Part 613, or new tanks which expand the
capacity of existing facilities which require registration under 6 NYCRR Part
613, are prohibited within the limiting distance of 100 feet of a watercourse
or wetland, or within the limiting distance of 500 feet of a reservoir,
reservoir stem, or controlled lake. If, however, the owner or operator of such
facility demonstrates to the Department that the application of the limiting
distances would preclude the continuation of an existing business, the facility
may be expanded within the limiting distances set forth in this paragraph.
   (c)   New home heating oil tanks not requiring registration under 6 NYCRR
Part 613, within the limiting distance of 100 feet of a watercourse or wetland,
or within the limiting distance of 500 feet of a reservoir, reservoir stem, or
controlled lake, are prohibited from being installed underground and shall be
located either aboveground or contained in a basement with a concrete or other
impervious floor.
   (d)   New aboveground and underground petroleum storage tanks of 185 gallons
or more, which are neither home heating oil tanks regulated under subdivision
(c) of this section nor located at facilities requiring registration under 6
NYCRR Part 613, are prohibited within the limiting distance of 25 feet of a
watercourse or wetland, or within the limiting distance of 300 feet of a
reservoir, reservoir stem, or controlled lake. If, however, the applicant
demonstrates to the Department that application of the limiting distances would
preclude the continuation of an existing business or the continued identical
use of the existing facility, the facility may be expanded within the limiting
distances set forth in this paragraph.
   (e)   Subdivisions (b), (c), and (d) shall not apply to:
      (1)   The storage of any petroleum products that is a noncomplying
regulated activity;
      (2)   The storage of petroleum products for agricultural purposes;
      (3)   The replacement in kind of existing petroleum storage facilities or
tanks;
      (4)   The storage of petroleum products where such storage is necessary
to operate a wastewater treatment plant approved by the Department; and
      (5)   The storage of petroleum products where such storage is made
necessary by construction of a new facility or the alteration or modification
of an existing facility used in connection with the operation of a public water
supply system.
(Amended City Record 10/30/2019, eff. 11/29/2019)
§ 18-35 Human Excreta, Holding Tanks, and Portable Toilets.
   (a)   Unless otherwise permitted by these rules and regulations, a
discharge, or storage which is reasonably likely to lead to a discharge, of
human excreta, or a discharge, or storage which is reasonably likely to lead to
a discharge, from a holding tank, into the environment (including into
groundwater), and which is reasonably likely to cause degradation of surface
water quality or of the water supply, is prohibited. It shall be an affirmative
defense under this subsection that such discharge, or storage likely to lead to
a discharge, is either permitted or not prohibited under federal law, and is
either permitted or not prohibited under state law.
   (b)   Emptying, discharging or transferring the contents of a holding tank
or other sewage receptacle into any watercourse, wetland, reservoir, reservoir
stem, or controlled lake is prohibited.
   (c)   All new holding tanks and non-waterborne systems designed for sewage
in quantities of less than 1,000 gallons per day from residential properties
that are either permitted or not prohibited under 10 NYCRR Appendix 75-A may be
used in the watershed provided that they are constructed and operated in
accordance with the following standards:
      (1)   Such holding tanks must have a capacity equal to at least five (5)
days' design flow, with a minimum capacity of 1,000 gallons.
      (2)   Such holding tanks must be equipped with an alarm (audible and
visible) located in a conspicuous place to indicate when pump-out is necessary.
      (3)   Such holding tanks must be designed, installed and maintained in a
manner to promote ease of access for pumping and cleanup.
      (4)   If such holding tanks will be used in the winter, the tanks must be
protected from freezing.
   (d)   New holding tanks designed for sewage in quantities of 1,000 gallons
per day or more, or from non-residential properties, that are either permitted
or not prohibited under state law, may be used in the watershed provided that
they are constructed and operated in accordance with the following standards:
      (1)   The owner of such a holding tank must have and maintain an
agreement with a professional hauler for disposal of waste at a facility that
is permitted to accept septage, as defined in 6 NYCRR Part 364.
      (2)   Such holding tanks must have a capacity equal to at least twice the
volume of waste to be generated between anticipated removal dates, with a
minimum capacity of 1,000 gallons.
      (3)   Such holding tanks must have a high-level alarm positioned to allow
storage of at least three days' volume of waste after activation.
      (4)   If such holding tanks will be used in the winter, the tanks must be
protected from freezing.
   (e)   Portable toilets shall not be located within the limiting distance of
50 feet of a mapped stream, wetland, reservoir, reservoir stem, or controlled
lake and, to the extent practicable, are not located within the limiting
distance of 50 feet from a watercourse other than a mapped stream.
(Amended City Record 10/30/2019, eff. 11/29/2019)
§ 18-36 Wastewater Treatment Plants.
   (a)   Minimum requirements.
      (1)   Unless otherwise permitted by these rules and regulations, the
design, construction, or operation of a wastewater treatment plant is
prohibited where such design, construction, or operation causes a discharge, or
storage which is reasonably likely to lead to a discharge, of sewage or sewage
effluent into the environment (including into groundwater), and which is
reasonably likely to cause degradation of surface water quality or of the water
supply. It shall be an affirmative defense under this subsection that such
discharge, or storage likely to lead to a discharge, is either permitted or not
prohibited under federal law, and is either permitted or not prohibited under
state law.
      (2)   The design of new wastewater treatment plants, and the plans and
specifications resulting from that design, require the review and approval of
the Department. New wastewater treatment plants must be constructed in
accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the Department.
      (3)   The design for an expansion or an alteration or modification of
wastewater treatment plants, and the plans and specifications resulting from
that design, require the review and approval of the Department. Any expansion
or alteration or modification of a wastewater treatment plant must be
constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the
Department.
      (4)   The owner or operator of a wastewater treatment plant shall operate
and maintain the wastewater treatment plant in accordance with the operations
and maintenance manual for the plant. Such manual shall be prepared by the
owner and approved by the Department. Such manual shall be prepared or revised,
and submitted to the Department for approval, within ninety (90) days after
construction, expansion, alteration or modification of a wastewater treatment
plant is completed.
      (5)   No new wastewater treatment plants with a surface discharge, or
expansion or alteration or modification of wastewater treatment plants, shall
cause a contravention of the water quality standards set forth in Subchapter D
of these rules and regulations or the phosphorus water quality values set forth
in the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation Technical and
Operational Guidance Series (TOGS) 1.1.1, Ambient Water Quality Standards and
Guidance Values and Groundwater Effluent Limitations (October 22, 1993, Reissue
Date June 1998, as modified and supplemented by the January 1999 Errata Sheet
and the April 2000 and June 2004 Addenda).
      (6)   No part of any seepage unit or absorption area for a subsurface
discharge from a wastewater treatment plant shall be located within the
limiting distance of 100 feet of a watercourse or wetland or within the
limiting distance of 500 feet of a reservoir, reservoir stem, or controlled
lake.
      (7)   Wastewater treatment plants with surface discharges into the
watershed shall be capable of achieving 99.9 percent removal and/or
inactivation of Giardia lamblia cysts and 99.99 percent removal and/or
inactivation of enteric viruses.
      (8)   Wastewater treatment plants with either surface or subsurface
discharges within the watershed shall provide phosphorus removal using the best
treatment technology so that the wastewater treatment plant is designed to be
operated and maintained to meet the following requirements:
 
 
SPDES Permitted Total Flow Total Phosphorus Limit
(Gallons/day)              (mg/l)
≤ 50,000                 1.0
> 50,000 and < 500,000     0.5
≥ 500,000                0.2
 
      (9)   Wastewater treatment plants with surface discharges to intermittent
streams in the watershed shall be operated and maintained to meet the
intermittent stream effluent limits set forth in the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation Technical and Operational Guidance Series (TOGS)
1.3.1, Total Maximum Daily Loads and Water Quality-Based Effluent Limits (July
8, 1996, Revised February 1998), including Amendments A through E (July 8,
1996), and New York State Department of Environmental Conservation Technical
and Operational Guidance Series (TOGS) 1.3.1B, Total Maximum Daily Loads and
Water Quality-Based Effluent Limits, Amendments-Low and Intermittent Stream
Standards (July 8, 1996), provided however, that the effluent limit for a
discharge of a pollutant to an intermittent stream shall in no case be less
stringent than the effluent limit which would apply to the same discharge of
the pollutant to the first downstream perennial stream.
      (10)   Within one year of the effective date of these rules and
regulations, the owners of all existing wastewater treatment plants shall
submit to the Department for review and approval an operations and maintenance
plan and a schedule setting forth a plan for bringing the wastewater treatment
plant into compliance with all of the requirements of this section. Any such
plan that is disapproved by the Department shall be revised and resubmitted to
the Department for review and approval within ninety (90) days after the
initial disapproval. Owners of existing wastewater treatment plants must secure
final Department approval of such operation and maintenance plans and such a
schedule setting forth a plan for bringing the plant into compliance by no
later than eighteen (18) months from the effective date of these rules and
regulations, and must complete all work in order for such plants to be brought
into compliance with the requirements of this section by no later than five (5)
years from the effective date of these rules and regulations or any extended
period of time approved by the Department upon good cause shown.
      (11)   Existing wastewater treatment plants with surface discharges are
prohibited from expanding if they are located in an area where new wastewater
treatment plants with surface discharges are prohibited by these rules and
regulations. This paragraph shall not apply to existing wastewater treatment
plants which discharge subsurface or the expansion of existing wastewater
treatment plants where the expanded portion discharges subsurface.
      (12)   Existing wastewater treatment plants with surface discharges may
expand if they are located in an area where new wastewater treatment plants
with surface discharges are allowed by these rules and regulations. The plans
submitted to expand the wastewater treatment plant shall meet all of the
requirements of this section.
      (13)   Existing wastewater treatment plants with subsurface discharges
may expand. The expanded portion of such wastewater treatment plants shall meet
all of the design standards and other requirements of this section.
      (14)   Any approval of a new or expanded wastewater treatment plant
issued by the Department shall expire and thereafter be null and void unless
construction is completed within five (5) years of the date of issuance of such
approval or any extended period of time approved by the Department upon good
cause shown. Following expiration of the approval, the plans for the wastewater
treatment plants may be resubmitted to the Department for consideration for a
new approval.
   (b)   Requirements for wastewater treatment plants located within phosphorus
restricted basins. No new wastewater treatment plants with surface discharges,
or expansions of existing wastewater treatment plants with surface discharges,
shall be allowed in a phosphorus restricted basin. A variance from this
provision may be sought in accordance with the requirements set forth in 15
RCNY §
18-61(d).
   (c)   Requirements for wastewater treatment plants located in coliform
restricted basins. No new wastewater treatment plants with surface discharges,
or expansions of existing wastewater treatment plants with surface discharges,
shall be allowed in a coliform restricted basin. A variance from this provision
may be sought in accordance with the requirements set forth in 15 RCNY §
18-61(d)(1).
   (d)   Treatment requirements for wastewater treatment plants located within
the 60 day travel time to intake.
      (1)   The map indicating the demarcation line for the watershed areas
that are located within the 60 day travel time to intake appears in
Appendix 18-A. Large detailed maps of such areas are available to be reviewed
by the public during business hours at the regional offices listed in 15 RCNY §
18-15.
      (2)   Within the 60 day travel time to the intake the following
requirements are applicable:
         (i)   New wastewater treatment plants with surface discharges, or
expansions of existing wastewater treatment plants with surface discharges, are
prohibited except as provided in 15 RCNY §
18-82(e). A variance from this provision may be sought in accordance with the
requirements set forth in 15 RCNY §
18-61(e);
         (ii)   Existing wastewater treatment plants with SPDES permitted
surface discharges may continue to operate provided the wastewater treatment
plant provides sand filtration or a Department-approved alternative technology
to sand filtration, disinfection, phosphorus removal, and microfiltration or a
Department-approved equivalent technology to microfiltration, as required by
these rules and regulations;
         (iii)   Wastewater treatment plants with subsurface discharges may
commence or continue to operate provided that the wastewater treatment plant
provides sand filtration or a Department-approved alternative technology to
sand filtration and phosphorus removal, and for SPDES permitted discharges
greater than 30,000 gallons per day (gpd), disinfection, as required by these
rules and regulations.
   (e)   Treatment requirements for wastewater treatment plants located in the
watershed and beyond the 60 day travel time to intake.
      (1)   The map indicating the demarcation line for the watershed areas
that are located beyond the 60 day travel time to intake appears in
Appendix 18-A. Large detailed maps of such areas are available to be reviewed
by the public during business hours at the regional offices listed in 15 RCNY §
18-15.
      (2)   Beyond the 60 day travel time to the intake the following
requirements are applicable:
         (i)   New wastewater treatment plants with surface discharges into a
reservoir, reservoir stem, controlled lake, or wetland are prohibited;
         (ii)   All new surface discharges into a watercourse, and any existing
wastewater treatment plants with SPDES permitted surface discharges may
commence or continue to operate, provided that the wastewater treatment plant
provides sand filtration or a Department-approved alternative technology to
sand filtration, disinfection, phosphorus removal, and microfiltration or a
Department-approved equivalent technology to microfiltration, as required by
these rules and regulations;
         (iii)   Wastewater treatment plants with subsurface discharges may
commence or continue to operate, provided that the wastewater treatment plant
provides sand filtration or a Department-approved alternative technology to
sand filtration and phosphorus removal, and for SPDES permitted discharges
greater than 30,000 gallons per day (gpd), disinfection, as required by these
rules and regulations.
   (f)   Design, operation and maintenance requirements.
      (1)   This subdivision (f) shall apply to wastewater treatment plants.
      (2)   The criteria used by the Department to approve the design for any
new wastewater treatment plant or the portion of any wastewater treatment plant
which is being expanded or altered or modified shall be all applicable
requirements of law, including the standards set forth in the following
documents:
         (i)   "New York State Design Standards for Intermediate Sized
Wastewater Treatment Systems" New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation (2014); and
         (ii)   "Recommended Standards for Wastewater Facilities," Great Lakes
– Upper Mississippi River Board of State and Provincial Public Health and
Environmental Managers (2014).
      (3)   The Department shall not approve a wastewater treatment plant, or
any proposed expansion of a wastewater treatment plant, which discharges within
the watershed, if there is inflow or infiltration into a sewer system connected
to such wastewater treatment plant which causes either:
         (i)   The State authorized flow limit of the wastewater treatment
plant to be exceeded; or
         (ii)   The strength of the sewage influent to the wastewater treatment
plant to be diluted to a level that adversely affects the efficacy of the State
permitted and Department approved treatment process.
      (4)   The Department shall not approve a wastewater treatment plant, or
any proposed expansion of a wastewater treatment plant, if there is an
indication of exfiltration from a sewer system connected to such wastewater
treatment plant.
      (5)   All wastewater treatment plants shall meet the following
requirements to insure uninterrupted reliable operation:
         (i)   All wastewater treatment plants shall provide standby power
units sufficient to run the entire plant in order to ensure uninterrupted
reliable operation in the event of utility power failure and these units shall
be equipped with an alarm and automatic start-up capability.
         (ii)   All vital plant structures, mechanical and electrical equipment
of wastewater treatment plants located or designed within the 100-year flood
plain shall be protected from damage from a 100-year flood that may affect or
disrupt its function or general performance. Such structures and equipment
shall remain fully operational in a 25-year flood.
         (iii)   The disinfection system shall be provided with backup units,
an alarm and equipment that will insure processing of the plant flow without
interruption and the backup electrical and/or mechanical equipment shall be
equipped with automatic start-up capability.
         (iv)   Sand filtration or a Department-approved alternative technology
to sand filtration shall be implemented in units of sufficient number and size
to ensure that the flow they are designed to accommodate, consistent with the
"New York State Design Standards for Intermediate Sized Wastewater Treatment
Systems," New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (2014) and/or
the "Recommended Standards for Wastewater Facilities," Great Lakes-Upper
Mississippi River Board of State and Provincial Public Health and Environmental
Managers (2014), can be processed in the event that the largest such unit is
off line;
         (v)   All wastewater treatment plants must be equipped with a flow
meter that includes a recording device; and
         (vi)   All alarm systems shall require telemetering to a central
location with around the clock operator presence or, in the alternative, to an
operator's residence so that a response shall be initiated immediately.
      (6)   The following requirements shall apply to all wastewater treatment
plants with subsurface discharges or absorption areas located in the watershed:
         (i)   The loading rate to the absorption trench may be 25 percent
greater than that required under the design standards listed in subdivision (f)
(2) of this section;
         (ii)   An additional area of at least 50 percent of the absorption
area shall be set aside as a reserve area;
         (iii)   At a minimum, one percolation and one deep hole test shall be
performed in both the primary absorption area and in the reserve absorption
area. An applicant shall notify the Department in writing at least 7 business
days prior to performance of such tests, and specify the location and the time
of the tests. At the option of the Department, a Department representative may
witness these tests; and
         (iv)   The use of pumping, mechanical dosing or other mechanical
devices requires a pump chamber equipped with an alarm to indicate malfunction,
a backup pump, and any other safety features required by the Department to
prevent overflow.
      (7)   (i)   All owners or operators of Department approved wastewater
treatment plants in the watershed shall, prior to commencement of construction
of such wastewater treatment plants, deposit with the Department a performance
bond for the completion of the construction of the wastewater treatment plant
and an additional bond or other guaranty for the payment of labor and material
furnished in the course of such construction. Upon completion of construction
and payment of labor and materials, such bonds or other guaranties shall be
released. Additionally, prior to commencement of operation of the approved
wastewater treatment plant, the owners or operators of the approved wastewater
treatment plant shall provide a surety bond, or a reasonable guaranty, that
they shall continue to maintain and operate the system for a period of five
years. The surety bond or guaranty shall be in an amount sufficient to insure
the full and faithful performance by the owners or operators of the wastewater
treatment plants, and their successors and assigns, with regard to their
obligation to properly maintain and operate the wastewater treatment plants in
accordance with all requirements of law and according to the conditions set by
the Department in its approval; provided, however, that such surety bond or
guaranty shall not be required by the Department where the owners or operators
of the wastewater treatment plant have provided a surety bond or guaranty for
the maintenance and operation of the wastewater treatment plant to the local
governing body, in an amount necessary to insure the full and faithful
performance of the operation and maintenance of the wastewater treatment plant;
provided further, that such surety bond or guaranty shall not be required where
the owner or operator of the wastewater treatment plant is a village, town,
county or city. The Commissioner may, at his or her discretion, increase the
amount of such surety bond or guaranty, but not to exceed an amount necessary
to insure the full and faithful performance of the operation of the wastewater
treatment plant. All such bonds shall be prepared on the forms of bonds
authorized by the City of New York and shall have as a surety such company or
companies that shall be approved by the City of New York and are authorized to
do business in the State of New York.
         (ii)   The Commissioner may authorize the provision of other security,
including cash, if the Commissioner finds that compliance with the bond
requirement is not reasonably possible and the public interest would be served
by such authorization. The alternative security shall be deposited with the
Comptroller of the City of New York.
         (iii)   Whenever an owner or operator of a wastewater treatment plant
deposits securities or other obligations with the City of New York, in lieu of
a performance bond, it shall be with the understanding that the Comptroller of
the City of New York, or his or her successors, may sell and use the proceeds
thereof for any purpose for which the principal or surety on such bond would be
liable under the terms of the approval. If money is deposited with the
Comptroller, the owner or operator of the wastewater treatment plant shall not
be entitled to receive interest on such money from the City of New York.
      (8)   The transfer of any approval or permit issued by the Department for
the construction and/or operation of any wastewater treatment plant shall
require Department approval. The Department shall approve such transfer
provided that the transferee demonstrates sufficient financial, technical, and
professional capability to construct, operate and/or maintain the subject
wastewater treatment plant in compliance with applicable laws, as cited in 15
RCNY §
18-36(a)(1), the provisions of these rules and regulations, and the terms and
conditions of any approval or permit granted by the Department.
   (g)   Application requirements.
      (1)   An application for review and approval of a new wastewater
treatment plant shall include the following information:
         (i)   A Department application form and an Environmental Assessment
Form (EAF Long Form);
         (ii)   A facility plan which shall include: a description of the
project, flow and waste load estimations, site characteristics, evaluation of
existing system, if applicable, and existing local or related facilities,
including any related water quality problems, examination of the project
service area, estimation of growth, examination of alternative solutions and
explanation of why the proposed option was chosen, analysis of potential
impacts, analysis of hydraulic and organic capacities (including Waste
Assimilation Capacity analysis), description of unit processes and explanation
of sizing, operation under emergency conditions, and sludge processing, storage
and disposal methods, estimation of costs, proposed financing methods and
anticipated user fees, outline of operation and maintenance requirements
(including cost projections), and regulatory review and permitting
requirements;
         (iii)   An engineering plan which shall include: location plan, site
plan, schematic of plant hydraulic profile, piping schematic, location,
dimension and elevations of plant process units and appurtenances, mechanical
system layout, electrical system layout, and erosion and sediment control and
stormwater management plan.
         (iv)   Construction specifications, including material and equipment
specifications;
         (v)   Construction schedule;
         (vi)   In cases where a draft environmental impact statement ("DEIS")
is to be prepared for an activity and the DEIS complies with the requirements
of Article 8 of the Environmental Conservation Law and the regulations
promulgated thereunder, and includes the information required in this part, the
DEIS may constitute all or part of the application for review and approval
under this part. In such case the applicant will provide the Department with
notice and a copy of the DEIS; however, no approval shall be issued by the
Department prior to review of the FEIS and issuance of a finding to approve;
and
         (vii)   A copy of the draft SPDES permit, if any, and, when issued, a
copy of the final SPDES permit. Copies of any revisions to the draft SPDES
permit shall also be provided to the Department as they become available to the
applicant.
      (2)   An application for review and approval of an expansion or of an
alteration or modification of a wastewater treatment plant shall include all of
the information required in subdivision (g)(1) of this section where
applicable, and shall either:
         (i)   Certify that the wastewater treatment plant is in compliance
with all of the requirements of this section, and all requirements of its SPDES
permit; or
         (ii)   Certify that a schedule for the wastewater treatment plant to
come into compliance with the requirements of this section and with the
requirements of its SPDES permit has been submitted to the Department for
approval. A copy of such compliance schedule shall be attached to the
application.
      (3)   All approvals for new or expansion of existing wastewater treatment
plants are conditioned on the applicant's submission of record drawings once
construction is complete.
(Amended City Record 10/30/2019, eff. 11/29/2019)
§ 18-37 Sewer Systems, Sewer Connections and Discharges to Sewer Systems.
   (a)   Combined sewer systems are prohibited from discharging within the
watershed.
   (b)   A new sewer connection or sewer extension to a sewer system is
prohibited where the wastewater treatment plant to which the sewer system has
been connected and which discharges within the watershed has had a SPDES flow
parameter violation in the prior twelve months, or where the additional flow
from the new sewer connection or sewer extension will cause or can be expected
to cause such wastewater treatment plant to have a SPDES flow parameter
violation as defined herein.
   (c)   Sewer Connections. 
      (1)   The owner of any individual residence that will be served by a new
sewer connection, or by an alteration or modification of a sewer connection,
shall notify the Department 48 hours prior to the installation of such sewer
connection or of such alteration or modification, and provide an opportunity to
the Department to observe the work. If specifically requested by the
Department, the owner shall submit to the Department all plans or designs for
such sewer connection or for such alteration or modification.
      (2)   The owner of a structure other than an individual residence that
will be served by a new sewer connection, or by an alteration or modification
of a sewer connection, to a sewer system that is subject to a qualifying
municipal sewer use law shall:
         (i)   provide to the Department, at least 48 hours prior to the
installation of such sewer connection or of such alteration or modification, a
written permit from the superintendent of the sewer system authorizing such
connection; and
         (ii)   notify the Department 48 hours prior to the installation of
such sewer connection or of such alteration or modification, and provide an
opportunity to the Department to observe the work.
      (3)   The plans for a new sewer connection, or for an alteration or
modification of a sewer connection, to a sewer system for a treatment facility
with a SPDES permit, which is not subject to a qualifying municipal sewer use
law, from a structure other than an individual residence, require review and
approval of the Department. As a condition of approval, the Department will
require the applicant to notify the Department 48 hours prior to the
installation of such sewer connection or of such alteration or modification,
and provide an opportunity to the Department to observe the work. An
application for review and approval of such a new sewer connection or
alteration or modification of a sewer connection must include:
         (i)   A written statement from the owner or operator of the treatment
facility certifying that the new sewer connection or alteration or modification
of a sewer connection will not require a modification of the treatment
facility's SPDES permit, and
         (ii)   Plans and specifications for the sewer connection.
      (4)   New sewer connections, or alterations or modifications of sewer
connections, to treatment facilities that do not have SPDES permits shall be
reviewed in accordance with 15 RCNY §
18-37.
   (d)   The design, construction and plans for a new sewer system or sewer
extension shall require the review and approval of the Department. Any proposed
alteration or modification of a sewer system shall require the review and
approval of the Department.
   (e)   Any approval of a new or an alteration or modification of an existing
sewer system, sewer extension, or sewer connection subject to Department
approval pursuant to 15 RCNY §
18-37(c)(3), issued by the Department expires and is null and void unless
construction is completed within five (5) years of the date of issuance.
Following expiration of the approval, the plans for the sewer system may be
resubmitted to the Department for consideration for a new approval.
   (f)   The criteria used by the Department to approve any new sewer system,
sewer extension, or sewer connection subject to Department approval pursuant to
15 RCNY §
18-37(c)(3) or the portion of any sewer system or such sewer connection which
is being altered or modified, shall be all applicable requirements of law,
including the standards set forth in the following documents:
      (1)   "New York State Design Standards for Intermediate Sized Wastewater
Treatment Systems," New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
(2014);
      (2)   "Recommended Standards for Wastewater Facilities," Great Lakes-
Upper Mississippi River Board of State and Provincial Public Health and
Environmental Managers (2014);
      (3)   19 NYCRR Part 1222 (Plumbing Code of New York State).
   (g)   All sewer systems and sewer extensions connected to a wastewater
treatment plant which discharges within the watershed shall be designed,
operated and maintained in such manner as to prevent inflow or infiltration
which causes one or more of the following:
      (1)   The SPDES authorized flow limit of the wastewater treatment plans
to be exceeded;
      (2)   The strength of the sewage influent to the wastewater treatment
plant to be diluted to a level that adversely affects the efficacy of the SPDES
permitted and Department approved treatment process; or
      (3)   A bypass of any portion of a treatment facility that would be
prohibited pursuant to 6 NYCRR Subpart 750-2.
   (h)   All sewer systems and sewer extensions shall be designed, operated and
maintained to prevent exfiltration from such systems.
   (i)   The owner or operator of a facility which disposes of wastes regulated
pursuant to the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards, 40 C.F.R. Part 403,
shall submit three copies of the engineering report, plans and specifications,
prepared by a licensed design professional, in compliance with 40 C.F.R. Parts
403, 406-471 and any applicable local regulations, to the Department for its
review and approval.
   (j)   Application Requirements for Sewer Systems and Sewer Extensions. An
application for review and approval of any sewer system or sewer extension
shall include the following information:
      (1)   Tax map number and, where available, building permit number, for
each property to be served by the proposed sewer system or sewer extension;
      (2)   Letter of flow acceptance from the owner of the receiving
wastewater treatment plant, when available;
      (3)   An engineering report presenting the proposed flow and supporting
design calculations; and
      (4)   Four (4) sets of plans showing:
         (i)   site location in relation to established sewer district;
         (ii)   distances to wells, watercourses, rock outcroppings, wetlands,
controlled lakes and reservoirs;
         (iii)   system profile including all connections, manholes and
required pump stations;
         (iv)   design details and specifications of system components
including pipe sizes and pump capacities;
         (v)   where applicable, a copy of the application for modification of
the SPDES permit for the receiving wastewater treatment plant and, if
available, any draft revisions to such SPDES permit; and
         (vi)   construction phasing.
      (5)   An application for review and approval of a sewer system must
include an operation and maintenance plan for the sewer system, which may be a
component of the operation and maintenance plan for the treatment facility
served by the sewer system; and
      (6)   An Environmental Assessment form and State Environmental Quality
Review Act determination, if applicable.
   (k)   All approvals for sewer systems and extensions are conditioned on the
applicant's submission of as-built drawings, prepared by a design professional,
once construction is complete.
   (l)   As a condition of approval the Department may require evidence of
financial security prior to construction, from any owner or operator of a new
sewer system or sewer extension or a substantial alteration or modification to
an existing sewer system. Such financial security shall consist of a bond, or
an equivalent guaranty, to be deposited with the Department, covering the full
cost of the construction of such facility and an additional bond or an
equivalent guaranty for the payment of labor and material furnished in the
course of such construction. Upon completion of construction and payment of
labor and materials, such bonds or other guaranties shall be released.
Additionally, a bond or equivalent guaranty may be required for the maintenance
and operation of the facility for a period of five years post-construction. No
bond or guaranty is required where the owner or operator of such a facility is
a village, town, county or city.
(Amended City Record 10/30/2019, eff. 11/29/2019)
§ 18-38 Subsurface Sewage Treatment Systems.
   (a)   Minimum Requirements for new subsurface sewage treatment systems. 
      (1)   The design, treatment, construction, maintenance and operation of
new subsurface sewage treatment systems, and the plans therefor, require the
review and approval of the Department, provided that the requirements of this
section shall not apply to subsurface sewage treatment systems necessary for an
agricultural activity that are designed, provide treatment and are constructed,
maintained and operated in compliance with State and Federal law.
      (2)   All new individual sewage treatment systems shall comply with the
requirements of 10 NYCRR Part 75 and Appendix 75-A except where a local
government or agency has enacted, or these rules and regulations specify, more
stringent standards, in which case, the more stringent standards shall apply.
      (3)   All new intermediate sized sewage treatment systems shall comply
with the requirements set forth in New York State Design Standards for
Intermediate Sized Wastewater Treatment Systems, New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation (2014), except where a local government or agency
has enacted, or these rules and regulations specify, more stringent standards,
in which case, the more stringent standards shall apply.
         (i)   As a condition of approval the Department may require evidence
of financial security prior to construction, from any owner or operator of a
new intermediate sized sewage treatment system or a substantial alteration or
modification to an existing intermediate sized sewage treatment system. Such
financial security shall consist of a bond, or an equivalent guaranty, to be
deposited with the Department, covering the full cost of the construction of
such facility and an additional bond or an equivalent guaranty for the payment
of labor and material furnished in the course of such construction. Upon
completion of construction and payment of labor and materials, such bonds or
other guaranties shall be released. Additionally, a bond or equivalent guaranty
may be required for the maintenance and operation of the facility for a period
of five years post-construction. No bond or guaranty is required where the
owner or operator of such a facility is a village, town, county or city.
      (4)   No part of any absorption field for any new subsurface sewage
treatment system shall be located within the limiting distance of 100 feet of a
watercourse or wetland or 300 feet of a reservoir, reservoir stem or controlled
lake. For a new conventional individual subsurface sewage treatment system or
for a new Ulster County Fill System the Department may recommend a greater
limiting distance from an absorption field to a watercourse, wetland,
reservoir, reservoir stem or controlled lake.
      (5)   Raised systems, as described in 10 NYCRR Part 75 and Appendix 75-A,
are allowed on undeveloped lots not located in a subdivision or on undeveloped
residential lots located in a subdivision which was approved prior to the
effective date of these rules and regulations, where site conditions are not
suitable for a conventional system provided that:
         (i)   The system shall be located at least 250 feet from any
watercourse or wetland and 500 feet from any reservoir, reservoir stem or
controlled lake provided that the greater limiting distance for raised systems
does not preclude construction on the subject lot or lots of the use proposed
by the applicant, and further provided that the site conditions and the
subsurface sewage treatment system comply with the other provisions of these
rules and regulations and other applicable Federal, State and local laws, as
cited in 15 RCNY §
18-38(a)(1); or
         (ii)   Raised systems which cannot meet the limiting distances set
forth in subparagraph (i) due to size or location of the lot shall be located
at the greatest limiting distance possible within the property lines and at
least 100 feet from any watercourse or wetland and 300 feet from any reservoir,
reservoir stem or controlled lake.
      (6)   Where a watershed county has adopted a subdivision code that allows
a raised system, as described in 10 NYCRR Part 75 and Appendix 75-A, or where
the New York State Department of Health approved such raised systems for use in
subdivisions located in the watershed, such raised systems are allowed in
subdivisions that are approved subsequent to the effective date of these rules
and regulations, provided that no part of such systems shall be located within
250 feet of a watercourse or wetland or 500 feet of a reservoir, reservoir stem
or controlled lake.
      (7)   Any approval of a subsurface sewage treatment system issued by the
Department expires and is null and void unless construction is substantially
completed such that the system is functioning as designed within five (5) years
of the date of issuance for systems located within approved subdivisions, or
within two (2) years of the date of issuance for all other subsurface sewage
treatment systems. Following expiration of the approval, the plans for the
subsurface sewage treatment system may be resubmitted to the Department for
consideration for a new approval.
   (b)   Minimum requirements for alteration and modification, repair and
remediation, and discontinuation of subsurface sewage treatment systems. 
      (1)   All subsurface sewage treatment systems, which are operating in
accordance with their Federal, State, and local approvals, but which do not
comply with the requirements for new subsurface sewage treatment systems set
forth in this section, shall be allowed to continue to operate.
      (2)   If the use of a subsurface sewage treatment system is, for any
reason, subject to discontinuation for a period of five consecutive years or
more, operation may resume if it comes into compliance with the standards for
alterations or modifications of subsurface sewage treatment systems in
accordance with 15 RCNY §
18-38(b)(4) below. If, however, the system cannot come into compliance with
these standards, the use must permanently desist. The owner or operator bears
the burden of proof for showing that there has been no discontinuation in the
use of a subsurface sewage treatment system.
      (3)   Any proposed alteration or modification of any subsurface sewage
treatment system requires the review and approval of the Department, except as
provided in subparagraphs (i) through (iii) below.
         (i)   The volume, character, or strength of the flow to a subsurface
sewage treatment system may be reduced without review and approval provided
that such reduction does not cause any increase in the existing discharge or
any increase in the potential for contamination to or degradation of the water
supply from that discharge. If the reduction in the volume, character, or
strength results from an alteration or modification of a system component, or
the addition of a new system component (such as installation of a peat filter
or aerobic treatment unit), then such alteration, modification, or addition
requires review and approval of the Department, except that:
            a.   Any such review and approval shall be limited to the affected
system component; and
            b.   No such review and approval is required where the alteration,
modification, or addition of the system component is otherwise exempt from
review under this section (such as the replacement of a septic tank with a
larger tank of an appropriate size for the subsurface sewage treatment system).
         (ii)   Except as set forth in this subdivision, for an intermediate
sized subsurface sewage treatment system that has a State Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (SPDES) permit, review and approval is not required for any
proposed alteration or modification that does not deviate from the engineering
design and site plan approved by the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
            a.   Review and approval by the Department is required if the
alteration or modification requires a modification of the SPDES permit for the
SSTS for any reason including, but not limited to:
               i.   the alteration or modification involves physical alteration
or modification of the SSTS, or
               ii.   the alteration or modification results in the system
receiving sewage that either exceeds the treatment system design flow, or has a
strength or characteristic beyond the design capability of the treatment
system.
            b.   If the Department has previously issued an approval for an
intermediate sized subsurface sewage treatment system, review and approval by
the Department is required for any alteration or modification that results in
the system receiving sewage that either exceeds the design flow of the system
as approved by the Department, or has a strength or characteristic beyond the
design capability of the system as approved by the Department.
         (iii)   In the following circumstances, where an ancillary, non-
residential use of a residence served by an individual subsurface sewage
treatment system does not result in an increase in or change in the nature of
the flow of sewage, the subsurface sewage treatment system shall not be
considered an intermediate-sized sewage treatment system, nor shall such use
require review and approval by the Department:
            a.   Where the residence is used to provide accommodations for
transient lodgers and no food service is provided other than to overnight
guests, unless such use requires a temporary residence permit pursuant to 10
NYCRR Subpart 7-1.
            b.   Where the individual residence is used for a home office or
home business, provided that:
               i.   The individual who operates the home office or home
business occupies the home as his or her primary or secondary residence;
               ii.   The home office or home business is of a type that is
estimated to generate 50 gallons per day of water or less based on Table B-3 of
the New York State Design Standards for Intermediate Sized Wastewater Treatment
Systems, New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (2014); and
               iii.   The conversion does not involve an increase in the
individual residence's number of bedrooms.
      (4)   Standards for Alterations or Modifications of Subsurface Sewage
Treatment Systems. 
         (i)   Any proposed alteration or modification of any subsurface sewage
treatment system must be performed in accordance with the requirements
applicable to new subsurface sewage treatment systems under this section.
         (ii)   Alterations or modifications of subsurface sewage treatment
systems that cannot meet these requirements, due to site constraints, must be
performed in accordance with the requirements applicable to new subsurface
sewage treatment systems to the extent possible. Applications for proposed
alterations or modifications of such subsurface sewage treatment systems must
include the information described in 15 RCNY §
18-38(d)(4).
         (iii)   Standard of review. The department will authorize use of a
subsurface sewage treatment system that has been subject to a period of
discontinuation for five consecutive years or more, or a proposed alteration or
modification of a subsurface sewage treatment system, if the applicant
demonstrates that such use, alteration, or modification does not present a
threat to public health or water quality as determined by the Department.
      (5)   If a subsurface sewage treatment system fails or needs remediation,
the owner or operator of the subsurface sewage treatment system must comply
with the following:
         (i)   Any proposed remediation of any part of a subsurface sewage
treatment system shall require the prior review and approval of the Department,
and if approved, shall be completed as soon as possible in accordance with a
schedule approved by the Department;
         (ii)   Any proposed remediation of any part of a subsurface sewage
treatment system shall be implemented, to the extent possible, in accordance
with the design standards set forth in this section, and shall require the
prior review and approval of the Department. However, if the Department
determines, based upon the application submitted by the owner or operator of
the subsurface sewage treatment system, that such system cannot comply with
this section, the owner or operator of the subsurface sewage treatment system
shall cooperate with the Department to determine the most suitable location and
design for the system on the specific site. The Department may require the
owner to agree to a regular schedule for the pump out of the septic tank or
other remedial action, including the use of holding tanks, before the proposed
remediation is approved by the Department and implemented; and
         (iii)   The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to the
routine repair and maintenance of a subsurface sewage treatment system,
including, but not limited to, the pump out of a septic tank, the replacement
of a septic tank, whether in kind or with a larger tank of an appropriate size
for the subsurface sewage treatment system, the repair of a broken lateral, the
leveling of a distribution box, or the removal of a blockage.
      (6)   Any approval issued by the Department to use a subsurface sewage
treatment system following a discontinuation expires and is null and void
unless any required enhancements are implemented and such use is commenced
within one (1) year of the date of issuance or such longer period as the
Department may authorize in writing. Following expiration of the approval, the
plans for the subsurface sewage treatment system may be resubmitted to the
Department for consideration for a new approval.
      (7)   Any approval of an alteration or modification of a subsurface
sewage treatment system issued by the Department expires and is null and void
unless any required enhancements are implemented within two (2) years of the
date of issuance. Following expiration of the approval, the plans for the
subsurface sewage treatment system may be resubmitted to the Department for
consideration for a new approval.
      (8)   Any property owner may request that the Department review and
approve a proposed use of a subsurface sewage treatment system by demonstrating
that it is capable of treating a specified volume and type of wastewater flow.
The proposal may include proposed enhancements to the system. A determination
by the Department that the subsurface sewage treatment system complies with the
standards applicable to new subsurface sewage treatment systems or, if it
cannot come into compliance the standards applicable to alterations or
modifications of subsurface sewage treatment systems to the extent possible
pursuant to 15 RCNY §
18-38(b)(4), for the proposed use and volume, shall be binding upon the
Department for five years following the date of the determination.
   (c)   Design, operation, treatment, and maintenance requirements. 
      (1)   All subsurface sewage treatment systems shall be designed, operated
and maintained to prevent the exposure of sewage to the surface of the ground
or the discharge of sewage to ground- water.
      (2)   Limitations on certain systems in the watershed. 
         (i)   Mound systems, galley systems, seepage pits, evaporation-
transpiration (ET) and evaporation-transpiration absorption (ETA) systems are
prohibited from use for subsurface sewage treatment systems installed in the
watershed on or after June 30, 2002.
         (ii)   Drip and low profile dispersal systems, as described in New
York State Design Standards for Intermediate Sized Wastewater Treatment
Systems, New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (2014) are
prohibited from use for subsurface sewage treatment systems installed in the
watershed on or after September 25, 2019.
         (iii)   Sand filters are prohibited from use for individual sewage
treatment systems in the watershed.
         (iv)   For new subsurface sewage treatment systems within the 60-day
travel time, and for new subsurface sewage treatment systems that require State
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) permits, trench length
reductions will not be offered for use of any enhanced subsurface sewage
treatment systems.
         (v)   No trench length reductions shall be granted for use of any
open-bottom gravelless absorption system, as described in 10 NYCRR Appendix 75-
A.8(c)(3)(i). One linear foot of a gravelless absorption system is equivalent
to one linear foot of conventional (24" wide) absorption trench.
      (3)   An additional area of at least 100 percent of the primary
absorption field shall be set aside as a reserve absorption field for any
subsurface sewage treatment system.
      (4)   No part of any primary or reserve absorption field shall be built
under pavement or other impervious surfaces, and pavement and other impervious
surfaces shall not be built over such absorption fields after installation.
      (5)   At least one percolation test and at least one deep hole test must
be performed in the primary absorption field. At least one percolation test and
at least one deep hole test must be performed in the reserve absorption field.
An applicant must notify the Department in writing at least seven (7) days
prior to performance of such tests, and specify the location and the time of
the tests. Such soils testing must be performed during normal business hours on
weekdays other than legal holidays. At the option of the Department, a
Department representative may witness such tests.
      (6)   Proposed sites with soil percolation rates faster than 3 minutes
per inch or slower than 60 minutes per inch shall not be approved by the
Department for locating a subsurface sewage treatment system.
      (7)   Whenever possible, gravity flow systems shall be used for
subsurface sewage treatment systems. The use of electrically operated pumps
shall require a chamber equipped with an alarm to indicate malfunction and any
other safety features required by the Department to prevent sewage overflow. An
intermediate sized sewage treatment system that uses electrically operated
pumps is required to have either a backup pump or a backup storage tank capable
of holding two days' flow. An individual sewage treatment system that uses
electrically operated pumps shall have a backup storage tank capable of holding
one day's flow.
      (8)   A reserve absorption field is intended to be left undisturbed to be
used in the event that the primary absorption field fails in the future. If the
reserve absorption field is used because the primary absorption field has
failed, the owner should, but is not required to, identify a new reserve
absorption field. If the reserve absorption field is used for purposes of
expanding the subsurface sewage treatment system, a new reserve absorption
field or Department-approved alternative must be identified.
   (d)   Application Requirements. 
      (1)   An application for review and approval of any subsurface sewage
treatment system shall include the following information:
         (i)   Soil investigation report including:
            (a)   percolation test results;
            (b)   deep hole test pit results or boring analysis indicating the
depth of useable soil;
            (c)   indication of surface water or ledge rock observed;
            (d)   design rate of flow; and
            (e)   delineation of United States Department of Agriculture Soil
Conservation Service soil type boundaries.
         (ii)   Building permit number and tax map number where available.
         (iii)   Four (4) sets of plans prepared by a design professional
showing:
            (a)   site location, including distances to wells, watercourses,
rock outcroppings, wetlands, controlled lakes and reservoirs, and any property
boundaries within 10 feet of any subsurface sewage treatment system component;
            (b)   site/system plans, drawn to scale, with topography showing
two-foot contour intervals;
            (c)   system profile;
            (d)   details of system components; and
            (e)   a report containing:
               (1)   a description of the project characteristics; and
               (2)   a detailing of the design process.
      (2)   An application for review and approval of an intermediate sized
sewage treatment system shall include all of the information in paragraph (1)
of subdivision (c) of this section, and additionally shall contain:
         (i)   An Environmental Assessment form and State Environmental Quality
Review Act determination, if applicable; and
         (ii)   A SPDES permit, if applicable.
      (3)   All approvals for new subsurface sewage treatment systems are
conditioned on the applicant's submission of as-built drawings, prepared by a
design professional, once construction is complete.
      (4)   An application for review and approval of an alteration or
modification of a subsurface sewage treatment system, or of the resumption of
use of a subsurface sewage treatment following discontinuation, that cannot
satisfy the requirements applicable to new subsurface sewage treatment system
must include all of the information in paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of this
section, except that the Department may, at its option, waive the requirement
to submit a soil investigation report. For an intermediate sized sewage
treatment system, the application must include the information in paragraph (2)
of subdivision (d) of this section. An application must also contain:
         (i)   Plans or other design information, consisting of:
            (a)   If available, design plans for the subsurface sewage
treatment plans, indicating all known regulatory approvals for such plans;
            (b)   If design plans are not available, a description of the
components of the system prepared by a licensed professional engineer;
         (ii)   A proposal for enhancements to the system to meet the standards
in 15 RCNY §
18-38 applicable to a new subsurface sewage treatment system to the extent
possible, including the information required under 15 RCNY §
18-38(c); and
         (iii)   Any additional information demonstrating any or all of the
following:
            (a)   A reduction in the potential for contamination to or
degradation of the water supply from the subsurface sewage treatment system,
            (b)   A reduction in flow to the subsurface sewage treatment
system, or
            (c)   Mitigation measures to avoid contamination to, or degradation
of, the water supply.
   (e)   Construction Requirements. 
      (1)   The applicant must notify the Department at least two business days
before the start of construction of a subsurface sewage treatment system. The
locations of the absorption field corners, septic tanks, pump or dosing
chambers, and other treatment components must be staked out before the start of
construction, so that the Department can, at its option, verify compliance with
separation distance to wells, watercourses, and property lines. The ends of
absorption trenches and the corners of absorption beds must be staked out
before the start of construction. Stakes must be marked with applicable line
and grade information and may not be disturbed during construction.
      (2)   If construction of a subsurface sewage treatment system ceases for
more than seven days, the applicant must make best efforts to notify the
Department at least two business days before restarting construction.
      (3)   The applicant must notify the Department at least one day before
burying any component of a subsurface sewage treatment system.
      (4)   All notifications to the Department pursuant to this subsection (d)
must be made via the email address and/or telephone number listed on the
approval.
(Amended City Record 10/30/2019, eff. 11/29/2019)
§ 18-39 Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plans and Impervious Surfaces.
   (a)   Impervious surfaces.
      (1)   The construction of an impervious surface within the limiting
distance of 100 feet of a watercourse or wetland, or within the limiting
distance of 300 feet of a reservoir, reservoir stem, or controlled lake, is
prohibited.
      (2)   Paragraph (1) shall not apply to the following activities:
         (i)   Construction of a new individual residence, which shall comply
with paragraph (5) of this subdivision;
         (ii)   Non-commercial ancillary improvements or additions to an
individual residence;
         (iii)   Construction of an impervious surface for a driveway serving
an individual residence constructed or having obtained all discretionary
approvals necessary for construction prior to March 1, 2010;
         (iv)   Construction of an impervious surface for a driveway serving an
individual residence that obtains all discretionary approvals necessary for
construction on or after March 1, 2010, which shall comply with paragraph (5)
of this subdivision;
         (v)   Agricultural activities;
         (vi)   Construction of bridges or crossings of watercourses or
wetlands constructed pursuant to a valid permit from the appropriate regulatory
agencies. If a permit from a regulatory agency other than the Department is not
required, the applicant shall comply with paragraph (9) of this subdivision;
         (vii)   Creation of an impervious surface made necessary by the
construction of a wastewater treatment plant or alteration or modification of a
wastewater treatment plant approved by the Department;
         (viii)   Creation of an impervious surface that is made necessary by
the construction of a new facility or alteration or modification of an existing
facility used in connection with the operation of a public water supply system;
or
         (ix)   Creation of an impervious surface, such as a culvert, needed as
an integral component of diversion or piping of a watercourse, but only with
the review and approval of the Department and only if the Department determines
that such impervious surface will not have an adverse impact on water quality.
      (3)   Paragraph (1) shall not apply to creation of an impervious surface
in the West of Hudson watershed within a village, hamlet, village extension, or
area zoned for commercial or industrial uses, which complies with paragraph (8)
of this subdivision or to the creation of an impervious surface in the East of
Hudson watershed within a Designated Main Street Area, which complies with
paragraph (11) of this subdivision.
      (4)   Paragraph (1) shall not apply to the creation of an impervious
surface in connection with the following activities occurring in the East of
Hudson watershed outside a Designated Main Street Area or in the West of Hudson
watershed outside a village, hamlet, village extension, or an area zoned for
commercial or industrial uses:
         (i)   Construction of a new road or widening of an existing road,
which shall comply with paragraph (6) of this subdivision;
         (ii)   Creation of an impervious surface within a designated village
center, which shall comply with paragraph (7) of this subdivision; or
         (iii)   Expansion of an existing impervious surface within the
limiting distance of 100 feet of a watercourse or wetland, at an existing
commercial, institutional, municipal, industrial, or multi-family residential
facility, provided that the total area of all expanded impervious surfaces,
including all impervious surfaces allowed under this provision after May 1,
1997, does not exceed 25 percent of the area of the existing impervious surface
at that commercial, institutional, municipal, industrial, or multi-family
residential facility, which shall comply with subdivisions (b), (c) and (d) of
this section.
      (5)   The following requirements are applicable to construction of a new
individual residence and of impervious surfaces for driveways serving
individual residences that obtain all discretionary approvals necessary for
construction on or after March 1, 2010:
         (i)   Whether or not a new individual residence will be located in a
subdivision, construction of a new individual residence within the limiting
distance of 300 feet of a reservoir, reservoir stem, or controlled lake is
prohibited;
         (ii)   Construction of a new individual residence in a subdivision
within the limiting distance of 100 feet of a watercourse or wetland is
prohibited where:
            (a)   The subdivision plat received preliminary approval on or
after October 16, 1995; or
            (b)   The subdivision plat received preliminary approval before
October 16, 1995, the person who owned the subdivision on October 16, 1995 was
the same person, or a principal or affiliate of the person, who owned the
subdivision at the time the subdivision plat received preliminary approval, and
construction activity related to infrastructure improvements for the
subdivision had not begun as of October 16, 1995;
         (iii)   Construction of a new individual residence not in a
subdivision, or in a subdivision approved before October 16, 1995 and not
prohibited by paragraph (a)(5)(ii)(b) of this subdivision, within the limiting
distance of 100 feet of a perennial stream or wetland requires an individual
residential stormwater permit from the Department, pursuant to subdivision (e)
of this section;
         (iv)   Construction of an impervious surface for a driveway serving an
individual residence that obtains all discretionary approvals necessary for
construction on or after March 1, 2010 within the limiting distance of 300 feet
of a reservoir, reservoir stem, or controlled lake is prohibited;
         (v)   Construction of an impervious surface for a driveway to serve an
individual residence that obtains all discretionary approvals necessary for
construction on or after March 1, 2010, within the limiting distance of 100
feet of a perennial stream or within the limiting distance of 50 feet of an
intermittent stream or wetland, requires an individual residential stormwater
permit from the Department, pursuant to subdivision (e) of this section.
      (6)   The following requirements are applicable to construction of an
impervious surface for a new road or the widening of an existing road:
         (i)   Construction of an impervious surface for a new road within the
limiting distance of 300 feet of a reservoir, reservoir stem or controlled lake
is prohibited, except paving an existing dirt or gravel road is permitted.
Construction of a new impervious surface by paving an existing dirt or gravel
road requires a stormwater pollution prevention plan which complies with
subdivisions (b), (c) and (d) of this section.
         (ii)   Construction of an impervious surface for a new road within the
limiting distance of 50 feet of an intermittent stream or wetland, or within
the limiting distance of 100 feet of a perennial stream, is prohibited, except
for paving an existing dirt or gravel road or where necessary to provide an
access road. Construction of an impervious surface for paving such existing
dirt or gravel road or for such a new access road requires a stormwater
pollution prevention plan which complies with the requirements of subdivisions
(b), (c) and (d) of this section for the entire impervious surface. An access
road constructed pursuant to this paragraph shall be constructed as far as
practicable from all watercourses and wetlands, as determined by the
Department.
         (iii)   Construction of an impervious surface for a new road between
the limiting distances of 50 feet and 100 feet of an intermittent stream or
wetland requires a stormwater pollution prevention plan which complies with the
requirements of subdivisions (b), (c) and (d) of this section.
         (iv)   Widening of an existing road located within the limiting
distance of 50 feet of an intermittent stream or wetland, within the limiting
distance of 100 feet of a perennial stream, or within the limiting distance of
300 feet of a reservoir, reservoir stem or controlled lake shall be performed
on the side of such existing road furthest from the watercourse, wetland,
reservoir, reservoir stem or controlled lake, to the extent practical.
      (7)   The following requirements are applicable to creation of an
impervious surface within a designated village center:
         (i)   A local government in the Croton System may delineate an area
within the local government's boundaries to be a "designated village center" in
a Comprehensive Croton Water Quality Protection Plan prepared and agreed to in
accordance with 15 RCNY §
18-82. Such designated village center shall comply with the requirements of
this paragraph with regard to the construction of impervious surfaces.
         (ii)   Within a designated village center the construction of a new
impervious surface within the limiting distance of 100 feet of a watercourse or
wetland, or within the limiting distance of 300 feet of a reservoir, reservoir
stem, or controlled lake requires the review and approval of the Department. An
approval issued by the Department pursuant to this subparagraph shall contain a
determination by the Department that there is no reasonable alternative to the
creation of the proposed new impervious surface within the applicable limiting
distance and that the best available measures have been taken to prevent
adverse impacts on the quality of the drinking water supply.
      (8)   The following requirements are applicable to creation of an
impervious surface in the West of Hudson watershed within a village, hamlet,
village extension or area zoned for commercial or industrial uses:
         (i)   Creation of any new impervious surface within the limiting
distance of 100 feet of a watercourse or wetland, or within the limiting
distance of 300 feet of a reservoir, reservoir stem or controlled lake, within
a village, hamlet, village extension or area zoned for commercial or industrial
uses as of the effective date of these rules and regulations, requires a
stormwater pollution prevention plan which complies with the requirements of
subdivisions (b), (c) and (d) of this section, except that the foregoing
requirements of this subparagraph shall not apply to the creation of a new
impervious surface for an activity set forth in paragraph (2) of this
subdivision which complies with the provisions of paragraph (2).
         (ii)   If a local government in the West of Hudson watershed adopts a
zoning ordinance designating additional areas for commercial or industrial use
after the effective date of these rules and regulations, it may apply to the
Department to allow construction of new impervious surfaces in the newly zoned
commercial or industrial areas located within the limiting distance of 100 feet
of a watercourse or wetland, or within the limiting distance of 300 feet of a
reservoir, reservoir stem, or controlled lake. The Department shall approve
such application if the Department determines that allowing new impervious
surfaces in such newly zoned commercial or industrial area is consistent with
the objectives of these rules and regulations and with previously approved
zoning ordinances. If approved by the Department, creation of new impervious
surfaces within such newly zoned commercial or industrial areas within the
aforesaid limiting distances shall be allowed subject to the requirements of
subparagraph (8)(i) above.
      (9)   Construction of a bridge or crossing of a watercourse or wetland
which does not require a permit from a regulatory agency other than the
Department shall require the review and approval of the Department. Such bridge
or crossing shall be constructed to prevent adverse impacts on the quality of
the water supply.
      (10)   Maintenance of an existing impervious surface shall not require
the review and approval of the Department.
      (11)   The following requirements are applicable to creation of an
impervious surface in the East of Hudson watershed within a Designated Main
Street Area:
         (i)   Creation of any new impervious surface within a Designated Main
Street Area requires a stormwater pollution prevention plan which complies with
the requirements of subdivisions (b), (c), and (d) of this section, except that
the foregoing requirements of this subparagraph shall not apply to the creation
of a new impervious surface for an activity set forth in paragraph (2) of this
subdivision which complies with the provisions of paragraph (2).
         (ii)   The approved boundary descriptions of all Designated Main
Street Areas shall be made available by the Department for public inspection at
its field offices in the East of Hudson watershed.
   (b)   Stormwater pollution prevention plans.
      (1)   Stormwater pollution prevention plans shall not be required to be
prepared pursuant to this section for agricultural and silvicultural
activities.
      (2)   Stormwater pollution prevention plans shall not be required to be
prepared pursuant to this section for clear cutting and mining activities,
provided, however, that such activities shall be subject to the requirements
set forth in the applicable New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation SPDES Permit which may be required pursuant to Environmental
Conservation Law § 17-0808.
      (3)   Stormwater pollution prevention plans shall be prepared for the
activities listed in subparagraph (4) of this subdivision. Such plans shall
also be subject to the prior review and approval of the Department. Such plans
shall be prepared and implemented in accordance with the requirements of Part
III of the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation SPDES
General Permit No. GP-0-15-002 that are applicable to construction activities
identified in Table 2 of Appendix B, and in accordance with the requirements of
subdivision (c) of this section, except that:
         (i)   plans for redevelopment shall be prepared and implemented in
accordance with subdivision (b)(8),
         (ii)   plans for construction activities identified in Table 1 of
Appendix B must be prepared and implemented in accordance with the requirements
of Part III of the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
SPDES General Permit No. GP-0-15-002 that are applicable to construction
activities identified in Table 1 of Appendix B. A construction activity will be
deemed to "alter hydrology from pre to post development conditions," for
purposes of Table 1 of Appendix B, if the post-development peak rate of flow
for the activity has increased by more than 5% of the pre-developed condition
for the one-year, twenty-four hour storm, the ten-year, twenty-four hour storm,
or the one hundred-year, twenty-four hour storm as defined herein. A
construction activity that is excluded from coverage under Table 1 of Appendix
B because it alters hydrology from pre to post development conditions must
comply with the requirements of subdivision (b)(3) above,
         (iii)   plans for construction activities requiring Department review
and approval of a stormwater pollution prevention plan under this section that
involve disturbance of less than one (1) acre of total land area, other than
construction of gasoline stations and construction, alteration, or modification
of solid waste management facilities, and which will not result in hot spot
runoff, must be prepared and implemented in accordance with subdivision (b)(9),
and
         (iv)   no activity shall be exempt from any such requirements as a
result of the size or nature of the watercourse(s) to which stormwater from
such activity discharges, except with prior written approval from the
Department. Such plans shall also be subject to the prior review and approval
of the Department.
      (4)   The activities for which a stormwater pollution prevention plan
must be prepared under subparagraph (3) of this subdivision are:
         (i)   Plans for development or sale of land that will result in the
disturbance of five (5) or more acres of total land area as described in the
definition of larger common plan of development or sale in Appendix A of SPDES
General Permit No. GP-0-15-002;
         (ii)   Construction of a subdivision;
         (iii)   Construction of a new industrial, institutional, municipal,
commercial or multi-family residential project that will result in creation of
an impervious surface totaling over 40,000 square feet in size;
         (iv)   A land clearing or land grading project, involving two or more
acres, located at least in part within the limiting distance of 100 feet of a
watercourse or wetland, or within the limiting distance of 300 feet of a
reservoir, reservoir stem or controlled lake or on a slope exceeding 15
percent;
         (v)   Construction of a new solid waste management facility or
alteration or modification of an existing solid waste management facility
within 300 feet of a watercourse or wetland or 500 feet of a reservoir,
reservoir stem or controlled lake;
         (vi)   Construction of a gasoline station;
         (vii)   Construction of an impervious surface for a new road, for an
access road, or for an existing dirt or gravel road, as required by paragraph
(a)(6) of this section;
         (viii)   Construction of an impervious surface in the West of Hudson
watershed within a village, hamlet, village extension or area zoned for
commercial or industrial uses, as required by paragraph (a)(8) of this section;
         (ix)   Up to a 25 percent expansion of an existing impervious surface
at an existing commercial, institutional, municipal, industrial, or multi-
family residential facility which is within the limiting distance of 100 feet
of a watercourse or wetland, as required in subdivision (a)(4)(iii) of this
section; or
         (x)   Construction of an impervious surface in the East of Hudson
Watershed in a Designated Main Street Area.
      (5)   If there is a significant change in design, construction,
operation, or maintenance of an activity which is subject to a Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan pursuant to subdivision (b)(3) which may have a
significant effect on the potential for the discharge of pollutants to surface
waters and which has not otherwise been addressed in the Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan, or if the Stormwater Pollution Plan proves to be ineffective
in eliminating or significantly minimizing erosion and sedimentation or the
discharge of pollutants associated with construction activity, the Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan must be amended. Such amended stormwater pollution
prevention plan shall be submitted to the Department for prior review and
approval and shall comply with the requirements of this section.
      (6)   Any approval of a stormwater pollution prevention plan issued by
the Department expires and is null and void unless construction is completed
within five (5) years of the date of issuance or within any extended period of
time approved by the Department upon good cause shown. Following expiration of
the approval, the application for the stormwater pollution prevention plan may
be resubmitted to the Department for consideration for a new approval.
      (7)   As a condition of approval the Department may require evidence of
financial security prior to construction from any owner or operator of a
stormwater management system pursuant to a stormwater pollution prevention
plan. Such financial security shall consist of a bond, or an equivalent
guaranty, to be deposited with the Department, covering the full cost of the
construction of such facility and an additional bond or an equivalent guaranty
for the payment of labor and material furnished in the course of such
construction. Upon completion of construction and payment of labor and
materials, such bonds or other guaranties shall be released. Additionally, a
bond or equivalent guaranty may be required for the maintenance and operation
of the facility for a period of five years post-construction. No bond or
guaranty is required where the owner or operator of such a facility is a
village, town, county or city.
      (8)   Where portions of an activity that require a stormwater pollution
prevention plan pursuant to subdivision (b)(3) constitute redevelopment as
defined herein, those portions of such plan shall:
         (i)   be prepared and implemented, to the extent possible, in
accordance with the requirements of Part III of the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation SPDES General Permit No. GP-0-15-002 that are
applicable to the construction activities identified in Table 2 of Appendix B;
      (9)   Where an activity requiring Department review and approval of a
stormwater pollution prevention plan under this section that involves
disturbance of less than one (1) acre of total land area, other than
construction of a gasoline station or construction, alteration, or modification
of a solid waste management facility, and which will not result in hot spot
runoff, requires a stormwater pollution prevention plan pursuant to subdivision
(b)(3) above, the application must consist of:
         (i)   A plan of the proposed activity, identifying the area of
disturbance, the location of any existing or proposed impervious surfaces, and
the location of any watercourses, wetlands, reservoirs, reservoir stems or
controlled lakes on or adjacent to the property;
         (ii)   A description and depiction of proposed erosion controls
sufficient to prevent sedimentation of the receiving watercourse, wetland,
reservoir, reservoir stem or controlled lake on or adjacent to the property
during construction. Erosion controls typically consist of sediment barriers,
such as hay bales and silt fencing, temporary sediment traps and temporary
stormwater flow diversions;
         (iii)   A schedule for construction, including grading and site
stabilization; and
         (iv)   A description and depiction of proposed permanent stormwater
management practices designed to filter, detain, or infiltrate runoff from
impervious surfaces, thereby minimizing the post-construction increase in
pollutant loading to the receiving watercourse, wetland, reservoir, reservoir
stem or controlled lake.
   (c)   Additional Requirements for Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plans.
      (1)   When any activity listed in paragraph (3) of subdivision (b) of
this section is proposed to be undertaken in the drainage basin of a terminal
reservoir, as identified in the watershed maps in
Appendix 18-A, the stormwater pollution prevention plan shall include analysis
of coliform runoff, before and after the land disturbance activity.
         (i)   If such proposed activity causes or contributes to the
contravention of the coliform standard set forth in 15 RCNY §
18-48(b)(1), the stormwater pollution prevention plan shall not be approved by
the Department, unless the measures required by the stormwater pollution
prevention plan in conjunction with any other controls to be imposed that limit
future land disturbance at the site, including but not limited to property
easements, restrictive covenants, zoning laws and development by-laws, will
prevent the contribution of additional coliform.
      (2)   Stormwater Conveyance Measures. Stormwater pollution prevention
plans prepared pursuant to this section shall provide for the maintenance of
natural drainage systems, including perennial and intermittent streams, and the
use of swales and drainage ditches in an open condition to the maximum extent
practicable. A stormwater pollution prevention plan shall ensure that any
closed stormwater conveyance measures are sized appropriately to convey, at a
minimum, the 10-year, 24-hour storm flow.
      (3)   Stormwater Treatment Volume. All stormwater pollution prevention
plans prepared pursuant to this section shall include measures to capture and
treat the greater of the volume of runoff generated by the 1-year, 24-hour
storm or the Water Quality Volume (WQv), except that a stormwater management
practice may be designed to capture and treat the lesser of those volumes if it
is a stormwater infiltration practice or it is a bioretention practice in
hydrologic soil group A or B. Stormwater management practices which provide
treatment shall be designed to accommodate the quantity of runoff flowing to
the stormwater management practice, including runoff from off-site areas.
      (4)   Where a stormwater pollution prevention plan prepared pursuant to
this section includes a stormwater infiltration practice, to the maximum extent
practicable, no portion of such stormwater infiltration practice shall be
located within 100 feet of any portion of the absorption field of a subsurface
sewage treatment system.
      (5)   To the maximum extent practicable, an activity requiring a
stormwater pollution prevention plan, and the stormwater pollution prevention
plan prepared for such activity, shall be designed:
         (i)   To minimize the alteration of the existing drainage areas and to
maintain the volumes of flow at design points at pre-construction levels,
except as necessary to alleviate downstream flooding problems or other adverse
conditions in existence prior to construction, or to divert runoff from off-
site and/or undisturbed areas away from areas proposed to be disturbed.
         (ii)   To minimize loss of annual recharge to groundwater by
maximizing the use of stormwater infiltration practices where suitable soil
conditions exist.
      (6)   If an activity requiring a stormwater pollution prevention plan
will result in impervious surfaces covering twenty percent (20%) or more of the
drainage area for which a stormwater management practice is designed, the
stormwater pollution prevention plan shall provide for stormwater runoff from
that drainage area to be treated by two different types of stormwater
management practices in series, except that only one stormwater management
practice is required if either:
         (i)   the stormwater management practice provided is a stormwater
infiltration practice; or
         (ii)   the activity requiring a stormwater pollution prevention plan
is in the West of Hudson watershed within a village, hamlet, village extension,
or area zoned for commercial or industrial uses or in the East of Hudson
watershed within a Designated Main Street Area.
      (7)   For purposes of the design criteria incorporated by reference in
New York State Department of Environmental Conservation SPDES General Permit
No. GP-0-15-002, "detention time" shall mean the time runoff is detained in a
stormwater management practice. It can be computed using either the center of
mass method or the plug flow method.
   (d)   Application requirements and procedures.
      (1)   An application for approval of a stormwater pollution prevention
plan shall include:
         (i)   The pollution prevention plan; and
         (ii)   The information required in a Notice of Intent under New York
State Department of Environmental Conservation SPDES General Permit No. GP-0-
15-002.
      (2)   When the Department notifies an applicant that an application for
approval of a stormwater pollution prevention plan is complete pursuant to 15
RCNY §
18-23(d)(2) and (3), the Department shall also issue a written notification to
the Stormwater Project Review Committee ("Committee") for the Town(s) or
Village in which the activity requiring preparation of the stormwater pollution
prevention plan is proposed to be located, of the Department's receipt of a
complete application.
         (i)   If requested by one or more members of the Committee, the
Department shall submit a copy of the complete application to the Committee for
its review and shall convene a meeting, in person or by telephone, of the
Committee.
         (ii)   The Department shall not be required to meet with or otherwise
further consult with a member of the Committee concerning an application where
the Committee member declines to review the application or fails to attend a
meeting of the Committee convened to consider the application.
      (3)   Upon completion of their review of the application, and upon a
majority vote of the Committee members, including the Department's Committee
member, who reviewed the application, the Committee may recommend to the
Department that an application for approval of a stormwater pollution
prevention plan be approved, approved with conditions or disapproved.
         (i)   If the Department's Committee member agrees with the majority
recommendation of the Committee, the Department may proceed to issue its
determination to the applicant.
         (ii)   If the Department's Committee member disagrees with the
majority recommendation of the Committee, the application, together with the
written recommendation of the Committee, shall be submitted to the Commissioner
of the Department for review and a determination. The Commissioner shall issue
a written record of decision setting forth the basis for the determination and
responding to any contrary written recommendations submitted by any member of
the Committee.
         (iii)   If the Committee fails to make a recommendation to the
Department at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date the Department is
required to notify an applicant in writing of its determination pursuant to 15
RCNY §
18-23(d)(5), the Department may proceed to issue its determination and the
Department shall not be required by these rules and regulations to further
consult with or consider the comments of the Committee or any member of the
Committee.
      (4)   Failure of any Committee member, other than the Department
Committee member, to act in accordance with the procedures or within the time
frames set forth in these rules and regulations, shall relieve the Department
of any obligation to consult with or consider the comments of the Committee
member. Failure of any Committee member, other than the Department Committee
member, to act in accordance with the procedures or within the time frames set
forth in these rules and regulations, shall not invalidate any determination
issued by the Department.
      (5)   A Committee may only make recommendations to the Department and
shall have no authority to make decisions on behalf of the Department. For
purposes of SEQRA, the Department's determination on an application, not the
Committee's recommendation to the Department, shall be considered a final
decision.
   (e)   Individual residential stormwater permits.
      (1)   An individual residential stormwater permit is required for:
         (i)   Construction of a new individual residence, not located within a
subdivision, and located within the limiting distance of 100 feet of a
perennial stream or wetland;
         (ii)   Construction of a new individual residence located within a
subdivision approved before October 16, 1995, and not prohibited by paragraph
(a)(5)(ii)(b) of this section, and located within the limiting distance of 100
feet of a perennial stream or wetland; and
         (iii)   Construction of an impervious surface for a driveway to serve
an individual residence that obtains all discretionary approvals necessary for
construction on or after March 1, 2010, located within the limiting distances
of 50 feet of an intermittent stream or wetland or within 100 feet of a
perennial stream, except that no individual residential stormwater permit is
required if the driveway is included in an activity requiring Department
approval of a stormwater pollution prevention plan.
      (2)   Application requirements. An application for issuance of an
individual residential stormwater permit shall include:
         (i)   A plan of the proposed individual residence and/or driveway;
         (ii)   A plan or map identifying the location of any watercourses,
wetlands, reservoirs, reservoir stems or controlled lakes on or adjacent to the
property;
         (iii)   A plan showing the approximate area of site disturbance;
         (iv)   A description and depiction of proposed erosion controls
sufficient to prevent sedimentation of the receiving watercourse or wetland
during construction. Erosion controls typically consist of sediment barriers,
such as hay bales and silt fencing, and temporary stormwater diversions;
         (v)   A schedule for construction, including grading and site
stabilization; and
         (vi)   A description and depiction of proposed stormwater best
management practices designed to filter, detain, or filtrate runoff from the
individual residence or driveway, thereby minimizing the post-construction
increase in pollutant loading to the receiving perennial stream or wetland.
      (3)   An individual residential stormwater permit issued by the
Department shall expire and thereafter be null and void unless construction is
completed within two (2) years of the date of issuance of the permit, or within
any extended period of time approved by the Department upon good cause shown.
Following expiration of the permit, the application for the individual
residential stormwater permit may be resubmitted to the Department for
consideration for a new permit.
(Amended City Record 10/30/2019, eff. 11/29/2019)
§ 18-40 Miscellaneous Point Sources.
   (a)   Unless otherwise permitted by the rules and regulations, a discharge,
or storage which is reasonably likely to lead to a discharge into the
environment (including into groundwater), from industrial facilities, including
vehicle washing facilities, and which is reasonably likely to cause degradation
of surface water quality or of the water supply, is prohibited. It shall be an
affirmative defense under this subsection that such discharge, or storage
likely to lead to a discharge, is either permitted or not prohibited under
federal law, and is either permitted or not prohibited under state law.
   (b)   Any new point source, excluding point sources otherwise regulated
pursuant to these rules and regulations, is prohibited from discharging into a
reservoir or controlled lake, reservoir stem, or wetland.
§ 18-41 Solid Waste.
   (a)   Siting or horizontal expansion of a junkyard or a municipal solid
waste landfill, within the limiting distance of 250 feet of a watercourse or
wetland, or the siting or horizontal expansion of a junkyard or a solid waste
management facility within the limiting distance of 1,000 feet of a reservoir,
reservoir stem or controlled lake is prohibited except for:
      (1)   Recyclable handling and recovery facilities that handle non-
putrescible solid waste, such as newspapers, magazines, corrugated boxes,
glass, cans and plastic, but not non-putrescible solid waste such as batteries,
car batteries, and waste oil;
      (2)   Composting facilities for individual households for personal use;
or
      (3)   Expansion of the existing permitted municipal solid waste landfill
located within Delaware County.
   (b)   Discharge of solid waste directly into any watercourse, wetland,
reservoir, reservoir stem or controlled lake is prohibited. For purposes of
this subdivision, solid waste includes materials that are otherwise exempt from
compliance with 6 NYCRR Part 360, as described in 6 NYCRR § 360.2(a)(3), unless
those materials are irrigation return flows, materials that are used for
artificial reefs in compliance with applicable State requirements, or
authorized to be discharged to waters of the state pursuant to a valid permit
issued by the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation pursuant
to Environmental Conservation Law article 15, 17, 24, 25, or 34 or a water
quality certification issued under Section 401 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act. This subdivision shall not apply to discharge of treated leachate
in accordance with the requirements of these rules and regulations and a valid
SPDES permit.
   (c)   Only construction and demolition debris that is recognizable
uncontaminated concrete, asphalt pavement, brick, soil, stone, trees or stumps,
wood chips, or yard waste may be used as fill in the watershed.
   (d)   All new solid waste management facilities, or altered or modified
existing solid waste management facilities within the limiting distance of 300
feet of a watercourse or wetland, or within the limiting distance of 500 feet
of a reservoir, reservoir stem, or controlled lake, are required to submit
stormwater pollution prevention plans to the Department for review and
approval, in accordance with 15 RCNY §
18-39(b)(3)(v).
(Amended City Record 10/30/2019, eff. 11/29/2019)
§ 18-42 Agricultural Activities.
Any intentional, knowing or reckless act or omission that in the course of an
agricultural activity significantly increases pollutants in the water supply is
prohibited.
§ 18-43 Pesticides.
Unless otherwise permitted by these rules and regulations, the discharge or
use, or storage of pesticides which is reasonably likely to lead to a
discharge, of pesticides into the environment (including into groundwater), and
which is reasonably likely to cause degradation of surface water quality or of
the water supply, is prohibited. It shall be an affirmative defense under this
subsection that such discharge, or storage likely to lead to a discharge, is
either permitted or not prohibited under federal law, and is either permitted
or not prohibited under state law.
§ 18-44 Fertilizers.
   (a)   The requirements of this section shall not apply to the application or
storage of fertilizers for:
      (1)   An agricultural activity performed in compliance with State or
Federal law; and
      (2)   Non-commercial application by an individual on residential
premises.
   (b)   No fertilizer activity shall be considered to be a noncomplying
regulated activity.
   (c)   Discharge from the washing of fertilizer application equipment into
any watercourse, wetland, reservoir, reservoir stem or controlled lake is
prohibited.
   (d)   Use of water directly from a reservoir, reservoir stem or controlled
lake for fertilizer make-up is prohibited.
   (e)   Use of water directly from a watercourse for fertilizer make-up
without the use of an anti-siphon device is prohibited.
   (f)   Open storage of fertilizer is prohibited.
§ 18-45 Snow Disposal and Storage and Use of Winter Highway Maintenance
Materials.
   (a)   Whenever feasible removed snow shall not be disposed of directly into
a watercourse, wetland, reservoir, reservoir stem or controlled lake. However,
this subdivision shall not be construed to require an owner or operator to
transport the removed snow in a vehicle for offsite disposal.
   (b)   No snow disposal activity shall be considered to be a noncomplying
regulated activity.
   (c)   Commercial, industrial, governmental, or institutional entities shall
be restricted to the use of the substances defined in these rules and
regulations as winter highway maintenance materials and to the use of the
minimum amount needed of such substances in order to protect the public safety.
In determining the minimum amount needed for public safety, such entities
should consider best management practices developed by the New York State
Department of Transportation.
   (d)   (1)   Commercial, industrial, governmental, or institutional entities
that store winter highway maintenance materials in quantities of 1,000 pounds
or more that contain greater than eight percent chloride compounds shall store
such materials in structures constructed on low permeability storage pads.
      (2)   Any outdoor areas used for loading, handling or mixing of winter
highway maintenance materials shall be constructed and maintained to prevent
seepage and runoff from entering any watercourse, wetland, reservoir, reservoir
stem or controlled lake.
   (e)   All commercial, industrial, governmental, or institutional entities
that store winter highway maintenance materials in quantities and composition
not otherwise subject to paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of this section,
shall store such materials in a manner that minimizes runoff into any
watercourse, wetland, reservoir, reservoir stem, or controlled lake. Runoff may
be controlled by use of control measures such as berms and covers.
   (f)   A winter highway maintenance material storage facility may be enlarged
provided that the enlarged facility is in compliance with the storage
requirements set forth in this section, and any other applicable requirements
of these rules and regulations.
   (g)   Winter highway maintenance material storage facilities that are
noncomplying regulated activities shall come into compliance with this section
no later than two years from the effective date of these rules and regulations.
**** Subchapter D: Water Quality Standards for Reservoirs and Controlled Lakes
****
§ 18-48 Water Quality Standards.
   (a)   The water in all reservoirs, Lake Gilead, and Lake Gleneida, shall
meet the following standards of quality:
      (1)   6 NYCRR Parts 701 and 703 (standards applicable to Class AA
waters), and
      (2)   The New York State Department of Environmental Conservation
Technical and Operational Guidance Series (TOGS) 1.1.1, Ambient Water Quality
Standards and Guidance Values (October 22, 1993, Reissue Date June 1998, as
modified and supplemented by the January 1999 Errata Sheet and the April 2000
and June 2004 Addenda) which lists the ambient water quality standards and
guidance values for principal organic chemicals and synthetic organic
chemicals.
   (b)   In addition, the water in source water reservoirs shall meet the
following phosphorus standard:
      (1)   Total phosphorus concentrations shall be equal to or less than 15
micrograms per liter.
   (c)   In addition, the water within 500 feet of the aqueduct effluent
chamber located at a terminal reservoir (Kensico, West Branch, New Croton,
Ashokan and Rondout) shall meet the following coliform standard:
      (1)   Raw water fecal coliform concentrations shall be equal to or less
than 20 colonies per 100 milliliters or total coliform concentration shall be
equal to or less than 100 colonies per 100 milliliters in at least 90 percent
of the measurements made over any consecutive six month period. For purposes of
determining compliance with this paragraph, a minimum of five samples per week
will be taken from each terminal reservoir. If both fecal and total coliform
analyses are performed, the fecal coliform results shall take precedence over
the total coliform analysis.
   (d)   For purposes of determining compliance with this subchapter, the
Department shall take water samples from the controlled lakes and reservoirs
and shall evaluate them in accordance with subdivisions (a), (b), and (c) of
this section.
      (1)   Where total coliform concentrations exceed the standards set forth
in 6 NYCRR Parts 701 and 703, and are determined by the Department to be due to
non-perennial, non-anthropogenic sources, such exceedances shall not be
included in calculating whether a violation of these rules and regulations has
occurred.
      (2)   Where fecal coliform concentrations exceed the standards set forth
in subparagraph (c) above, and are determined by the Department to be due to
non-perennial, non-anthropogenic sources, such exceedances shall not be
included in calculating whether a violation of these rules and regulations has
occurred.
   (e)   The Department shall, on an annual basis, conduct a review of water
quality data for the purpose of determining whether each reservoir and
controlled lake meets or fails to meet the water quality standards set forth in
subdivisions (a), (b), and (c) of this section, as applicable. The results of
the Department's review, together with the calculations used in arriving at the
results for each reservoir, shall be published in a report which shall be made
available to the public upon request.
**** Subchapter E: Enforcement ****
§ 18-51 Enforcement.
   (a)   The City shall enforce the rules and regulations set forth herein, in
a manner consistent with applicable Federal, State and local laws.
   (b)   The City may, in enforcing the rules and regulations set forth herein,
exercise all of its rights and remedies under applicable Federal, State and
local laws, including, but not limited to: inspecting facilities engaging in
regulated activities and sources of the water supply in accordance with
applicable federal and State constitutional requirements; issuing notices of
violation or of intention to sue; instituting civil or criminal actions;
seeking injunctive relief and legal damages; imposing penalties in accordance
with Public Health Law § 1103; and entering into consent orders and agreements.
   (c)   Nothing contained in these rules and regulations shall be construed as
limiting the City's ability to exercise any of its rights and remedies under
any other law, statute, rule, regulation, or order, including, but not limited
to, the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (aka the Clean Water Act), 33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.; the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation,
and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601 et seq.; the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.; the Oil Pollution Act, 33 U.S.C. §§
2701 et seq.; Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act, 7 U.S.C. §§
136 et seq.; Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq.; New York
State Public Health Law; New York State Environmental Conservation Law; New
York State Navigation Law; New York State Department of Health septic system
requirements (10 NYCRR Appendix 75-A); New York State Real Property Actions and
Proceedings Law; and New York State Penal Law.
   (d)   Upon completion of the requirements of the State Administrative
Procedure Act (SAPA) and the promulgation of these rules and regulations by the
New York State Department of Health as State rules and regulations, the
requirements of these rules and regulations may also be enforced by the
Commissioner of the New York State Department of Health.
**** Subchapter F: Variances ****
§ 18-61 Variances.
   (a)   The Commissioner may, in his or her discretion, upon written
application from the applicant, grant a variance from the requirements of these
rules and regulations for a regulated activity and for the alteration or
modification of a noncomplying regulated activity.
      (1)   An application for a variance for a regulated activity or for an
alteration or modification of a noncomplying regulated activity shall:
         (i)   Identify the specific provision of the rules and regulations
from which the variance is sought or identify the nature and extent of the
alteration or modification of the noncomplying regulated activity;
         (ii)   Demonstrate that the variance requested is the minimum
necessary to afford relief; and
         (iii)   Demonstrate that the activity as proposed includes adequate
mitigation measures to avoid contamination to or degradation of the water
supply which are at least as protective of the water supply as the standards
for regulated activities set forth in these rules and regulations.
      (2)   In granting variances the Commissioner may impose specific
conditions, including evidence of financial security, time limitations and
limitations on any transfer of the variance granted. In addition, the
Commissioner may grant a lesser variance than that applied for.
      (3)   Any proposed substantial alteration or modification of an activity
that has been granted a variance under this subchapter shall require the review
and approval of the Department and shall comply with the provisions of this
subchapter.
      (4)   The burden of proof for a variance shall be on the applicant.
      (5)   Except for a variance granted for an alteration or modification of
a noncomplying regulated activity, a grant of a variance for a regulated
activity shall not be deemed to make such activity a noncomplying regulated
activity under these rules and regulations.
   (b)   An appeal of a denial of a variance for a regulated activity or a
denial of a variance for an alteration or modification of a noncomplying
regulated activity may be made in the manner specified in 15 RCNY §
18-28.
   (c)   Failure to comply with any condition of a variance for a regulated
activity, or for a variance for an alteration or modification of a noncomplying
regulated activity shall be a violation of these rules and regulations. The
Department shall review the terms and conditions of each variance granted at
least once every five years to determine whether the terms and conditions of
the variance have been complied with.
   (d)   Variances within coliform and phosphorus restricted basins.
      (1)   The Department may grant a variance from the prohibition of
locating a new wastewater treatment plant or expanding an existing wastewater
treatment plant in a coliform restricted basin, or in a phosphorus restricted
basin, where the Department determines that conditions in the area to be served
by the new or expanded wastewater treatment plant are resulting in the release
or discharge of inadequately treated sewage into the water supply, and that
there is no other feasible method of correcting such release or discharge of
inadequately treated sewage except to provide a variance from such prohibition.
Provided, however, that in such cases, the additional treatment capacity of the
new or expanded wastewater treatment plant may only be of a size sufficient to
service the area identified as the source of contamination and any immediate
area of concern as limited or delineated by the Department.
      (2)   A request for a variance from the prohibition of expanding an
existing wastewater treatment plant located in a phosphorus restricted basin
which does not meet the criteria set forth in subdivision (d)(1) may be granted
only if the applicant demonstrates that subsurface discharge is impossible and
that every one (1) kilogram of projected increase in the phosphorus load
resulting from the expansion of the existing wastewater treatment plant and
accompanying non-point source runoff, is offset by two (2) kilograms of
reductions in phosphorus loading within such basin provided by enhanced
treatment, basin-wide phosphorus trading, and/or a watershed protection plan
developed pursuant to Subchapter H.
   (e)   Variances Within the 60 Day Travel Time to Intake in the Croton
System.
      (1)   The Department may grant a variance from the prohibition set forth
in 15 RCNY §
18-36(d)(2)(i) against locating a new wastewater treatment plant or expanding
an existing wastewater treatment plant in the Croton System, within the 60 day
travel time to intake, where the Department has made the following
determinations:
         (i)   One of the following situations is present:
            (a)   conditions in the area to be served by the new or expanded
wastewater treatment plant, including failed subsurface sewage treatment
systems, are resulting in the release or discharge of inadequately treated
sewage into the water supply; or
            (b)   influent flow rates to an existing wastewater treatment plant
exceed the permitted flow limit for the wastewater treatment plant as specified
in its SPDES permit and/or the design capacity of the wastewater treatment
plant and have caused, or can reasonably be expected to cause, the release of
inadequately treated sewage.
         (ii)   There is no other feasible method of correcting such release or
discharge of inadequately treated sewage except by locating a new or expanding
an existing surface-discharging wastewater treatment plant within the 60 day
travel time to intake; and
         (iii)   The applicant has demonstrated that there are no sources of
inflow or infiltration to the sewer system of the new or expanded wastewater
treatment plant, other than sources that are to be eliminated pursuant to a
consent order or other commitment binding on the applicant, that can
practicably be eliminated.
      (2)   The applicant must demonstrate to the Department, that the total
flow to the new or expanded wastewater treatment plant authorized pursuant to
this subdivision will be limited as follows:
         (i)   if the applicant seeks to expand a wastewater treatment plant
serving a sewer district, the flow to the expanded wastewater treatment plant
may include only:
            (a)   flow from facilities within the sewer district that are
connected to the wastewater treatment plant as of the date of the application
for a variance (based on the flows reported by the wastewater treatment plant
pursuant to its SPDES permit in the year preceding the application for the
variance); and
            (b)   flow from facilities within the sewer district that are
served by subsurface sewage treatment systems as of the date of the application
for a variance; and
            (c)   additional flow of no more than ten percent (10%) of the
average of the flows reported by the wastewater treatment plant pursuant to its
SPDES permit in the year preceding the application for the variance to be
allocated within the sewer district; and
            (d)   reasonably anticipated flows from any area(s) outside the
sewer district identified as source(s) of contamination pursuant to clause (a)
of subparagraph (i) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (e) of this section.
         (ii)   if the applicant seeks to expand a wastewater treatment plant
without a sewer district, the flow to the expanded wastewater treatment plant
may include only:
            (a)   flows to the wastewater treatment plant as of the date of the
application for a variance;
            (b)   reasonably anticipated flows from any area(s) identified as
source(s) of contamination pursuant to clause (a) of subparagraph (i) of
paragraph (1) of subdivision (e) of this section.
         (iii)   if the applicant seeks to construct a new wastewater treatment
plant, the flow to the new wastewater treatment plant may include only
reasonably anticipated flows from the area(s) identified as source(s) of
contamination pursuant to clause (a) of subparagraph (i) of paragraph (1) of
subdivision (e) of this section.
      (3)   A new or expanded wastewater treatment plant authorized pursuant to
a variance under this subdivision, and its sewer system, shall meet the
following conditions:
         (i)   The wastewater treatment plant shall provide sand filtration or
a Department-approved alternative technology to sand filtration, disinfection,
phosphorus removal, and microfiltration or a Department-approved equivalent
technology to microfiltration, as required by these rules and regulations; and
         (ii)   The wastewater treatment plant shall be designed, operated, and
maintained to meet a total phosphorus limit of 0.1 mg/l, and the applicant
shall seek to have such limit included in the wastewater treatment plant's
SPDES permit; and
         (iii)   The applicant shall develop and implement a Department-
approved Capacity, Management, Operation and Maintenance (CMOM) plan for the
entire sewer system serving the wastewater treatment plant, and shall seek to
have such plan incorporated into the wastewater treatment plant's SPDES permit.
At a minimum, such CMOM plan shall include:
            (a)   a map of the entire collection system;
            (b)   an assessment of the current capacity of the collection
system;
            (c)   a program and schedule for routine inspections and testing,
and preventive operation and maintenance activities;
            (d)   a list of any structural deficiencies identified in the
system and a schedule for short- and long-term rehabilitation measures to
address each identified deficiency;
            (e)   an inflow study, and a plan and implementation schedule, to
control and eliminate, to the maximum extent practicable, stormwater
contributions from sources such as catch basins, downspouts, and sump pumps;
and
            (f)   a program for training appropriate personnel on collection
system operation and maintenance; and
         (iv)   All wastewater pumping stations in the sewer system serving the
new or expanded wastewater treatment plant shall meet the alarm systems and
emergency operation requirements applicable to new wastewater pumping stations
as set forth in "Recommended Standards for Wastewater Facilities," Great Lakes
- Upper Mississippi River Board of State and Provincial Public Health and
Environmental Managers (2014); and
         (v)   The applicant shall seek to have included in the wastewater
treatment plant's SPDES permit a condition providing that in the event that the
SPDES permitted flow limit is violated, the owner will investigate the
violation and prepare a corrective action plan.
(Amended City Record 10/30/2019, eff. 11/29/2019)
**** Subchapter G: Administration and Enforcement by Local Governments ****
§ 18-71 Certification of Administrative Programs.
   (a)   The local government of a town, city, village or county may apply to
the Department, care of the Engineering Section (see 15 RCNY §
18-15), for certification of a program to administer specific provisions of
these rules and regulations.
   (b)   A local government's proposed program for administration of specific
provisions of these rules and regulations may include processing and review of,
and determinations on, applications for approval of specific regulated
activities.
   (c)   An application for certification of a local government's
administrative program shall include the following information:
      (1)   Identification of the specific substantive and procedural
provisions of the rules and regulations that the local government is requesting
to administer;
      (2)   Number, technical expertise and experience of personnel and
identification of other resources that will be dedicated to administration of
the program;
      (3)   Identification of funding or revenue sources for implementation of
the program, including a commitment of such funding for the next fiscal year;
      (4)   Identification of the specific department, unit or officials who
will be designated to administer these rules and regulations;
      (5)   Identification of information management capability to insure
efficient administration and adequate record keeping;
      (6)   Identification of applicable existing local laws and rules and
regulations and plans for coordination of such laws and rules and regulations
with the requirements of these rules and regulations; and
      (7)   Any other information requested by the Department.
   (d)   (1)   The Department shall review an application for certification of
an administrative program and make a preliminary determination to certify or
deny certification of a program within 60 business days of receipt of such
application. A determination to certify shall be based upon a finding by the
Department that the resources, funding and administrative program proposed by
the applicant will provide a level of efficiency and effective protection of
the water supply equal to that which would otherwise be provided by the
Department under these rules and regulations. Notice of the preliminary
determination shall be provided in writing by the Department to the designated
representative of the local government submitting the application for
certification.
      (2)   Within 60 business days of the Department's preliminary
certification of the administrative program, the Department and the local
government shall commence negotiating and writing a draft memorandum of
understanding setting forth the requirements and conditions of the program.
      (3)   A governmental agency or unit of a town, city, village or county
that has a program for administration and/or enforcement that has been
certified by the Department pursuant to this subchapter shall be referred to as
a "certified local government."
§ 18-72 Administrative Determinations.
   (a)   Each administrative program submitted by a local government under this
subchapter shall contain provisions governing the extent and frequency of
Department review and approval of administrative determinations made by the
local government, as the Department shall agree upon.
   (b)   Pursuant to each administrative program submitted by a local
government under this subchapter, the local government shall provide the
Department (Attention: Chief, Sources Division) with a copy of each
administrative determination made by such local government, at the same time
that the determination is made available to the applicant.
§ 18-73 Annual Review of Administrative Programs.
   (a)   The administrative program of a certified local government shall be
reviewed annually by the Department. Such review shall be based upon records
that demonstrate the effectiveness of the program which include objective
criteria such as:
      (1)   A review of determinations on applications for approval of
regulated activities;
      (2)   A review of the adequacy of financial, personnel and other
resources for the previous year, and evidence of future commitment of adequate
financial, personnel, and other resources to continue the administrative
program; and
      (3)   A review of such other records as the certified local government
may be required to keep.
§ 18-74 Decertification or Modification of Administrative Programs.
   (a)   The administrative program of a certified local government shall be
continued unless decertified or modified by the Commissioner. A preliminary
determination to decertify or modify shall be made at any time if the
Commissioner determines that the local government's administration of any
element of the program is inadequate to protect the water supply.
   (b)   Where the Commissioner has made a preliminary determination to
decertify or modify a local government's administrative program pursuant to
subdivision (a) of this section, a notice of proposed decertification or
modification, and the reasons therefor, shall be sent by certified mail, to the
designated representative of the certified local government. The certified
local government may, within ten business days of the sending of such notice,
submit information addressing the reasons for decertification or modification
stated in the notice. The Commissioner, after receipt and consideration of any
information submitted by the certified local government, shall make a final
determination to continue, modify, or decertify the program within thirty
business days of sending of the notice of proposed decertification or
modification. Upon decertification of an administrative program the
administration of the rules and regulations set forth herein shall revert to
the Department.
   (c)   A local government which has received a determination of
decertification may reapply for certification after one year.
§ 18-75 Certification of Enforcement Programs.
   (a)   The local government of a town, city, village or county may apply to
the Department, care of the Engineering Section (see 15 RCNY §
18-15) for certification of a program to enforce specific provisions of these
rules and regulations.
   (b)   A local government's proposed program for enforcement of specific
provisions of these rules and regulations may include the following:
      (1)   Inspection of premises for potential violations of these rules and
regulations and the preparation of written reports detailing the results of
each such inspection; and
      (2)   Issuance of notices of violation of specific provisions of these
rules and regulations.
   (c)   An application for certification of a local government's enforcement
program shall include the following information:
      (1)   Identification of the specific provisions of the rules and
regulations that the local government intends to enforce;
      (2)   Number, technical expertise and experience of personnel and
identification of other resources that will be dedicated to the enforcement
program;
      (3)   Identification of funding or revenue sources for implementation of
the program, including a commitment of such funding for the next fiscal year;
      (4)   Identification of the specific department, unit or officials who
will be designated to enforce the rules and regulations;
      (5)   Identification of information management capability to insure
efficient administration and adequate record keeping; and
      (6)   Any other information requested by the Department.
   (d)   The Department shall review an application for certification in
accordance with the procedures set forth in subdivision (d) of 15 RCNY §
18-71. A determination to certify shall be based upon a finding by the
Department that the resources, funding and enforcement program proposed by the
applicant will provide a level of efficiency and effective protection of the
water supply equal to that which would otherwise be provided by the Department
under these rules and regulations. Any memorandum of understanding for an
enforcement program shall provide that the designated enforcement personnel of
the local government shall be agents of the Department for purposes of
enforcement of specific provisions of these rules and regulations, and provided
further, that such memorandum of understanding shall state that the Department
shall retain the authority to enforce these rules and regulations in addition
to any enforcement by the local government.
§ 18-76 Annual Review of Enforcement Programs.
   (a)   The enforcement program of a certified local government shall be
reviewed annually by the Department. Such review shall be based upon records
that demonstrate the effectiveness of the program which include objective
criteria, such as:
      (1)   A review of notices of violation issued by the certified local
government;
      (2)   A review of inspection reports prepared by the certified local
government;
      (3)   A review of the determinations made by courts or administrative
tribunals on notices of violation issued by the certified local government;
      (4)   A review of compliance with notices of violation issued by the
certified local government;
      (5)   A review of the adequacy of financial, personnel and other
resources for the previous year, and evidence of future commitment of adequate
financial, personnel and other resources to continue the enforcement program in
accordance with any requirements of a memorandum of understanding; and
      (6)   A review of such other records as the certified local government
may be required to keep in accordance with a memorandum of understanding.
§ 18-77 Decertification or Modification of Enforcement Programs.
   (a)   The enforcement program of a certified local government shall be
continued unless decertified or modified by the Commissioner. A preliminary
determination to decertify or modify shall be made at any time if the
Commissioner determines that the local government's administration of any
element of the program is inadequate to protect the water supply.
   (b)   Where the Commissioner has made a preliminary decision to decertify or
modify a local government's enforcement program pursuant to subdivision (a) of
this Section, a notice of proposed decertification or modification, and the
reasons therefor, shall be sent by certified mail to the designated
representative of the certified local government. The certified local
government may, within ten business days of the sending of such notice, submit
information addressing the reasons for decertification or modification stated
in the notice. After receipt and consideration of any information submitted by
the certified local government, the Commissioner shall make a final
determination to continue, modify, or decertify the program within thirty
business days of sending of the notice of proposed decertification or
modification. Upon decertification of an enforcement program, the enforcement
of the rules and regulations set forth herein shall be the sole responsibility
of the Department.
   (c)   A local government which has received a determination of
decertification may reapply for certification after one year.
§ 18-78 Consent of the City.
Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to allow the designated
administrative or enforcement personnel of a certified local government, or any
representative or attorney of a certified local government, to appear in any
court proceeding or before any administrative tribunal on behalf of the City or
the Department, for the purpose of enforcing violations of these rules and
regulations or defending against any claim or action arising from these rules
and regulations without the written consent of the City.
**** Subchapter H: Watershed Protection Plans ****
§ 18-81 Local Government Stormwater Protection Plans.
   (a)   A local government of a town, village, or county in the watershed may
submit to the Department for review and approval a proposed local government
stormwater protection plan ("Stormwater Plan") to undertake all or some aspects
of watershed protection as set forth in 15 RCNY §
18-39. The Stormwater Plan may be submitted individually by a local government
or jointly with one or more adjoining local government(s) in accordance with
the requirements of this subchapter.
      (1)   Within 90 days of receipt by the Department of a proposed
Stormwater Plan, the Department shall review the proposed Stormwater Plan to
determine whether it meets the requirements of this Section and notify the
local government, in writing, whether the proposed Stormwater Plan is approved;
      (2)   If the Department fails to notify the local government(s) in
writing of its determination within the 90 day period set forth in paragraph
(a)(i) of this subdivision, the local government(s) may notify the Department
of its failure by means of certified mail, return receipt requested to the
local Department representative who is responsible for processing the
Stormwater Plan;
      (3)   If the Department fails to notify the local government(s) within
ten (10) business days of the receipt of such notice the Stormwater Plan shall
be deemed approved subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the most
recent submission by the local government(s).
   (b)   Pursuant to the terms and conditions of an approved Stormwater Plan,
the Department may issue a waiver from specific provisions of 15 RCNY §
18-39, including the prohibition of construction of an impervious surface
within the limiting distance of 100 feet of a watercourse or wetland or within
the limiting distance of 300 feet of a reservoir, reservoir stem or controlled
lake, for all applicants of projects located within some or all of the
geographical area of the local government(s). The Department may issue such
waivers after a local government(s) has an approved Stormwater Plan.
   (c)   An approvable Stormwater Plan shall include:
      (1)   The specific provision(s) of 15 RCNY §
18-39 from which the waiver is sought;
      (2)   A description of the metes and bounds of the geographical area
(town, village, county, or part thereof) for which the waiver is sought,
including a map of the described area;
      (3)   Mechanisms to be established by the local government that are at
least as protective of the watershed reservoir drainage basin in which the
waiver will be effective as the specific provisions of 15 RCNY §
18-39 from which the waiver is sought;
      (4)   A commitment by the local government(s) to implement each element
of the Stormwater Plan in accordance with the terms of the Stormwater Plan and
a schedule for implementation of all elements of the Stormwater Plan;
      (5)   An agreement by the local government(s) to coordinate with the
Department any review by the local government(s) required under the State
Environmental Quality Review Act for regulated activities, as defined in these
rules and regulations;
      (6)   The rights, obligations and roles of the local government(s) and
the Department under the Stormwater Plan; and
      (7)   Identification of the approximate number, technical expertise and
experience of personnel and all other resources that will be dedicated to
carrying out such plan.
   (d)   The mechanisms to be established pursuant to paragraph (c)(3) of this
subdivision may include:
      (1)   Stormwater control structures, or best management practices, that
capture and treat stormwater from existing non-point pollution sources such as
areas of concentrated impervious surfaces;
      (2)   Mechanisms or programs that address the capture and treatment of
stormwater from future non-point pollution sources on a community-wide basis
such as the creation of a stormwater district;
      (3)   Land use controls, zoning, and other local laws, ordinances and
rules and regulations that will protect the quality of the water supply,
including but not limited to laws and rules and regulations concerning wetland
protection, protection of hydrologically sensitive areas, and control of runoff
from non-point pollution sources; or
      (4)   Educational programs providing information to residents of the
town, village, or county whose local government is involved in the watershed
protection plan process concerning:
         (i)   The challenges of protecting water quality and the Federal,
State and local requirements for watershed protection;
         (ii)   The water supply system as a natural resource and source of
drinking water; and
         (iii)   Actions that can be taken by residents and the local
government to enhance water quality protection.
   (e)   An annual report shall be submitted by the local government to the
Department on each anniversary of the date of the signing of the approved
Stormwater Plan. The annual report shall include, but need not be limited to
the following information:
      (1)   A statement by the local government of its compliance with the
terms and conditions of the approved Stormwater Plan; and
      (2)   A statement of future commitment of adequate financial, personnel
and other resources to continue compliance with the terms and conditions of the
approved Stormwater Plan.
   (f)   Once the Stormwater Plan is approved by the Department, the Stormwater
Plan shall be considered valid and effective.
      (1)   The local governments proposing the Stormwater Plan may, upon
written notice to the City, modify the plan at any time after it has been
agreed upon. If the Stormwater Plan is proposed to be modified, the Department
shall make a determination within 60 days of notice of the proposed
modification, whether the Stormwater Plan as modified shall continue to be
valid and effective. In making such a determination, the Department shall
consider whether the Stormwater Plan as modified, taken as a whole, continues
to be at least as protective of the watershed as the specific provisions of 15
RCNY §
18-39 from which the waiver applies. The Stormwater Plan shall continue to be
valid and effective during the period the Department's review of any proposed
modification. If the Department determines that the proposed modification would
cause the Stormwater Plan to be not as protective as the provisions of 15 RCNY
§
18-39 which are being waived, the Department shall so notify the local
government(s). The existing and approved Stormwater Plan will then remain valid
and effective until and unless the local government(s) implemented the proposed
changes to the Stormwater Plan.
      (2)   If at any time the Department determines that the local
government's administration of all or part of the Stormwater Plan is not as
protective as the provisions of 15 RCNY §
18-39 which are being waived, the Department may revoke or modify the
Stormwater Plan after notice has been given to the local government and an
opportunity to meet and discuss the problem has been provided.
      (3)   Upon a final determination to revoke the Stormwater Plan the
waivers issued thereunder shall be void and the watershed rules and regulations
contained herein shall be applicable in the area of the watershed that was
previously exempt pursuant to the waivers issued under the Stormwater Plan.
      (4)   Any Stormwater Plan agreed to shall be reviewed by the parties
agreeing to such plan fifteen (15) years after such plan becomes effective in
order to determine whether such plan has met and will continue to meet its
goals.
§ 18-82 Watershed Planning in the Croton System.
   (a)   Notwithstanding the prohibitions set forth in 15 RCNY §
18-36 on new or expanded wastewater treatment plants with surface discharges
within the sixty day travel time to intake or within phosphorus restricted
basins, the Department shall allow for the preparation and implementation of a
Comprehensive Croton System Water Quality Protection Plan ("Croton Plan") and
an accompanying phosphorus offset program and diversion credit program in
accordance with this 15 RCNY §
18-82. 15 RCNY §
18-82 is independent of, does not govern, and is not governed by, 15 RCNY §
18-81.
   (b)   (1)   At the request of Dutchess, Putnam or Westchester County, and in
partnership with Dutchess, Putnam or Westchester County, and the municipalities
located in the Croton system watershed, the Department shall prepare or assist
in the preparation of a Croton Plan only in a participating County or Counties
which:
         (i)   Identifies significant sources of pollution to the Croton
system;
         (ii)   Recommends measures to be taken by the Department, the
Counties, and the municipalities which, in conjunction with other federal,
State, local and Department water quality protection programs, will prevent
degradation to, and improve, water quality, with the long term goal of
attaining water quality standards in the Croton system; and
         (iii)   Recommends measures to be taken to protect the character and
special needs of communities located within the watershed.
      (2)   A County wishing to do so may, when joined by a majority of
municipalities located within the County's watershed, choose to prepare the
Croton Plan for the portion of the watershed located within the County. Such
Croton Plan shall be prepared in partnership with the Department.
      (3)   The Croton Plan shall be developed in the manner set forth in
subdivisions (c), (d) and (e) below and may allow for new wastewater treatment
plants with a surface discharge or for the expansion of existing wastewater
treatment plants with a surface discharge, provided the additional flow is
either offset by a diversion of wastewater off of the watershed pursuant to
subparagraph (e)(4)(i), or the additional phosphorus load is offset pursuant to
subparagraph (e)(4)(ii).
      (4)   Any data that would benefit the Croton Planning process that is in
the possession of the Department or one of the Counties or municipalities
participating in the development of a Croton Plan shall be shared among the
participants and appropriately considered in developing a Croton Plan.
   (c)   The Croton Plan shall consist of the following three elements:
      (1)   Identification of water quality problems and community character
needs. Such identification shall include the following elements:
         (i)   An identification of growth or development projected to occur
under existing municipal zoning and master plans and allowed under existing
land use controls, other than these rules and regulations, and including
development necessary to maintain community character, public facilities and
institutions and to serve local, regional or special needs;
         (ii)   An identification of specific existing water quality problem
areas and specific sources of pollution to the Croton system, including areas
of existing or imminent subsurface sewage treatment system failures, areas of
concentrated point source discharges and substantial non-point source
pollution, and areas in need of streambank stabilization.
         (iii)   An assessment of future water quality impacts related to
growth or development identified in paragraph (i) above.
         (iv)   An identification of areas identified in paragraph (i) above
where site constraints may prevent the siting of new subsurface sewage
treatment systems in accordance with the requirements set forth in these rules
and regulations.
         (v)   An identification of areas identified in paragraph (i) above
where these rules and regulations prohibit new surface discharges from
wastewater treatment plants and site constraints prevent the siting of a new
wastewater treatment plant with a subsurface discharge.
      (2)   Identification of investments to correct existing water quality
problems in accordance with developed priorities. Such identification shall
include the following elements:
         (i)   The identified investments may include investments (i.e.,
capital projects and best management practices) implemented during the
development of the Croton Plan, investments that the participating Counties and
municipalities commit to implement, and an identification of priorities for
future investments, without any commitment on the part of the Counties and
municipalities to implement such investments.
         (ii)   Proposed measures to address water quality problems identified
in paragraph (c)(1)(ii) above. Such measures may include subsurface sewage
treatment system maintenance, rehabilitation and replacement programs,
installation of community septic systems, the construction of sewer extensions
or new sewer systems, stormwater controls, and the permanent diversion of
wastewater to a discharge point outside of the watershed.
      (3)   Strategies for prevention of future water quality problems and the
consideration of future community character needs in conjunction with the water
quality goals of the Croton Plan. Such strategies shall include the following:
         (i)   An assessment of the economic, water quality, community
character, and special needs impacts of directing growth away from areas
identified in paragraphs (c)(1)(iv) and (v) above;
         (ii)   An identification of the economic, water quality and community
character impacts of allowing growth within those areas identified in
paragraphs (c)(1)(i), (iv) and (v) above, if directing growth in accordance
with paragraph (c)(3)(i) above is not feasible or practical;
         (iii)   An identification of potential areas for the construction of
new or expanded wastewater treatment plants, as provided for in (e) below,
either under a future permanent phosphorus offset program or utilizing the 10
percent credit provision for an implemented diversion project and a statement
of the reasoning for the selection of such potential areas;
         (iv)   An identification of land use and local laws and regulations
that the participating Counties and municipalities have already implemented
and/or agree to implement in the future which are intended, in combination with
other measures in the Croton Plan, to mitigate the water quality impacts
identified in subsection (c)(1)(iii) above;
         (v)   With respect to future land use issues, identification of
mechanisms to ensure the improvement and protection of water quality is taken
into consideration by the local government and that the local government agrees
to use best efforts to implement such mechanisms; and
         (vi)   At the option of the local government, designation of "village
centers" as provided for in 15 RCNY §
18-39(a)(7)(i).
   (d)   (1)   If a County requests, pursuant to 15 RCNY §
18-82(b), that a Croton Plan be developed within five (5) years of the
effective date of these rules and regulations, the Department, in partnership
with the participating Counties and municipalities, and in consultation with
the New York State Department of Health, shall complete a draft Croton Plan and
release such draft Croton Plan for public review and comment. If a Croton Plan
has been prepared by a County and its municipalities, the County and
municipalities, in partnership with the Department and in consultation with the
New York State Department of Health, shall complete a draft Croton Plan within
five (5) years of the effective date of these rules and regulations and release
such draft Croton Plan for public review and comment. The Department, the
participating Counties and municipalities shall consider and respond to
comments received from the public in preparing the final Croton Plan.
      (2)   Within six (6) months after the release of the draft Croton Plan,
the final Croton Plan shall be agreed to by the Department and the Counties and
municipalities which participated in the preparation of the Croton Plan, and in
consultation with the New York State Department of Health. In determining
whether to agree to the Croton Plan, the Department will consider the Croton
Plan, including the level of commitments therein, taken as a whole and
consistent with subsection (d) of this section, meets the overall goals of the
Croton Plan, set forth in subsection (b) of this section. The Department will
not approve or disapprove individual components of the Croton Plan. The
Department and the participating Counties and municipalities shall make a
reasonable effort to resolve any and all issues which preclude their agreement
to the Croton Plan. The five (5) year period referred to in paragraph (1)
above, and/or the six (6) month period referred to in this paragraph (2) may be
extended by agreement of the Department and the participating Counties and
municipalities. In addition, the participating Counties and municipalities may,
at any time, agree to discontinue the development of the Croton Plan.
      (3)   A failure of any participating County or municipality to agree to
the Croton Plan shall not affect the ability of another participating County or
municipality to agree to the Croton Plan and to site new wastewater treatment
plants or to expand existing wastewater treatment plants with a surface
discharge in accordance with subdivision (e).
      (4)   Once the Croton Plan is agreed to by the Department and the
participating Counties and municipalities, the Croton Plan shall be considered
valid and effective. The participating Counties and municipalities agreeing to
the Croton Plan may, upon 60 days written notice to the City, modify the Plan
at any time after it has been agreed upon. If the Croton Plan is proposed to be
modified, the Department shall make a determination within sixty (60) days of
notice of the proposed modification, whether the Croton Plan, as modified,
shall continue to be valid and effective. In making such a determination, the
Department shall consider whether the Croton Plan, as modified and taken as a
whole, is consistent with subsection (d) of this section and meets the overall
goals of the Croton Plan set forth in subsection (b) of this section. Any
approved Croton Plan remains in effect pending any determination on a proposed
modification and shall remain in effect until and unless either the Department
agrees to a modification or a local government modifies it without the
Department's approval or ceases to implement it.
      (5)   Any Croton Plan agreed to shall be reviewed by the participants to
the plan fifteen (15) years after the Croton Plan becomes effective in order to
determine whether the Croton Plan has met and will continue to meet its goals,
and to determine whether new goals are appropriate.
      (6)   The Counties and the municipalities agreeing to the Croton Plan
shall submit to the Department an annual report each year the Croton Plan is in
effect. The annual report shall be submitted on the anniversary of the date the
Croton Plan became effective and shall include:
         (i)   A statement of the status of the development or implementation
of measures proposed in the Croton Plan;
         (ii)   A statement of expenditures incurred by the Counties and
municipalities in implementing, and administering measures proposed in the
Croton Plan; and
         (iii)   An identification of the financial, personnel and other
resources needed to continue implementation and administration of the measures
proposed in the Croton Plan.
   (e)   The Croton Plan may allow for the siting of a new wastewater treatment
plant with a surface discharge or the expansion of an existing wastewater
treatment plant with a surface discharge in the Croton system within a
phosphorus restricted basin or a basin located within the 60 day travel time,
but not within a coliform restricted basin, pursuant to the following
conditions:
      (1)   Site constraints prevent the proposed new wastewater treatment
plant or the expanded existing wastewater treatment plant from discharging
subsurface;
      (2)   The municipal government and the County in which the wastewater
treatment plant would be sited, confirms in writing that the proposed new
wastewater treatment plant or the expansion of an existing wastewater treatment
plant is consistent with the Croton Plan;
      (3)   The Department, in consultation with the New York State Department
of Health, determines that the proposed new wastewater treatment plant or
expansion of an existing wastewater treatment plant is consistent with the
water quality objectives of the Croton Plan; and
      (4)   The discharge from the new wastewater treatment plant or the
expansion of an existing wastewater treatment plant complies with one of the
following conditions:
         (i)   The total volume (or flow) of surface discharge from such new
wastewater treatment plant or expansion of an existing wastewater treatment
plant, together with the total volume of surface discharges from all other new
wastewater treatment plants and expansions of wastewater treatment plants which
have been permitted in the subject County pursuant to this subparagraph (i),
shall not, in the aggregate, exceed 10 percent of the total volume (or flow) of
surface discharge from wastewater treatment plants located in the Croton
system, within the subject County, which previously discharged into the Croton
system but have been permanently diverted, since the effective date of these
rules and regulations, to a discharge point outside of the Watershed. The
Department may approve applications to construct new wastewater treatment
plants with surface discharges pursuant to this subdivision prior to the
permanent diversion of wastewater, and allow construction to begin on such new
wastewater treatment plants, provided that the wastewater treatment plant may
not commence operation until the diversion for which the credit is received has
actually occurred.
      (5)   With respect to any new or expanded wastewater treatment plant
allowed pursuant to this subdivision (e), the Department will not impose
additional requirements on the siting of such new or expanded wastewater
treatment plant other than the requirements specifically set forth in these
rules and regulations applicable to all wastewater treatment plants, the
requirements of this subdivision (e), and, with respect to new or expanded
wastewater treatment plants in phosphorus restricted basins relying on
phosphorus offsets, the requirements of any phosphorus offset program pursuant
to 15 RCNY §§
18-82(g),
18-83(a) and
18-84.
   (f)   (1)   A County or municipality wishing to participate in the
preparation of the Croton Plan shall indicate its intention to participate by
written notice to the Department given within one year of the effective date of
these rules and regulations. Such notice shall include a commitment by the
subject County or municipality to cooperate with the Department in generating
and analyzing the data and information reasonably necessary to address the
Croton Plan elements identified in subdivision (c) above, and an agreement to
minimize the use of offsets as a basis for new wastewater treatment plants or
expansions of existing wastewater treatment plants pursuant to subdivision (e),
to the extent that the economic and social needs of such County or municipality
can be reasonably addressed without the use of such offsets.
      (2)   Within thirty (30) days after receipt of a notice as described in
subdivision (f)(1) above, the Department shall notify a County or municipality
of its inclusion in the preparation of a Croton Plan.
      (3)   If a County and its municipalities wish to prepare a Croton Plan,
in accordance with subdivision (b)(2) above, the Department shall, within
thirty (30) days of receipt of a notice as described in subdivision (f)(1)
above, authorize the County and municipalities to begin preparation of such a
Croton Plan. Such authorization shall include a commitment by the Department to
cooperate with the County and municipalities in generating the data and
information reasonably necessary to address the Croton Plan elements identified
in subdivision (c) above.
      (4)   The provisions of subdivision (e) above shall not apply in any
County or municipality which fails to participate in the preparation of the
Croton Plan, fails to cooperate with the Department in the manner described in
paragraph (f)(1) above in preparing the Croton Plan; fails or ceases to
implement any water quality protection measures which such County or
municipality has committed to implement as part of the final Croton Plan agreed
upon by the County, municipality and the Department; or where a previously
agreed upon Croton Plan is no longer valid and effective.
   (g)   Nothing in this Subpart is intended to constrain, limit or preclude an
applicant from seeking, or the Department from issuing, approval of or a
variance for a proposed regulated activity under any other applicable provision
of these rules and regulations.
   (h)   Nothing in this section or in the Croton Plan is intended to constrain
or limit the authority of local governments under State law to make local land
use and zoning decisions, and nothing in this section or the Croton Plan should
be construed to have the effect of transferring such local land use and zoning
authority from the participating local governments to the Department or any
other entity.
(Amended City Record 10/30/2019, eff. 11/29/2019)
§ 18-83 Watershed Planning in the West of Hudson Watershed. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 10/30/2019, eff. 11/29/2019)
§ 18-84 Permanent Phosphorus Offset Program. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 10/30/2019, eff. 11/29/2019)
**** Subchapter I: Severability ****
§ 18-91 Severability.
The provisions of these rules and regulations shall be severable, and if any
item, subclause, clause, sentence, subparagraph, paragraph, subdivision,
section or subchapter of these rules and regulations, or the applicability
thereof to any person or circumstance, shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or
invalidate the remainder thereof, and the application thereof, but shall be
confined in its operation to the item, subclause, clause, sentence,
subparagraph, paragraph, subdivision, section or subchapter thereof, or to the
person or circumstance directly involved in the controversy in which such
judgment shall have been rendered.
Appendix 18-A:
Watershed Maps
   (a)   The watershed area for the New York City water supply lies in the
parts of the following counties and towns that are delineated on Map 18-A.1:
      (1)   Delaware County: In the towns of Andes, Bovina, Colchester, Delhi,
Deposit, Franklin, Hamden, Harpersfield, Kortright, Masonville, Meredith,
Middletown, Roxbury, Sidney, Stamford, Tompkins, Walton.
      (2)   Dutchess County: In the towns of Beekman, East Fishkill, Pawling.
      (3)   Fairfield County (Connecticut): In the towns of Danbury, Greenwich,
New Fairfield, Ridgefield, Sherman.
      (4)   Greene County: In the towns of Ashland, Halcott, Hunter, Jewett,
Lexington, Prattsville, Windham.
      (5)   Putnam County: In the towns of Carmel, Kent, Patterson, Putnam
Valley, Southeast.
      (6)   Schoharie County: In the towns of Broome, Conesville, Gilboa,
Jefferson.
      (7)   Sullivan County: In the towns of Fallsburg, Liberty, Neversink.
      (8)   Ulster County: In the towns of Denning, Hardenburgh, Hurley,
Kingston, Marbletown, Olive, Rochester, Shandaken, Wawarsing, Woodstock.
      (9)   Westchester County: In the towns of Bedford, Cortlandt, Harrison,
Lewisboro, Mount Kisco, Mount Pleasant, New Castle, North Castle, North Salem,
Pound Ridge, Somers, Yorktown.
   (b)   The watershed areas for the New York City water supply that lie within
the 60 day travel time to intake are delineated on Map 18-A.2.
      (1)   In the East-of-Hudson System, the entire reservoir and controlled
lake drainage basins of Boyds Corner, Croton, Kensico, Lake Gleneida, Muscoot,
West Branch, and parts of the reservoir drainage basins of Amawalk, Cross
River, Croton Falls, and Titicus are within the 60 day travel time to intake.
      (2)   In the West-of-Hudson System, the entire reservoir drainage basin
of Rondout, and parts of the reservoir drainage basins of Ashokan,
Cannonsville, Neversink and Pepacton are within the 60 day travel time to
intake.
   (c)   The reservoir drainage basins for each reservoir are delineated on Map
18-A.3.
   (d)   Detailed maps of each area within the 60 day travel time to intake are
available at the regional offices listed in 15 RCNY §
18-15.
Map 18-A.1(a) East of Hudson Watershed: Counties and Towns 
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-176.gif] 
Map 18-A.1(b) West of Hudson Watershed: Counties and Towns
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-178.gif] 
Map 18-A.2(a) East of Hudson Watershed: 60 Day Travel Time 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-180.gif] 
Map 18-A.2(b) West of Hudson Watershed: 60 Day Travel Time 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-182.gif] 
Map 18-A.3(a) East of Hudson Watershed: Reservoir Drainage Basins
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-184.gif]
Map 18-A.3(b) West of Hudson Watershed: Reservoir Drainage Basins
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-186.gif]
(Amended City Record 10/30/2019, eff. 11/29/2019)
Appendix 18-B:
System Specific Water Quality Characteristics and Applicable Monitoring
Criteria
   (a)   The system specific water quality characteristics of the reservoirs
and reservoir stems, as of September 1990, are set forth in Tables 1 and 2 of
this Appendix. It is the intension of the Department that the System specific
characteristics be maintained at the stated levels by implementation and
enforcement of these rules and regulations.
TABLE 1
System Specific Characteristics: Reservoir Standards (mg/L)
                     Croton System      Catskill/Delaware System (including
                                        Kensico)
                     Annual Mean S/S/M* Annual Mean S/S/M*
Alkalinity           ≥40.00           ≥10.00
(mg CaCO3/L)
Ammonia Nitrogen     0.05        0.10   0.05        0.10
Chloride 30.00       40.00       8.00   12.00
Nitrite +            0.30        0.50   0.30        0.50
Nitrate -N
Organic Nitrogen     0.50        0.70   0.50        0.70
Sodium               15.00       20.00  3.00        16.00
Sulfate              15.00       25.00  10.00       15.00
Total Diss. Solids   150.00      175.00 40.00       50.00
Total Organic Carbon 6.00        7.00   3.00        4.00
Total Susp. Solids   5.00        8.00   5.00        8.00
Chlorophyll-a        0.01        0.015  0.007       0.012
 
* S/S/M means Single Sample Maximum
TABLE 2
System Specific Characteristics: Reservoir Stem Standards (mg/L)
                    Croton System      Catskill/Delaware System (including
                                        Kensico)
                     Annual Mean S/S/M* Annual Mean S/S/M*
Alkalinity                       ≥40.00           ≥10.00
(mg CaCO3/L)
Ammonia Nitrogen     0.10        0.2    0.05        0.25
Chloride 30.00       35.00       100.00 10.00       50.00
Nitrite +            0.35        1.50   0.40        1.50
Nitrate -N
Organic Nitrogen     0.50        1.50   0.50        1.50
Sodium               15.00       20.00  5.00        10.00
Sulfate              15.00       25.00  10.00       15.00
Total Diss. Solids   150.00      175.00 40.00       50.00
Total Organic Carbon 9.00        25.00  9.00        25.00
Total Susp. Solids   5.00        8.0    5.00        8.00
 
* S/S/M means Single Sample Maximum
   (b)   The following monitoring methods are used by the Department in
assessing the impacts of a regulated activity on a reservoir, reservoir stem or
controlled lake. An applicant may conduct sampling in waters owned by the City
as set forth herein with prior authorization by the Department.
   (c)   Collection of Samples and Assessment of Impacts. 
      (1)   In conducting tests or making analytical determinations to
ascertain conformity or nonconformity with the standards set forth in
Subchapter D, samples should be collected from locations which are
representative of the general quality of water in the watercourse, reservoir,
reservoir stem or controlled lake.
      (2)   In assessing the impact of a proposed regulated activity on a
watercourse, reservoir, reservoir stem, or controlled lake, or in determining
compliance with the standards set forth in Subchapter D, the Department will
examine the impacts of the proposed activity throughout the year and the
impacts on the photic, metalimnion and hypolimnion zones of the reservoir,
reservoir stem or controlled lake.
      (3)   Impacts on reservoirs will be determined on the basis of samples
taken on a schedule which is sufficient to reflect temporal variability and to
meet regulatory requirements.
      (4)   Sampling locations in reservoirs will include: dams, intakes, mid-
pool stations, and main tributary arms into each reservoir. At every station, a
sample of the photic zone shall be taken. At deeper stations, samples will be
collected from the metalimnion and hypolimnion.
      (5)   Reservoir stem samples should be collected in the section of the
reservoir stem that is free-flowing and unimpeded by the reservoir when the
impoundment is at full pool elevation.
   (d)   Tests and Analytical Determinations. In determining compliance or
noncompliance with the water quality standards in Subchapter D, the Department
will only consider tests or analytical determinations made by laboratories
certified by the New York State Department of Health.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-16780.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-16783.jpg]
(Amended City Record 10/30/2019, eff. 11/29/2019)
Chapter 19: Use of the Public Sewers
§ 19-01 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the meaning of terms shall be as follows
(unless the context specifically indicates otherwise):  
   Allowable Runoff. "Allowable runoff" means non-stormwater discharges
associated with firefighting activities or as otherwise authorized by the
Commissioner pursuant to this chapter.  
   Articles. "Articles" means clothing, garments, textiles, fabrics, leather
goods, and the like, that are dry cleaned.  
   Automatic grease removal device. "Automatic grease removal device" means a
plumbing appurtenance that is installed in a drainage system to intercept
grease-laden waste from a wastewater discharge. Such device operates on a time-
or event-controlled basis and has the ability to remove free-floating fat, oil
and grease automatically without intervention from the user, except for
maintenance.  
   Best Management Practices ("BMP"). "Best Management Practices" or "BMP"
include, but are not limited to, a schedule of activities, prohibitions,
maintenance policies, and other management procedures that are implemented to
prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants into the public sewer system.
Best Management Practices also include pretreatment requirements, operating
procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks,
sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.  
   Best Management Practices Plan ("BMPP"). "Best Management Practices Plan" or
"BMPP", for the purposes of this regulation, means an operational methodology
prepared in accordance with the requirements of this section and established by
any person pursuant to this 15 RCNY
Chapter 19 or by order of the Commissioner to prevent or reduce the discharge
of any substance regulated under this Chapter, consistent with the principles
of Best Management Practices, to the public sewer system.  
   Biological liquefaction system. See "food waste liquefier."  
   BOD (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand). "BOD" means the laboratory
determination of the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation
of organic matter in a given time and at a specified temperature. It is
expressed in parts per million (ppm) or (mg/L) of oxygen used in a period of
five days at 20°C.  
   Building drain. "Building drain," also known as "house drain," means that
part of the lowest piping of a drainage system that receives the discharge from
soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside and that extends to the exterior
face of the exterior building wall, or the outlet of the most downstream trap,
private manhole, catch basin, detention tank, or similar fixture or equipment,
and conveys the drainage directly to the building sewer or, in the absence of a
building sewer, to an approved place of disposal.  
   Building drainage system. "Building drainage system," also known as "house
drainage system," means that part of the plumbing system which receives,
conveys and removes liquid and waterborne wastes to a public or private sewer.
 
   Building sewer. "Building sewer," also known as "house sewer," means that
part of the drainage system that extends from the end of the building drain, or
the outlet of the most downstream trap, private manhole, catch basin, detention
tank or similar fixture or equipment, and conveys the discharge to a public
sewer.  
   Bypass. "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of wastes from any portion
of a treatment system.  
   Catch basin. "Catch basin" means a structure or device designed to collect
and convey stormwater to a storm or combined sewer. It captures some of the
debris and heavy solids carried by the flow in a settlement chamber and stores
this material for periodic removal.  
   Clear water waste. "Clear water waste" means clear water drips from pumps
and equipment, coil condensate, steam condensate, single pass refrigeration
discharge, reduced pressure zone device discharge, and similar clear water
drippage.  
   Combined sewage. "Combined sewage" means sewage originating from sanitary
and/or industrial wastewater and stormwater.  
   Combined sewer. "Combined sewer" means a sewer receiving a combination of
sewage, stormwater, groundwater and nonpotable clear water waste.  
   Commissioner. "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Environmental
Protection.  
   Contributory area. "Contributory area" means the area from which the
intercepted sewage flow is controlled by a regulator chamber.  
   Cooling water. "Cooling water" means the water discharged from any system of
condensation, air conditioning, cooling, refrigeration, or other similar
temperature reducing sources. It shall contain no polluting substances which
would produce BOD or SS in excess of 10 mg/L or toxic substances in
concentrations or amounts greater than those specified herein.  
   Cost per pound of removing pollutants. "Cost per pound of removing
pollutants" means the cost per pound (in dollars) of removing from sewage the
BOD and SS contained in wastewater discharged into the sewerage system
expressed to the nearest tenth of a cent as certified by the Commissioner
pursuant to Paragraph 14 of Subdivision a of § 24-523 of the Administrative
Code.  
   Department. "Department" means the Department of Environmental Protection of
the City of New York.  
   Dip tank. "Dip tank" means a separate tank that contains perchloroethylene
and is used for purposes other than dry cleaning.  
   Discharge. "Discharge" means the introduction, placement, or release of any
substance, whether knowing or unknowing, accidental or otherwise, into a public
sewer or private sewer connected to a public sewer and shall include indirect
discharges as defined herein.  
   Diversion chamber. "Diversion chamber" means a structure which diverts
sanitary sewage into a regulator chamber under dry-weather conditions. During
wet-weather it directs combined sewage, in excess of wastewater resource
recovery facility capacity, to overflow into a tide gate chamber.  
   Drainage area. "Drainage area" means the geographical area which contributes
flow to a particular location in the sewerage system.  
   Dry cleaning. "Dry cleaning" means the process used to remove soil, greases,
paints and other unwanted substances from articles with the use of
perchloroethylene.  
   Dry cleaning equipment. "Dry cleaning equipment" means any machine, device,
or apparatus used to dry clean articles.  
   Dry cleaning facility. "Dry cleaning facility" means an establishment with
one or more dry cleaning systems.  
   Dry cleaning system. "Dry cleaning system" means all of the following
equipment, devices, or apparatus associated with the perchloroethylene dry
cleaning operations, including, but not limited to: dry cleaning equipment;
filter or purification systems; waste holding; treatment or disposal systems;
water separators; perchloroethylene supply systems; dip tanks; pumps; gaskets;
piping, ducting, fittings, valves, or flanges that convey perchloroethylene-
contaminated air; and dry cleaning control systems.  
   Effluent. "Effluent" means wastewater, treated or untreated, which is
discharged directly or indirectly to a combined or sanitary sewer.  
   Flammable. "Flammable" means any waste stream with a closed cup flash point
of less than 100 degrees Fahrenheit or 38 degrees Centigrade using the test
methods specified in the definition of "flash point" in New York City Fire Code
Section FC 3402.  
   Flushable. "Flushable" means meeting the International Water Services
Flushability Group (IWSFG) testing criteria for flushability, as currently set
forth in the 2018 IWSFG Publicly Available Specification (PAS) documents 1, 2,
and 3, and in any successor documents.  
   Food waste disposal. See "food waste disposer."  
   Food waste disposer. "Food waste disposer" also known as "food waste
disposal," means an electric motor driven device installed between a sink's
drain and trap, for grinding food waste and disposing of such ground food waste
through the plumbing drainage system.  
   Food waste liquefier. "Food waste liquefier" also known as "biological
liquefaction system" means a device that breaks down food waste into liquefied
form typically, but not exclusively, by mechanical turning, agitation,
maceration, shredding, grinding, and/or aerobic digestion, as well as dilution
with water, and may use additives such as microorganisms, enzymes, vitamins,
and/or minerals. The resulting liquefied food waste is discharged into the
drainage system.  
   Gravity grease interceptor. "Gravity grease interceptor" means a grease
interceptor that utilizes gravity flow and retention time as the primary means
of separating fat, oil, and grease from the facility waste stream prior to it
entering the public sewer. Gravity grease interceptors are predominantly
located outside due to their large size.  
   Grease interceptor. "Grease interceptor" means a plumbing appurtenance that
is installed in a drainage system to intercept grease-laden wastes from a
wastewater discharge. Such device has the ability to intercept free-floating
fat, oil, and grease.  
   Grease retention capacity. "Grease retention capacity" means the maximum
amount of grease that a grease interceptor or automatic grease removal device
is able to hold in accordance with its testing and rating certification,
without compromising its ability to remove an average of 90 percent or more of
the grease or other extractable matter in the wastewater.  
   Green infrastructure. "Green infrastructure" means the range of city-owned
measures that use plant or soil systems, permeable pavement or other permeable
surfaces or substrates, stormwater harvest or reuse, or landscaping to store,
infiltrate or evapotranspirate stormwater and reduce flows to sewer systems or
to surface waters.  
   Groundwater. "Groundwater" means water located beneath the ground surface in
soil pore spaces and in the fractures of rock formations and any water removed
from the ground, including water from springs, and natural underground streams
but excluding water from wells used for the delivery of potable or process
water.  
   House drain. See "building drain".  
   House drainage system. See "building drainage system".  
   House sewer. See "building sewer".  
   Hydromechanical grease interceptor. "Hydromechanical grease interceptor"
means a grease interceptor that utilizes hydraulic flow action, internal
baffling, and air entrainment as the primary means of separating fat, oil, and
grease from the fixture waste stream. Hydromechanical grease interceptors are
predominantly located indoors, compact in size, and located in proximity to the
fixtures they serve.  
   Indirect discharge. "Indirect discharge" means a discharge from a private
sewer to a public sewer, or a discharge to any street, gutter, pipe, channel,
pumping station, catch basin, drain, waterway, or other conveyance leading to
or connecting with a public sewer, including but not limited to the placement
or abandonment of any substance which could reasonably enter a public sewer
under the force of stormwater or other influence.  
   Industrial wastes. "Industrial wastes" means any liquid, gaseous or solid
substances, or a combination thereof, resulting from any process of industry,
manufacturing, trade or business or from the development or recovery of any
natural resources.  
   Influent. "Influent" means wastewater which flows into a pretreatment device
or facility, or into a wastewater resource recovery facility.  
   Interceptor. "Interceptor" means a sewer which receives the dry-weather flow
from a number of transverse combined or sanitary sewers and conducts such
sewage to a wastewater resource recovery facility. During storms it receives
predetermined quantities of dry-weather flow admixed with stormwater and
conducts commingled sewage to a wastewater resource recovery facility.  
   Interceptor-collector. "Interceptor-collector" means a sewer which not only
intercepts existing combined sewers to convey the flow to a wastewater resource
recovery facility, but also serves as a local sanitary sewer.  
   Laboratory determination. "Laboratory determination" means the measurements,
tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes in accordance
with the methods contained in the latest edition at the time of any such
measurements, tests and analysis, of "Standard Methods for Examination of Water
and Waste Water," a joint publication of the American Public Health
Association, the American Waterworks Association and the Water Pollution
Control Federation or in accordance with any other methods prescribed by the
Commissioner in these Rules and Regulations or in any other Rules and
Regulations.  
   May. "May" is permissive.  
   mg/L. "mg/L" means a unit of concentration expressed in milligrams per
liter.  
   Non-polar material. "Non-polar material" means that portion of the oil and
grease that is not eliminated from a solution containing N-Hexane, or any other
extractant the EPA shall prescribe, by silica gel or any other means of
adsorption the EPA shall prescribe.  
   Oil and grease. "Oil and grease" means the matter extractable from a
wastewater sample using N-Hexane or any other extractant the EPA shall
prescribe.  
   Other wastes. "Other wastes" means garbage (shredded or unshredded), refuse,
decayed wood, sawdust, shavings, bark, sand, lime, cinder, ashes, and all other
discarded matter not sewage or industrial waste.  
   Perchloroethylene. "Perchloroethylene" means a colorless, volatile
chlorinated hydrocarbon. Perc is also known as tetrachloroethylene and PCE. The
chemical formula for perc is Cl2C:CCl2. The CAS (chemical abstract service)
registry number for perc is 00127-18-4.  
   Person. "Person" means any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation, institution or group.  
   pH. "pH" means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration. It indicates the intensity of acidity or alkalinity expressed in
terms of pH scale running from 0 to 14. A pH value of 7.0, the midpoint of the
scale, represents neutrality. Values above 7.0 indicate alkalinity and those
below 7.0 acidity.  
   Pollutants. "Pollutants" means substances that may be present in sewage,
industrial waste or other waste, whether gaseous, liquid or solid.  
   ppb. "ppb" means parts per billion by volume in air or by weight in water.  
   Potable water. "Potable water" means water free from impurities present in
amounts sufficient to cause disease or harmful physiological effects and
conforming to the bacteriological and chemical quality requirements of the New
York State Sanitary Code.  
   Premises. "Premises" means any parcel of real property including land,
improvements or appurtenances, such as buildings.  
   Pre-rinse sink. See "scraper sink".  
   Pretreatment. "Pretreatment" means any measures to be taken by a user of the
public sewer that are necessary in order that the characteristics or amounts of
substances discharged to a combined or sanitary sewer, either directly or
indirectly, comply with 15 RCNY §§
19-03 or
19-04, including but not limited to the alteration of plant or processes, the
installation of equipment and/or the implementation of procedures designed to
reduce or eliminate the discharge of pollutants and toxic substances or
eliminate any discharge so that compliance with 15 RCNY §§
19-03 or
19-04 is attained.  
   Private sewer. "Private sewer" means a private sanitary, storm, or combined
sewer that is designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of
the City drainage plan.  
   Process water. "Process water" means any water which, during manufacturing
or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or
use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product, or
waste product.  
   Process wastewater. "Process wastewater" means process water that has been
discharged or discarded.  
   Public sewer. "Public sewer" means a sewer that is owned by the City of New
York.  
   Pumping station. "Pumping station" means a structure in the sewerage system
housing pumps and appurtenances to lift sewage from a lower to a higher level.
 
   Receiving water. "Receiving water" means a channel, canal, stream, creek,
river, pond, lake, ocean, or other body of water.  
   Reduced pressure zone device. "Reduced pressure zone device" means a minimum
of two independently acting check valves, with an automatically operated
pressure differential relief valve located between the two check valves.  
   Regulator. "Regulator" means a device or apparatus for controlling the
quantity of combined sewage from a contributory area admitted to an interceptor
or interceptor collector. It is usually comprised of a regulator chamber, a
diversion chamber and a tide gate chamber.  
   Regulator chamber. "Regulator chamber" means a structure and related
appurtenances, which limits the quantity of flow to an interceptor or
interceptor-collector.  
   Sanitary sewer. "Sanitary sewer" means a sewer that conveys only sewage.  
   Sanitary wastes. "Sanitary wastes" means bodily wastes, wash water, or
similar matter.  
   Scavenger wastes. "Scavenger wastes" means the sludge derived from sanitary
wastewater discharged into cesspools, septic tanks or privies located within
the City of New York.  
   Scraper sink. "Scraper sink," also known as "pre-rinse sink" means a sink
used for scraping food scraps, particles, and residue off of dishes.  
   Scullery sink. "Scullery sink" means a sink used for cleaning dishes and
cooking utensils.  
   Sewage. "Sewage" means, for purposes of these Regulations, water and
waterborne materials and substances of every kind and description which are
typically conveyed through a sewer, including but not limited to, liquid
wastes, chemicals, wastewater, human, animal, or plant wastes, industrial
waste, nonpotable clear water waste or other waste, or infiltration and inflow.
 
   Sewage treatment works, sewage treatment plant or wastewater resource
recovery facility. "Sewage treatment works," "sewage treatment plant" or "
wastewater resource recovery facility" means a City-owned facility for the
treatment of sewage.  
   Sewer. "Sewer" means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage and/or
stormwater. Except where otherwise specified or where the context clearly
dictates otherwise, the term "sewer" as used in this chapter shall refer to a
public sewer.  
   Sewer surcharge. "Sewer surcharge" means a charge which may be applied by
the New York City Water Board to premises or users discharging wastewater,
directly or indirectly, into a combined or sanitary sewer which contains BOD
and/or SS in concentrations exceeding those which may be specified by rule of
said board.  
   Sewerage system or sewer system. "Sewerage system" or "sewer system" means
and includes all sewers, including storm sewers, sanitary sewers, combined
sewers and intercepting sewers and manholes, sewage pumping treatment and
disposal works and any other plants, works or equipment, accessories, and green
infrastructure within the City, which are used or are useful in connection with
the collection, treatment or disposal of sewage, waste, or stormwater, and
which are owned, operated or maintained by the City as part of the public sewer
system.  
   Shall. "Shall" is mandatory.  
   Shredded garbage. "Shredded garbage" means garbage shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under flow conditions normally
prevailing in combined or sanitary sewers, with no particle having a dimension
greater than 1/2 inch in any direction.  
   Silver-Rich Solutions. "Silver-Rich Solutions" include, but are not limited
to, fixers, bleach-fixes, stabilizers (e.g. plumbless stabilizers and chemical
washes), low-flow washes, and all functionally-similar solutions.  
   SS (denoting suspended solids). "SS" means the laboratory determination of
the dry weight expressed in parts per million (ppm) or mg/L of solids that
either float on the surface or are in suspension in sewage and can be removed
by filtration.  
   Storm sewer. "Storm sewer" means a sewer, the primary purpose of which is to
carry stormwater.  
   Stormwater. "Stormwater" means runoff that is generated when precipitation
from rain events or snowmelt flows overland and does not percolate into the
ground.  
   Tide gate chamber. "Tide gate chamber" means a structure and related
appurtenances which allows bypassing or overflow of excess combined sewage of a
combined sewer or the flow of stormwater of a storm sewer to enter the
receiving waters and prevents back flow of the receiving waters into the
sewerage system.  
   Tilting braiser. "Tilting braiser," also known as "tilting skillet" means a
cooking device that can be used in various different cooking operations such as
braising, frying, stewing, broiling, grilling, roasting, etc., which is drained
after usage by tilting the cooking compartment and pouring out its liquid
waste.  
   Tilting skillet. See "tilting braiser."  
   Total silver halide process wastewater. "Total silver halide process
wastewater" means the sum of all aqueous solutions used in any silver halide
imaging process, including, but not limited to, photography film developers,
fixers, bleach-fix, stabilizers, washes, rinse waters, and all functionally-
similar solutions.  
   Toxic substance. "Toxic substance" means any substance on the list of toxic
pollutants or combination of pollutants published by the Administrator of the
Federal Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to § 307(a)(1) of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act, commonly referred to as the Clean Water Act, as
amended, or any substance whether gaseous, liquid or solid, which when
discharged to the sewerage system may tend to (1) interfere with or inhibit any
wastewater resource recovery facility process or disposal operation or (2) be
detrimental to the health of human beings, animals or to aquatic life.  
   Unshredded garbage. "Unshredded garbage" means solid waste from preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food or food products and from handling, storing and
sale of produce.  
   User. "User" means any person which causes a direct or indirect discharge to
a public sewer.  
   Wastewater. "Wastewater" means liquid-carried sanitary, industrial or other
wastes, contaminated stormwater runoff, or any liquid that is conveyed by means
of a pump or a hose into a public sidewalk, street, sewer, or sewer
appurtenance, including but not limited to a catch basin or manhole.  
   Water separator. "Water separator" means a vessel that uses gravity to
physically separate liquid perc from liquid water.  
   Wipe. "Wipe" means a non-woven disposable product that is designed,
marketed, or used for personal hygiene, or for household, commercial, or
industrial cleaning purposes.  
   Wok. "Wok" means a bowl-shaped pan used especially for frying and steaming.
 
   Yellow grease. "Yellow grease" means waste cooking oil.  
(Amended City Record 2/28/2018, eff. 3/30/2018; amended City Record 2/18/2020,
eff. 3/19/2020; amended City Record 8/26/2021, eff. 9/25/2021)
§ 19-02 Disposal of Wastewater, Stormwater and Groundwater.
   (a)   Except with the written approval of the Commissioner and in compliance
with the terms and conditions of such approval, no stormwater outlet such as
from a building, yard, or catch basin, nor any drain from a body of water such
as a lake, swamp, pond or swimming pool shall be connected to a public sewer,
or to a private sewer connected to a public sewer, or to an interceptor-
collector.
   (b)   No stormwater shall be allowed to enter a building drainage system
within any area served by a separate sanitary sewer. Within any such area, no
down spout or leader, gutter or other pipe, drain or channel which may at any
time carry stormwater, subsurface drainage derived from hydraulic pressure or
from well points, cooling water, or sea water shall be connected to any
sanitary sewer. No down spout or leader shall be used as a soil, waste or vent
pipe. Every joint in the connection of a building drain to a sanitary sewer
must be made watertight so that no leakage into or from any such drain shall
occur.
   (c)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, directly or
indirectly, into any storm sewer any substance other than stormwater or
allowable runoff.
   (d)   (1)   No connection to the sewerage system including but not limited
to conveyance through hard pipe, hose, or channel shall be made without the
written approval of the Commissioner and compliance with the terms and
conditions of such approval.
      (2)   The owner of any parcel of real property with an unauthorized
connection to the sewerage system shall be liable for removing any such
connection, and if needed, for reconnecting to a proper sewer as authorized,
directed, or ordered by the Commissioner, and for all associated costs and
expenses.
      (3)   The Commissioner, when circumstances may warrant, may direct the
Department to undertake such disconnection and/or reconnection in lieu of said
owner, the costs and expenses of which shall become due and payable by the
owner and shall constitute a lien against such property in the manner described
in § 24-512 of the Administrative Code.
      (4)   Pursuant to 15 RCNY §
19-10(d)(1) and (d)(2), the Commissioner, his or her deputies and any other
employees of the Department, when authorized by such Commissioner, may enter
upon such property and bring in the necessary equipment at reasonable hours,
for the purpose of exercising the powers or performing the duties of the
Department under this section. Refusal to permit such entry or bring in such
necessary equipment shall be a violation of these regulations.
   (e)   (1)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, directly or
indirectly, into any catch basin or manhole any substance other than stormwater
or allowable runoff.
      (2)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, directly or
indirectly, into any green infrastructure any substance other than stormwater.
   (f)   (1)   (i)   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged,
directly or indirectly, groundwater into a public sewer without a groundwater
discharge permit from the Department's Bureau of Customer Services; provided
that no person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, directly or
indirectly, over 10,000 gallons per day of groundwater, into a public sewer
without a letter of groundwater quality approval from the Department's Bureau
of Wastewater Treatment, a letter of approval contingent upon a review of the
capacity and capabilities of the receiving sewer from the Department's Bureau
of Water and Sewer Operations, and a groundwater discharge permit from the
Department's Bureau of Customer Services.
         (ii)   Such letters of approval are also required for groundwater
discharges of 10,000 gallons per day or less when the applicant's New York
State Professional Engineer determines that such groundwater may contain any
materials or substances prohibited or regulated by any provision of this title.
         (iii)   For groundwater discharges of 10,000 gallons per day or less
that are in compliance with these Rules, the Commissioner may allow a New York
State Professional Engineer to submit a statement on a form provided by the
Department certifying that representative groundwater samples have been
collected and that they have been properly handled, preserved, and analyzed in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part 136, or, if 40 C.F.R. Part 136 does not cover
the pollutant in question, in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," and that the analysis of
such samples by a New York State Health Department certified wastewater
laboratory shows compliance with the toxic discharge limits set by the
Commissioner pursuant to 15 RCNY §
19-03(a)(11)(ii). The owner of the premises is required to maintain the
laboratory results for said analysis for a minimum of either five years or such
longer period as may be required by other applicable laws or regulations, and
must make them available to the Department upon request.
         (iv)   The owner and/or operator of the premises from which the
groundwater originates shall remain liable for what is discharged into the
public sewer, and shall be subject to the applicable fines, penalties and other
sanctions provided in § 24-524 of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York if such discharge is not in compliance with applicable provisions of the
Administrative Code and Rules of the Department.
         (v)   No such self-certification shall be deemed to waive, nor shall
any such self-certification be held to limit the power of the Commissioner to
enforce any requirements of these or any other regulations, or of the
Administrative Code or of any other law. The Department shall not incur any
liabilities or obligations for the failure of the discharge from such self-
certified premises to comply with this chapter or any other regulations, the
Administrative Code or any other law.
         (vi)   Any groundwater discharges to a storm sewer which discharges
directly to a receiving water, regardless of the amount, shall require a State
Pollution Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) permit, a non-jurisdictional
determination letter, or such other written approval as may be required from
the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation in addition to a
groundwater discharge permit from the Department's Bureau of Customer Services,
and if over 10,000 gallons per day, a letter of approval contingent upon a
review of the capacity and capabilities of the receiving sewer from the
Department's Bureau of Water and Sewer Operations.
      (2)   The Commissioner may impose any terms or conditions in a
groundwater discharge permit and/or letter of groundwater quality approval that
he or she deems necessary. If those terms or conditions are not complied with
at all times, the permit and/or letters of approval may be immediately revoked
pursuant to paragraph (7) of this subdivision.
      (3)   The Commissioner may consult with the United States Environmental
Protection Agency and the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation prior to granting a groundwater discharge permit and/or letters of
approval, and at their suggestion, may include such conditions as he or she
deems appropriate.
   (g)   The Commissioner may approve an application for a groundwater
discharge permit and/or letters of approval upon demonstration by the
applicant, satisfactory to the Commissioner, that:
      (1)   substantial property damage will result unless such groundwater is
removed;
      (2)   there are no feasible alternative methods of disposal;
      (3)   allowing the discharge will not overload the hydraulic capacity of
the sewer;
      (4)   such discharge will not cause an unacceptable dilution of the
influent to the wastewater resource recovery facility receiving the groundwater
discharge, so as not to adversely impact the facility's operation; and
      (5)   such discharge will be temporary.
   (h)   (1)   Permits and/or letters of approval for the temporary discharge
of groundwater into storm sewers shall require, at a minimum, compliance with
the following conditions:
         (i)   the discharger must develop and implement, pursuant to a
schedule set by the Commissioner, an alternative method of disposal, unless the
applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that no such
alternative method of disposal exists or can be developed or implemented;
         (ii)   the discharger must indemnify and hold the City of New York
harmless for any damage or liability incurred by the City of New York either
directly or indirectly, in the event that the discharge results in overloading
the capacity of such storm sewer, or otherwise causes flooding, and shall also
post and maintain such cash or surety bond as may be required and will be
satisfactory to the Commissioner and must supply evidence of such bond when
required;
         (iii)   the discharger must pay a sewer use fee or charge equivalent
to the one imposed by the Department pursuant to § 24-514 of the Administrative
Code;
         (iv)   the discharger must install a flow meter to measure the flow of
groundwater to the storm sewer.
      (2)   Permits and/or letters of approval for the temporary discharge of
groundwater into either combined or sanitary sewers, shall require, at a
minimum, compliance with the following conditions:
         (i)   the discharger must develop and implement, pursuant to a
schedule set by the Commissioner, an alternative method of disposal, unless the
applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that no such
alternative method of disposal exists or can be developed and implemented;
         (ii)   the discharger must indemnify and hold the City of New York
harmless for any damage or liability incurred by the City of New York either
directly, or indirectly, in the event that the discharge results in overloading
the capacity of such combined or sanitary sewer, causes a bypass away from the
sewage treatment plant to which it would have otherwise flowed, or otherwise
causes flooding, and must also post and maintain such cash or surety bend, as
may be required and will be satisfactory to the Commissioner and must supply
evidence of such bond when required;
         (iii)   the discharger must pay a sewer use fee or charge equivalent
to that imposed by the Department pursuant to § 24-514 of the Administrative
Code;
         (iv)   the discharger must install a flow meter to measure the flow of
groundwater to the combined or sanitary sewer.
   (i)   A permit and/or letters of approval issued by the Commissioner for the
temporary discharge of groundwater, unless sooner terminated or revoked; is
effective for one year. The permit and/or letters of approval may be renewed by
the Commissioner thereafter for additional one-year periods upon new
application by the discharger.
   (j)   General application for non-stormwater discharges into storm sewers. 
      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any person may
apply to the department for written approval to discharge a substance other
than stormwater or groundwater into a storm sewer in accordance with the
requirements of this subdivision.
      (2)   An applicant may apply by submitting an application on the form and
in a format approved by the Commissioner and made available on the City's
website.
      (3)   Such written approval shall be granted for a period determined by
the Commissioner, not to exceed one year. The Commissioner may approve
additional discharge periods upon new application by the discharger.
      (4)   The Commissioner shall disapprove an application for a discharge,
pursuant to this section if, in the determination of the Commissioner, the
discharge is reasonably likely to be:
         (i)   Inconsistent with the proper maintenance and purpose of the
city's storm sewers, including but not limited to the capacity of such storm
sewers; or
         (ii)   A significant contributor of pollutants to the sewer system or
to surface waters of the state, or otherwise inconsistent with the state
pollutant discharge elimination system (SPDES) permit for municipal separate
storm sewer systems of New York City, SPDES No. NY-0287890 or its successor.
      (5)   The Commissioner may impose such terms and conditions that he or
she deems necessary to protect the sewer system, the surface waters of the
state, or to protect the public health or the environment.
      (6)   The applicant may file with the Commissioner a written appeal of a
denial of an application submitted, pursuant to Paragraph (1) of this
subdivision or of the terms or conditions of a written approval imposed,
pursuant to Paragraph (5) of this subdivision. Such appeal must be filed within
30 days of the determination on the application. Appeals shall be reviewed by
the Department and a final determination regarding the appeal shall be made
within a reasonable period of time.
      (7)   If the terms or conditions of a written approval are not complied
with at all times, the written approval may be revoked upon notice to the
discharger and an opportunity to be heard, except that the Department may, upon
a finding that the continued discharge presents an imminent harm to public
health or safety or to the environment, immediately revoke such written
approval without prior notice. In such case, the Commissioner shall forthwith
notify the individual of such revocation, the reasons for such revocation and
that the individual has the right to request a hearing within a reasonable
period of time.
(Amended City Record 2/28/2018, eff. 3/30/2018; amended City Record 2/18/2020,
eff. 3/19/2020)
§ 19-03 Materials and Substances Excluded from Combined and Sanitary Sewers.
   (a)   Except as hereinafter provided, any person that discharges or causes
to be discharged, including any placement, run, leak, or escape into any
combined or sanitary sewer, pipe, channel, pumping station, catch basins, drain
connecting with any combined or sanitary sewer or any other sewer
appurtenances, or green infrastructure, or waterway connecting with any
combined or sanitary sewer, or into any private sewer connected with a combined
or sanitary sewer any of the following described materials, substances or
wastes, except as authorized in writing by the Commissioner or such small
quantities through a building drainage system as may be present in normal
household wastes, shall be strictly liable, without regard to fault:
      (1)   Construction materials, concrete or concrete contaminated water,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastic, wood, paunch manure, coffee grounds, fur, wax, power wash waste,
building wash waste, fats, oils, grease, or any solids or viscous substances
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with
the proper operation of the sewerage system. No amount of the following shall
be considered normal household wastes for purposes of this section: wipes that
are not flushable, diapers, paper towels, floss, condoms, razors, hypodermic
needles, contact lenses, bandages, sanitary pads, tampons, tampon applicators,
gauze, cotton balls, swabs, any other personal hygiene products, drinking
straws, any other items that are not toilet paper, sanitary waste, or items
that have otherwise been authorized in writing by the Commissioner;
      (2)   Snow and ice at locations not authorized in writing by the
Commissioner;
      (3)   Steam or wastewater above 150°F;
      (4)   Flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases, including but not
limited to gasoline, benzene and naphtha (notwithstanding anything to the
contrary contained in these Regulations, under no circumstances may any such
substances be discharged into the sewerage system, even if diluted prior to or
after discharge);
      (5)   Oil sludges, waste oil, motor oil, heating oil, diesel and other
fuels, dielectric fluid, brake fluid, transmission fluid, hydraulic fluid, or
other similar substances;
      (6)   Non-polar material, as defined in 15 RCNY §
19-01, in concentrations greater than 50 mg/L for any given time;
      (7)   Coal tar, its derivatives and waste;
      (8)   Paints and related paint waste products from any source that tend
to clog or otherwise interfere with the operation of the sewerage system;
      (9)   Corrosive wastewater having a pH lower than 5.0 or higher than 12.0
or having any other corrosive property likely to cause damage to structures or
equipment of the sewerage system or create a hazard to personnel;
      (10)   Toxic substances in such quantities, which may when discharged
from a single source or in combination with other sources:
         (i)   interfere with any sewage treatment process, including sludge
digestion;
         (ii)   limit the City's options for operating its sewerage system or
disposing of the sewage sludge, grit or scum generated at wastewater resource
recovery facilities;
         (iii)   be detrimental to the health of human beings, animals, or
aquatic life;
         (iv)   have any negative impact on the receiving waters; or
         (v)   violate federal or state laws or regulations or the requirements
of a discharge permit of a sewage treatment plant issued pursuant to § 402 of
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, commonly referred to as the Clean
Water Act, as amended, or any other permit issued pursuant to federal or state
law.
      (11)   Toxic substances in such quantities which may, when discharged
from a single source or in combination with other sources:
         (i)   violate any federal or state laws, regulations, rules or
standards governing such discharge; or
         (ii)   violate the toxic discharge limits to be set by the
Commissioner, contained in a list to be maintained by the Commissioner and
which may be published from time to time in the City Record, or
         (iii)   violate any discharge limit contained in 15 RCNY §
19-04(a) or ordered pursuant to 15 RCNY §
19-04(b).
      (12)   Any liquids or wastes containing pollutants of such quality and/or
quantity that become burdensome in the operation and maintenance of a sewage
treatment plant;
      (13)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance;
      (14)   Any wastewater or substance, which in the opinion of the
Commissioner, will result in a violation of any applicable federal, state or
local water quality standard concerning discoloration or other undesirable
physical change in the appearance of the receiving waters;
      (15)   Any still bottom or sludge residues resulting from dry cleaning
processes including, but not limited to, dirt, lint, soil and any other
deposits or residues extracted as a result of any dry cleaning processes. The
discharge of filters or filter media used in dry cleaning processes is also
prohibited;
      (16)   Antifreeze;
      (17)   Hazardous waste pharmaceuticals, as defined in the Code of Federal
Regulations, in 40 C.F.R. Part 266.500.
   (b)   (1)   Food waste disposers shall be permitted only within dwelling
units. Under no circumstances will the discharge of garbage or refuse whether
shredded or unshredded, other than ground putrescible food waste from food
waste disposers in dwelling units, be permitted into a combined or sanitary
sewer.
      (2)   Except for food waste disposers within dwelling units, any device
that breaks down food waste by whatever means for the purpose of discharging it
into the sewer system, including but not limited to food waste liquefiers, is
prohibited in both residential and non-residential premises unless such device,
prior to the effective date of this paragraph, either was connected to a grease
interceptor as a result of an Order issued by the Department, appeared on
engineering plans approved by the Department, or was registered with the New
York City Department of Sanitation. When any such device reaches the end of its
useful life, if it is replaced, it may only be replaced with on-site processing
methods that do not break down food waste for the purpose of discharging it
into the sewer system, and which comply with all applicable federal, state, and
local requirements.
   (c)   Except with the written approval of the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation, and in compliance with the terms and conditions
thereof, only stormwater and allowable runoff may enter a receiving water
without first passing through a wastewater resource recovery facility or its
bypass.
   (d)   (1)   Every person must provide protection from accidental discharge
and from spillage with the potential to cause a discharge of any materials or
substances prohibited or regulated by any provision of any section of any title
of these Regulations. Facilities to prevent accidental discharges and spills,
such as spill prevention equipment, must be provided and maintained by the
person at his or her expense. The Commissioner may require the construction
and/or installation of special facilities to prevent accidental discharges and
spills and the submission of detailed plans, for review, prior to the
construction and/or installation.
      (2)   In the event of a discharge in violation of any provision of any
section of any title of these Regulations, the person involved in the
accidental discharge must immediately notify the Department, at any hour, by
telephone at 311, and must give such other additional notice as the
Commissioner may direct. The telephone notification must include, the name of
the person reporting the discharge, the exact time and location of the
discharge, the nature of the discharge, including quantity, what it contains
and any other information the Commissioner may request. The Commissioner may
require additional notification and reporting, including written reports in a
form he or she may prescribe.
      (3)   All establishments using or storing toxic or other substances the
discharge of which would be prohibited, restricted, or regulated by these
Regulations, must post a notice of the procedures to be followed in the event
of an accidental discharge. The Commissioner may prescribe the size, form and
content of this notice. This notice must be posted at the location of the
storage and use of toxic and other substances, the discharge of which would be
prohibited, restricted or regulated by these Regulations.
      (4)   In the event of a discharge that enters or has the potential to
enter the public sewers, in violation of any provision of any section of any
title of these regulations, any person involved in the discharge must
immediately take steps to mitigate the effects of such discharge and commence
clean-up procedures of such discharge in accordance with all applicable
Federal, State and City laws, rules and regulations.
   (e)   The control of all odors which arise in premises from a public sewer
must at all times be the responsibility of the owner or occupiers of premises.
The cost of such control shall be borne by the owner or occupiers of premises.
   (f)   (1)   All pretreatment and monitoring devices, including but not
limited to a grease or oil interceptor or automatic grease removal device,
whether required to be installed by order of the commissioner or by any other
law or regulation and located on any premises, shall be the proper device and
correctly installed, maintained in good working order, and operated properly to
ensure that the requirements of this section and other applicable sections of
the regulations are met.
      (2)   Bypass of pretreatment systems is prohibited except under the
conditions and subject to the limitations specified in 15 RCNY §
19-04(d)(2).
   (g)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any radioactive
material either directly or indirectly into the sewerage system, unless all
restrictions, prohibitions, and requirements of 24 RCNY Health Code
Article 175 are fully complied with.
   (h)   (1)   Interceptors and separators must be provided to prevent the
discharge of oil, grease, sand and other substances harmful or hazardous to the
building drainage system, the public sewer, the private sewage disposal system,
or the wastewater resource recovery facility or processes.
      (2)   The size, type and location of grease interceptors and automatic
grease removal devices must be designed and installed in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions and the requirements of 15 RCNY §
19-11 based on the anticipated conditions of use.
      (3)   The size, type and location of other types of interceptors and
separators, including but not limited to oil separators, and sand interceptors
must be designed and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions and the requirements of Section 1003 of the New York City Plumbing
Code based on the anticipated conditions of use.
      (4)   Wastes that do not require treatment or separation must not be
discharged into any interceptor or separator.
(Amended City Record 2/18/2020, eff. 3/19/2020; amended City Record 8/26/2021,
eff. 9/25/2021)
§ 19-04 Toxic Substances Accepted Conditionally.
   (a)   The concentration in wastewater of any of the following toxic
substances must not exceed the specified concentrations listed below before
discharge to a combined or sanitary sewer;
Toxic Substance Permissible Maximum Concentration Daily Average Maximum
                for any given time (mg/L)         Concentration (mg/L)
Toxic Substance       Permissible Maximum Concentration Daily Average Maximum
                      for any given time (mg/L)         Concentration (mg/L)
Cadmium               2                                 0.69
Chromium (hexavalent) 5                                 -
Copper                5                                 -
Cyanide (amenable)    0.2                               -
Lead                  2                                 -
Mercury               0.05                              -
Nickel                3                                 -
Zinc                  5                                 -
 
   (b)   (1)   Notwithstanding anything contained in 15 RCNY §
19-04(a) above, when the volume of a single toxic discharge or the combined
toxic discharges of a group of establishments within a single drainage area is
large enough, in the opinion of the Commissioner, to create unacceptable total
concentrations of a toxic substance either in the influent entering a sewage
treatment plant or in the receiving waters, the Commissioner may by order
impose more stringent concentration limits than those listed in 15 RCNY §
19-04(a), or impose mass limits upon the person or persons so discharging.
Conversely, when a toxic discharge is sufficiently diluted or rendered
innocuous before reaching a sewage treatment plant or the receiving waters, the
Commissioner may, in his or her absolute discretion, grant written permission
for discharge concentrations greater than those listed in 15 RCNY §
19-04(a).
      (2)   The Commissioner may by order impose maximum amounts or
concentrations of a toxic substance which may be discharged directly or
indirectly to a combined or sanitary sewer from an industrial source
notwithstanding that such amounts or concentrations are less than those
demanded by other subdivisions of this section or that the substance is not
regulated by such subdivisions for that source, provided that such amounts or
concentrations are economically achievable by that source as determined by the
Commissioner. Within 20 days after service of the Commissioner's determination
and order, the person discharging the toxic substance may request a hearing at
which evidence may be presented only upon the issue of the economic
achievability of the maximum amounts or concentrations of the toxic substance,
as imposed by the Commissioner, to be discharged to the combined or sanitary
sewer. Following such hearing, the hearing officer designated by the
Commissioner shall report his or her findings and recommendations to the
Commissioner who, in his or her discretion, may sustain, revoke, or modify the
original determination and order. The Commissioner shall, upon his or her
decision to sustain or modify the original determination and order, issue a
final order to the person discharging the toxic substance to comply with such
decision.
   (c)   Pursuant to § 24-523(e)(2) of the Administrative Code, all
pretreatment standards and requirements promulgated pursuant to the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act, commonly referred to as the Clean Water Act, as
amended, including time limitations for compliance with such standards,
monitoring of wastewater and the reporting of the results of such monitoring
are hereby incorporated into these regulations and all such reports must also
be made to the Commissioner. All sources of pollutants or toxic substances to
the combined or sanitary sewers, subject to such pretreatment standards, must
discharge wastewaters to the combined or sanitary sewers in conformance with
such standards, provided however, that if a more stringent standard is
applicable under 15 RCNY §
19-04(a) or (b) or any other section of these Regulations then the more
stringent standard shall be controlling.
   (d)   (1)   Pretreatment systems must be correctly installed, maintained in
good working order, and operated properly so as to ensure continued compliance
with 15 RCNY §§
19-03 and
19-04.
      (2)   Bypass of Pretreatment Facilities. 
         (i)   Bypass is prohibited unless:
            (A)   it is unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury,
or severe property damage, no feasible alternatives exist, and the Industrial
User submits notification as required by subparagraph (b) of this paragraph; or
            (B)   it is for essential maintenance to assure efficient
operation, it does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be
violated, and the Industrial User submits notification as required by
subparagraph (b) of this paragraph.
         (ii)   Notification of bypass:
            (A)   Anticipated bypass. If the Industrial User knows in advance
of the need for a bypass, it must submit prior written notice, at least ten
days before the date of the bypass, to the Department. 
            (B)   Unanticipated bypass. The Industrial User shall immediately
notify the Department by calling 311, and must submit a written notice to the
Department within 5 days after the bypass. This report shall specify: 
               1.   a description of the bypass, its cause and duration;
               2.   whether the bypass has been corrected; and
               3.   the steps being taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate
and prevent a recurrence of the bypass.
            When calling 311 the Industrial User must ask for and record the
complaint number for proof of compliance with the notification requirements.
   (e)   No person shall increase the use of process water or in any way
attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute means of
pretreatment in order to comply with any provision of any section of these
Regulations.
(Amended City Record 2/18/2020, eff. 3/19/2020)
§ 19-05 Permit for Industrial Wastewater Discharge.
   (a)   The following persons may not discharge process wastewater to the
combined or sanitary sewers without an industrial wastewater discharge permit,
or equivalent control mechanism:
      (1)   Significant Industrial Users, as defined in the Code of Federal
Regulations, in 40 C.F.R. Part 403.3(v); and
      (2)   Any other person for whom the Commissioner determines that a
wastewater discharge permit or equivalent control mechanism is necessary to
protect the sewer system or the treatment processes thereof or to protect the
public health or welfare.
   (b)   (1)   The applicant for a wastewater discharge permit or equivalent
control mechanism must complete and file an application in the form prescribed
by the Department and containing such information as the Commissioner may
direct. Any person who has been issued a permit must apply for renewal of that
permit at least 120 days prior to its expiration date.
      (2)   The Commissioner, in his or her discretion, may issue wastewater
discharge permits and may impose such terms and conditions he or she deems
necessary to protect the sewer system or the treatment processes thereof or to
protect the public health or welfare. Non-compliance with any of the terms and
conditions of the permit, shall be grounds for revocation of the permit to
discharge wastewater into the combined or sanitary sewer; such revocation shall
be effective immediately upon notice to the permittee of such revocation.
   (c)   (1)   Upon direction or order by the Commissioner, any user of a
combined or sanitary sewer must:
         (i)   complete an industrial wastes questionnaire form;
         (ii)   allow an inspection of the user's processes which contribute
wastewater to a combined or sanitary sewer;
         (iii)   measure and sample for the purposes of determining volume and
characteristics of effluents which are discharged to a public sewer. Any
information included in the industrial wastes questionnaire which is designated
confidential business information by the user of the combined or sanitary
sewer, except effluent characteristics, is to be treated in accordance with
applicable law and procedures established by the Commissioner.
      (2)   An industrial waste questionnaire shall include:
         (i)   Details of production, number of employees, water consumption
and usage, waste disposal facilities, and other pertinent data to enable the
Commissioner to properly determine the nature of the waste being discharged;
         (ii)   A plan of the property showing accurately all sewers, drains
and building sewer connections;
         (iii)   A laboratory determination of the characteristics of the
wastewater discharged to a combined or sanitary sewer, if required by the
Commissioner. Such a laboratory determination shall be made at the expense of
the applicant, and when the applicant has neither the facilities nor
professional personnel to properly perform this laboratory determination in
accordance with the methods prescribed in the definition of laboratory
determination under 15 RCNY §
19-01, he or she must have the laboratory determination performed and attested
to by a person or agency of recognized professional standing. The samples of
wastewater for which a laboratory determination is to be made must be taken in
accordance with the direction of the Commissioner and the results must be
transmitted to the Commissioner.
   (d)   For discharges which conform or are expected to conform to 15 RCNY §
19-03 or 15 RCNY §
19-04, the Commissioner, nevertheless, may require the installation and
maintenance, by a date set by the Commissioner, at the sole expense of the user
of the public sewer, of facilities or equipment for the measurement and
sampling by departmental personnel of wastewater discharged to a public sewer.
   (e)   No person shall cause or allow a new connection to a public sewer of
premises, in which one or more establishments that will discharge industrial
wastes or other wastes, as defined in this chapter, are to be located, without
a written permit from the Commissioner, pursuant to § 24-509 of the
Administrative Code. No such permit shall issue unless the Commissioner shall
have determined that the characteristics of such discharges will comply with
the provisions of 15 RCNY §
19-03 or 15 RCNY §
19-04 and approves such connection. If pretreatment is required in order that
the discharge to the combined or sanitary sewer complies with 15 RCNY §
19-03 or 15 RCNY §
19-04, review and/or approval by the Commissioner of plans for such
pretreatment shall be limited by him or her to the determination of whether
such plans conform in principle to the accepted practices in the field of
wastewater treatment. No such permit or approval shall be deemed to waive, nor
shall any such permit or approval be held to limit the power of the
Commissioner to enforce any requirements of these or any other regulations of
the Administrative Code or of any other law. The Department, by such permit or
approval, shall not incur any liabilities or obligations for the failure of the
effluent from such pretreatment to comply with this chapter or any other
regulations, the Administrative Code or any other law.
   (f)   For any non-residential discharge of animal fats and/or vegetable oils
that either (a) requires a new sewer-connection permit and/or approval, or (b)
requires a filing at the New York City Department of Buildings for an
alteration and/or repair or the like, of an operation listed in 15 RCNY §
19-11(a), or (c) requires the installation of a grease interceptor or automatic
grease removal device pursuant to any section of these Rules or any other
regulations or law, the Commissioner shall allow a New York State Professional
Engineer or a New York State Registered Architect to submit to the Department
an application that includes, at a minimum, plans containing grease interceptor
or automatic grease removal device sizing calculations and a statement
certifying that the sizing and design of any required grease interceptor or
automatic grease removal device complies with 15 RCNY §
19-11. A sworn Affidavit of Completion must be submitted to the Department by a
New York City Licensed Master Plumber in accordance with all applicable
requirements. The sworn affidavit must affirm that the grease interceptor or
automatic grease removal device was installed and is operating in accordance
with the self-certification application. The owner and/or operator of the
establishment where the grease interceptor or automatic grease removal device
is installed shall remain liable for the proper installation, operation and
maintenance of such equipment, and shall be subject to the applicable fines,
penalties and other sanctions provided in § 24-524 of the Administrative Code
of the City of New York if such equipment is not installed, operated and
maintained in conformance with applicable provisions of the Administrative Code
and Rules of the Department. No such self-certification shall be deemed to
waive, nor shall any such self-certification be held to limit the power of the
Commissioner to enforce any requirements of these or any other regulations, or
of the Administrative Code or of any other law. The Department shall not incur
any liabilities or obligations for the failure of the effluent from such self-
certified premises to comply with this chapter or any other regulations, the
Administrative Code or any other law.
(Amended City Record 2/18/2020, eff. 3/19/2020)
§ 19-06 Removal, Transportation and Disposition of Scavenger Wastes.
   (a)   (1)   Scavenger wastes must be admitted into the sewerage system at
designated manholes only. The discharge, directly or indirectly, of scavenger
wastes into the sewerage system without a valid permit or in contravention of
the terms of a permit shall constitute a violation of this section. Persons
desiring to discharge scavenger wastes at such designated manholes shall be
required to obtain a scavenger wastes permit from the Commissioner.
      (2)   The disposal of such wastes to the City's sewerage system from
sources outside of New York City is prohibited.
      (3)   Wastes from cesspools or septic tanks containing substances derived
from non-sanitary wastewater will not be admitted into the sewerage system
except by special permit issued by the Commissioner. All non-scavenger waste is
prohibited from discharge to a designated scavenger waste manhole except by
special permit issued by the Commissioner.
      (4)   The discharge of these wastes must be made only at a designated
manhole location on a combined or sanitary sewer as shall be stated in said
permits or as may be relocated by the Commissioner.
   (b)   The applicant for scavenger wastes permit or special permit must be
the owner or lessee of the vehicle to which the permit is to apply. Any false,
untruthful or misleading statements in any application for a scavenger wastes
permit or special permit or in any material submitted in support of said
application will invalidate the permit. All scavenger wastes permit or special
permits issued by the Commissioner shall be for one (1) year, unless stated
otherwise. A copy of the scavenger wastes permit or special permit must be
carried in every truck for which a scavenger wastes permit or special permit
has been issued, and must be presented on demand of the Commissioner.
   The person must at all times conduct discharging operations so as to
maintain the safety and cleanliness, of the designated manhole and its
surrounding area.
   The scavenger wastes permit or special permit may be immediately suspended
or revoked at any time by the Commissioner for violation of this section.
   (c)   All applicants for a permit to discharge scavenger wastes into the
sewerage system must furnish, at a minimum, the following information with each
application:
      (1)   Name of firm or individual and address;
      (2)   Volume of scavenger wastes removed each year for the last three
years; new applicants to submit an estimate of volume for the first year.
      (3)   Number of scavenger vehicles in collection service.
      (4)   Completed copy of the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation Waste Transporter Permit if such exists at the time of
application; if not, any scavenger waste permit issued will be conditioned upon
obtaining such Waste Transporter Permit.
   (d)   The scavenger waste permit is applicable for vehicles transporting
only scavenger wastes and is not valid for vehicles which, at times, transport
other wastes.
   (e)   The discharge of any wastes from grease interceptors, separators or
traps is prohibited.
(Amended City Record 2/18/2020, eff. 3/19/2020)
§ 19-07 Best Management Practices Plans (BMPPs) for Persons Discharging Total
Silver Halide Process Wastewater to the Public Sewer System.
   (a)   Any person that discharges total silver halide process wastewater to
the public sewer system, including, but not limited to, photofinishers,
printers, publishers, hospitals, dentists, and X-ray laboratories, must prepare
and implement a Best Management Practices Plan (BMPP) in accordance with the
applicable provisions of subdivision (i) of this section.
   (b)   All pretreatment technology for the recovery of silver at such
facilities must be installed pursuant to this section and must be appropriately
sized, per manufacturer's specifications, to achieve the minimum percent
recovery of silver, as required by the applicable subdivisions of this section,
from silver-rich solutions. The pretreatment technology must be installed,
operated, and maintained as per manufacturer's specifications. Written records
concerning the selected sizing criteria and recommended specifications must be
maintained at the facility at all times.
   (c)   In lieu of complying with the requirements of this section applicable
to on-site recovery, any person discharging total silver halide process
wastewater to the public sewer system may have all silver-rich solutions
transported off-site for recovery, reclamation, and/or refinement in accordance
with all applicable City, State and Federal regulations. Any person that
exercises this option must retain (1) the most recent manifest and/or (2) a
vendor certification, and/or (3) other documentation regarding the disposal of
silver-rich solutions. Such documentation must include, but is not limited to,
the name of the transporter, the quantity of silver-rich solutions removed from
their facility, and where and how the silver-rich solutions were disposed of.
   (d)   All required records and measurements made by persons at their
facility pursuant to this section must be available at all times at the
person's facility, for the time periods indicated in the applicable provisions
of subdivision (i) of this section, for inspection and copying by authorized
representatives of the Department. For persons employing outside contractors to
maintain their pretreatment systems, a certification from the vendor that the
applicable requirements of these regulations are being complied with must be
kept at the person's facility, for the time periods indicated in subdivision
(i) of this section, for inspection and copying, upon request by authorized
representatives of the Department.
   (e)   Any person defined as Significant Industrial Users, pursuant to 40
C.F.R. Part 403, must obtain an Industrial Wastewater Discharge Permit to
discharge to the public sewers.
   (f)   Persons subject to the requirements of this section must install and
operate the applicable pretreatment technology. Equivalent pretreatment
technology may only be used if preapproved by the Commissioner.
   (g)   Design and operation of pretreatment technology shall be based upon
percent recovery of silver-rich solutions. The Department may, upon written
request, consider reducing the design-recovery percentages required in these
regulations for persons utilizing silver-halide processes with in-line
recovery, such as closed loop or recirculated electrolytic desilvering.
   (h)   For persons performing on-site recovery, the quantities of all total
silver-halide process wastewater discharges (i.e. flow rates) shall be gauged
and recorded in a log book as follows:
      (1)   one day per month, for persons discharging 100 gallons or more of
total silver halide process wastewater; or
      (2)   one day per calendar quarter, for persons discharging less than 100
gallons per day of total silver halide process wastewater; or
      (3)   one day per calendar year, for persons discharging less than 100
gallons per day of total silver halide process wastewater and who are complying
with subdivision (i)(1)(ii)(B) of this section.
   Flows shall be recorded as the daily amount of all total silver-halide
process wastewater that is discharged to the public sewer. The day that is
selected for gauging and for sampling must be representative of a normal
production day. Flows should be determined either through the use of: (i) fixed
metering equipment, (ii) timed filling of a vessel of known volume, or (iii)
through calculation, utilizing estimated amounts of make-up (replenishment)
solutions.
   (i)   The BMPP must include but not be limited to the following:
      (1)   Discharges of less than 100 gallons per day. Any person that
discharges less than 100 gallons per day of total silver halide process
wastewater must:
         (i)   install and continually operate metallic replacement
pretreatment technology designed to recover at least 90% of the silver from the
silver-rich solutions processed;
         (ii)   test for the silver concentration in the influent and effluent
from the silver recovery unit(s) using silver estimating paper/wire and/or test
kits at least:
            (A)   once per calendar quarter on a day that is representative of
normal operations; or
            (B)   once per calendar year on a day that is representative of
normal operations, only if the person maintains a log of the amount of silver-
rich solutions being treated and discharged.
         (iii)   measure representative daily quantities of total silver-halide
process wastewater discharged to the public sewer;
         (iv)   keep written records of pretreatment technology maintenance;
         (v)   keep written records of the date that any new pretreatment
technology is brought into service; and
         (vi)   keep all measurements and records required by this section at
their facility for at least one year from the date such records and
measurements are made.
      (2)   Discharges of 100 up to but not including 1,000 gallons per day.
Any person that discharges from 100 up to but not including 1,000 gallons per
day of total silver halide process wastewater must:
         (i)   install and continually operate one of the following
pretreatment technologies designed to recover at least 90% of the silver from
silver-rich solutions processed:
            (A)   two metallic replacement units installed in series and
operated simultaneously; or
            (B)   electrolytic recovery; or
            (C)   chemical precipitation;
         (ii)   test for the silver concentration in the influent and effluent
from the silver recovery unit(s) using silver estimating paper/wire and/or test
kits at least once per month on a day that is representative of normal
operations;
         (iii)   measure representative daily quantities of total silver-halide
process wastewater discharged to the public sewer;
         (iv)   keep written records of pretreatment technology maintenance;
         (v)   keep written records of the date that any new pretreatment
technology is brought into service; and
         (vi)   keep all measurements and records required by this section at
their facility for at least three years from the date such records and
measurements are made.
      (3)   Discharges of 1,000 up to but not including 10,000 gallons per day.
Any person that discharges from 1,000 up to but not including 10,000 gallons
per day of total silver-halide process wastewater must:
         (i)   install and continually operate one of the following
pretreatment technologies designed to recover at least 95% of the silver from
silver-rich solutions processed:
            (A)   electrolytic recovery and metallic replacement; or
            (B)   chemical precipitation; or
            (C)   any combination of the above;
         (ii)   test for the silver concentration in the influent and effluent
from the silver recovery unit(s) using silver estimating paper/wire and/or test
kits at least once per month on a day that is representative of normal
operations;
         (iii)   perform one composite sampling of the influent and effluent at
least once every two years on a day that is representative of normal operations
and have the sample analyzed for silver by a laboratory certified by the New
York State Department of Health;
         (iv)   measure representative daily quantities of total silver-halide
process wastewater discharged to the public sewer;
         (v)   keep written records of pretreatment technology maintenance;
         (vi)   keep written records of the date that any new pretreatment
technology is brought into service; and
         (vii)   keep all measurements and records required by this section at
their facility for at least three years from the date such records and
measurements are made.
      (4)   Discharges of 10,000 gallons per day or more. Any person that
discharges 10,000 gallons per day or more of total silver-halide process
wastewater must:
         (i)   install and continually operate one of the following
pretreatment technologies designed to recover at least 99% of the silver from
silver-rich solutions processed:
            (A)   two metallic replacement units installed in series and
operated simultaneously and one electrolytic recovery unit; or
            (B)   one electrolytic recovery unit and chemical precipitation;
         (ii)   test for the silver concentration in the influent and effluent
from the silver recovery unit(s) using silver estimating paper/wire and/or test
kits at least once per month on a day that is representative of normal
operations;
         (iii)   perform one daily composite sampling of the influent and
effluent at least once every calendar year on a day that is representative of
normal operations and have the sample analyzed for silver by a laboratory
certified by the New York State Department of Health;
         (iv)   measure representative daily quantities of total silver-halide
process wastewater discharged to the public sewer;
         (v)   keep written records of pretreatment technology maintenance;
         (vi)   record the date any new pretreatment technology is brought into
service; and
         (vii)   keep all measurements and records required by this section at
such person's facility for at least three years from the date such records and
measurements are made.
(Amended City Record 2/18/2020, eff. 3/19/2020)
§ 19-08 House and Trailer Connections.
   (a)   Conditional house connection. 
      (1)   Conditional House Connection Permits are issued under a variety of
situations among which the two (2) most common are:
         (i)   The developer/builder does not have a prospectus at the time
house connection permits have to be issued as consequence of a hardship.
         (ii)   The developer/builder does not have a prospectus which is most
likely early on in the construction sequence of his or her building
construction, however needs one or several connections to drain the
construction site.
      (2)   The manner in which conditional House Connection Permits are issued
is as follows: The Local Office of the Department's Permit Control Section will
approve a permit application conditionally by indicating on it that the
Certificate of Inspection is not to be released until a prospectus has been
secured.
   (b)   Trailer connections. Basically there are two types of trailer
connections: 
      (1)   A construction trailer connection that is necessitated by the
construction of a building. Such connection should be tied in with the
certification of the site connection proposal and the issuance of the House
Connection Permits for such building as follows:
         (i)   The Plumber requesting the trailer connection should present a
copy of the certified site connection proposal with the Permit Application.
         (ii)   The Local Office will issue a house connection permit subject
to the following condition: We will withhold the Certificate of Inspection for
at least one of the Buildings House Connections until the plug for the trailer
connection is performed.
      (2)   If the construction trailer is necessitated by the Department of
Transportation (or any other Agency's) Capital Project, the plumber should
present an original letter from the appropriate agency to the Department
indicating:
         (i)   The number and size of connections needed.
         (ii)   The duration of the construction operations at the end of which
the plumber will plug the trailer connection(s).
         (iii)   Guarantee from DOT (or any other Agency) that the Plumber will
obtain a plug permit(s) at the end of their construction operations to plug the
trailer connection(s).
   The Local Office will not issue any other trailer connections to the agency
in question if it is common knowledge that a job has been completed and there
are outstanding open connections.
   (c)   Board of Standards and Appeals (BSA) letter. Letters to the Board of
Standards and Appeals for situations where there are no allowable storm/
combined sewer outlets for storm discharge within 500 feet will be sent out
upon verification by the Department provided: The filing Engineer/Architect
requests such a letter and encloses the following:
      (1)   NB/BN/ALT numbers.
      (2)   Street address.
      (3)   Block and Lot.
      (4)   Site Plans.
      (5)   Tentative Lot Sheets.
      (6)   Survey.
   (d)   House connection charges (private sewers). 
      (1)   For private sewers that are still recoupable (meaning either: (i)
All property owners abutting the sewer have not paid their proportionate part
of the sewer cost for sewers built prior to 1963; or (ii) For sewers where the
Construction Permits were obtained after January 1, 1963, the seven year period
is not up and all the abutting property owners have not paid their share of the
private sewer cost),
      (2)   The following procedure is to be followed:
         (i)   Case I (Plumber has "Consent Letter"). At the time of applying
for the House Connection Permit the Plumber will present the "Proof of Payment
Letter" (Sewer Owner's Consent Letter) to the Local Office in order to be able
to connect to the Private Sewer. 
         (ii)   Case II (Missing Sewer Owner). At the time of applying for the
House Connection Permit the plumber will present the following additional
documents: 
            (A)   Registered Letter Envelope with Post Office Stamp: Return to
sender not at this address or something similar. (The addressee on the envelope
should be the latest address we have on record which would prove that an
attempt was made to contact the sewer owner.)
            (B)   A properly executed Missing Owner Affidavit.
            (C)   A House Connection Bond for a six year period which should be
the House Connection Charge to the Private Sewer plus 25 percent (the
computation of the House Connection Charge is determined/provided by the Local
Office).
         (iii)   Case III (House Connection Charge Dispute with Sewer Owner).
At the time of applying for the House Connection Permit the plumber will
present the following additional documents: 
            (A)   A properly executed "Fee in Dispute Affidavit".
            (B)   A House Connection Bond for a six year period which should be
the House Connection Charge to the Private Sewer plus 25 percent (the
computation of the House Connection Charge is determined/provided by the Local
Office).
(Amended City Record 2/18/2020, eff. 3/19/2020)
§ 19-09 Business Confidentiality Procedures.
   (a)   Scope. These procedures concern all information submitted to the
Department pursuant to either the New York City Department of Environmental
Protection rules and regulations relating to the use of the Public Sewers or to
§§ 24-501 et seq. of Chapter 5 of Title 24 of the Administrative Code of the
City of New York. All requests for confidentiality will be evaluated in
accordance with Article 6 of the New York State Public Officers Law. 
   (b)   Submission of Business Confidentiality Claims ("Claims") in Response
to Requests for Information by the Department. 
      (1)   Method and time to assert a claim. A business may assert a claim
concerning information requested by the Department, by placing a cover sheet,
stamped legend or any other suitable form of notice on the information,
employing language such as "trade secret", "proprietary" or "company
confidential" at the time such information is submitted. Allegedly confidential
parts of otherwise non-confidential documents should be clearly marked as such.
Effluent data, as defined in 40 C.F.R. Part 2.302, cannot be treated as
confidential.
      (2)   Failure to submit a timely claim. If a business submits information
in response to a Department request, without a claim accompanying such
information at the time it is received by the Department, the Department need
not make further inquiries to the business concerning confidentiality of the
submitted information, and the information may be made available for public
inspection. If a claim is submitted after the Department has received the
information, the Department may make efforts that are administratively
practicable to process the late claim with the previously submitted
information.
   (c)   Department requests for comments and their submission by claimants. 
      (1)   The Department shall give written notice to each business asserting
a claim, in accordance with 15 RCNY §
19-09(b)(1), stating that written comments, as described in 15 RCNY §
19-09(c)(5), must be submitted no later than 15 business days after receipt by
the business of the request for comments. The request for comments will
indicate the address of the appropriate Department official to whom comments
should be sent, and will also state that failure to submit timely comments will
be construed as a waiver of the claim. This notice by the Department shall be
made in such a manner that the fact and date of receipt may be verified.
      (2)   The comment period may be extended, if, before comments are due, a
written request for an extension has been made and approved by the Department.
      (3)   If disclosure of information under a claim would be helpful in
alleviating a situation posing an imminent and substantial danger to public
health or safety, the Department may prescribe and make known to an affected
business a shorter comment period that it finds necessary under the
circumstances.
      (4)   Information submitted by a business as part of its comments,
pertaining to its claim, will be treated as part of the claim.
      (5)   Written notice will invite comments on:
         (i)   the period of time for which confidential treatment is desired;
         (ii)   the extent to which the information has been disclosed to
others and any measures or precautions taken to guard against undesired
disclosure;
         (iii)   whether any other governmental agency determination or any
judicial decision has held the claimed information to be confidential. If so, a
copy of such determination or decision, if available, must be included; and
         (iv)   whether the business asserts that disclosure would be likely to
result in substantial harmful effects on their competitive position, what those
harmful effects would be, and why they should be viewed as substantial. The
reasons why the information is considered to be confidential (i.e. why the
information should be regarded as a trade secret or proprietary information)
must be stated in detail.
   (d)   Non-final recommendation by the Department. When a business submits
information to the Department that is claimed to be confidential, the
Department shall consider the claim and comments, previously issued
determinations, material submitted to the Department in response to requests,
applicable substantive criteria and any other material that it finds
appropriate. The Department will make a non-final recommendation as to whether
or not the information should be treated as confidential and this
recommendation shall be forwarded to the designated Records Access Officer upon
request. 
   (e)   Final confidentiality determination. When notified of a request,
pursuant to the Freedom of Information Law, for any claimed information, the
Records Access Officer shall issue a final confidentiality determination. If it
is determined that the information should not be treated as confidential, the
affected business shall be notified (in writing) by the Records Access Officer
of that determination and that a request for the release of such information
has been made. Notice shall also state the date that the information will be
released. If the Records Access Officer decides to treat the information as
confidential, the request for release of the information shall be denied. 
(Amended City Record 2/18/2020, eff. 3/19/2020)
§ 19-10 General Provisions.
   (a)   Delegation of authority. All actions or approvals required by or
permitted to the Commissioner pursuant to this chapter may be taken by any
Deputy or Assistant Commissioner of the Department or by an authorized
representative of the Commissioner or any Deputy or Assistant Commissioner. 
   (b)   Protection from damage. 
      (1)   No unauthorized person shall enter any regulator or other element
of the sewerage system and no person shall dispose of or allow to discharge
directly or indirectly into the public sewer any material or substance excluded
by these Rules and Regulations from the public sewers. No person shall damage
or tamper with the operation of any mechanism nor shall any person change the
operation of any device without proper authorization from the Commissioner.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly, or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which
is a part of the sewerage system.
   (c)   Non-interference with authorized employees. Authorized employees of
the Department shall be in charge of the operation of the sewerage system and
no person or persons shall interfere with such employees in the performance of
their duties nor shall any material which will impair the operation of such
system be thrown or placed or cause to be thrown or placed in or about such
system, or in or about the parts or appurtenances of the operating machinery,
or devices of such system. No person shall in any way interfere with or
obstruct the operation of the machinery or devices of such system and no person
other than an authorized employee or agent of the Department shall operate or
attempt to operate or change the operation of any appurtenance of a sewage
treatment works. 
   (d)   (1)   An authorized representative of the Department may enter on any
property to inspect for compliance with this chapter or Chapter 5 of Title 24
of the Administrative Code or to execute orders of the Commissioner issued
pursuant thereto. If entry to such property is denied, the Department may seek
judicial authorization, and such representative may enter, pursuant to such
authorization. In the event of exigent circumstances, an authorized
representative of the Department may enter on any property without such
judicial authorization to inspect for compliance with these rules or Chapter 5
of Title 24 of the Administrative Code or to execute orders of the Commissioner
issued pursuant thereto. Inspections, pursuant to this paragraph may include
observation, sampling and testing as necessary.
      (2)   No person shall interfere with or obstruct a duly authorized
representative of the Department, bearing proper credentials and
identification, from inspecting or from otherwise entering all properties,
public or private, including providing access to equipment, plumbing, or
industrial or commercial processes as necessary for the completion of such
inspection, in accordance with Paragraph (1) of this subdivision, for the
purpose of inspection, observation, sampling and testing as necessary to
determine compliance with this chapter, Chapter 5 of Title 24 of the
Administrative Code or to execute the orders of the Commissioner issued
pursuant thereto.
      (3)   Tampering with any device placed within the premises for purposes
of sampling or testing shall be a violation of this chapter.
   (e)   Cooperation by private persons, water companies and public agencies. 
      (1)   The Commissioner may require every person who owns or occupies real
property within the City, and every private water company supplying water to
property within the City, to furnish him with such information, as may be
necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   The Commissioner shall have the power to hold hearings and subpoena
any such persons or company, or any officer, employee or agent of any such
company, and direct the production of books and records in order to carry out
the provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   Every such person, water company or public official or municipal
agency, officer or employee shall cooperate with the Commissioner in carrying
out the provisions of § 24-523 of the Administrative Code and shall comply with
all rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to said section.
   (f)   Penalties and sanctions. Any person who is in violation of, or fails
to comply with any provision of any section of these Regulations or any order
or determination issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the fines,
penalties and other sanctions provided in § 24-524 of the Administrative Code
of the City of New York. 
   (g)   The Commissioner shall cause to be published annually, in a newspaper
of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the City
of New York, a list of persons that, at any time during the previous twelve
months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment
requirements, as defined in 40 C.F.R. Part 403.8(f)(2)(viii).
   (h)   Nothing contained in any section of this chapter shall be deemed to
waive any requirement of the New York City Administrative Code or of any other
city, state or federal law or regulation.
(Amended City Record 2/28/2018, eff. 3/30/2018; amended City Record 2/18/2020,
eff. 3/19/2020)
§ 19-11 Best Management Practices (BMPs) for All Non-Residential Dischargers of
Fat, Oil, and Grease to the Public Sewer System.
   (a)   Grease interceptors or automatic grease removal devices must be
installed by a New York City Licensed Master Plumber in waste lines which may
receive fat, oil, and/or grease from all non-residential dischargers,
including, but not limited to, those leading from pot sinks, wok stations, soup
or stock kettles or similar devices, scraper sinks (pre-rinse sinks), scullery
sinks, meat and/or poultry and/or fish preparation sinks, sinks or drains
receiving discharges from dairy products, automatic hood wash units, floor
drains including but not limited to floor sinks into which kettles are drained,
automatic dishwashers which use chemical sanitizers, scraper sinks or other
similar plumbing fixtures, vessels, receptacles, and equipment in all
restaurants, kitchens (including but not limited to those serving the central
eating areas in residential health care facilities, nursing homes, senior
centers, rehabilitation facilities, and community centers), hospitals, bars,
cafeterias (including but not limited to school cafeterias), clubs, catering
halls, butcher shops, slaughterhouses, fish markets, supermarket food
processing areas, delicatessens, bakeries, ice cream and yogurt shops,
commissaries where food is prepared for off-site food service establishments,
grocery stores, coffee shops, tea shops, donut shops, pastry shops, or other
non-residential establishments where fat, oil, and/or grease may be introduced
into the drainage system.
   A grease interceptor or an automatic grease removal device shall not be
required for individual dwelling units, any private living quarters, work place
pantries used exclusively by employees to prepare meals for themselves where no
food or drink is sold, or non-culinary schools which only contain residential
type stoves and sinks intended only for teaching basic home cooking skills.
   Sizing of grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices must
comply with the criteria specified in this section, including applicable Tables
I and/or II.
   For grease interceptor sizing, the required minimum flow rate in gallons per
minute (gpm) and minimum grease retention capacity in pounds (lb) shall be
applicable to hydromechanical grease interceptors. To determine the
corresponding minimum size for gravity grease interceptors, such minimum flow
rate in gallons per minute shall be multiplied by 3. The resulting number shall
be the minimum storage capacity in gallons that shall be required if a gravity
grease interceptor is installed.
   If a grease interceptor or automatic grease removal device model is not
manufactured in the required size then the next higher size for that model
shall be the required size.
   (b)   All prefabricated grease interceptors and automatic grease removal
devices shall either have been approved by the New York City Board of Standards
& Appeals prior to July 10, 1991, approved by the New York City Department of
Buildings Materials and Equipment Acceptance Division prior to July 1, 2008, or
shall be designed and tested in accordance with the Plumbing and Drainage
Institute standard PDI G101, or the American Society of Mechanical Engineers
standards ASME A112.14.3 or ASME A112.14.4 and shall be installed in accordance
with the manufacturer's instructions. The design, construction, and
installation of all grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices
must not hinder the ability to perform a dye test for the purpose of
ascertaining connections to waste lines, unless installed with a dye testing
port for such purposes, upstream of the inlet of such interceptors and devices.
Neither shall such design, construction, and installation hinder the ability to
perform such other inspection as may be necessary for determining compliance
with these regulations. Grease interceptors and automatic grease removal
devices that are installed below grade which have lids that are unequal in
surface area to that of the body of such interceptors and devices must either
have an opening just under where the lid sits that is of a different width from
that of all other models made by the same manufacturer, or alternatively must
have another tamper-proof distinguishing feature subject to Department
approval, so that the model can be readily identified when installed below
grade. No grease interceptor or automatic grease removal device shall be
installed below grade, if the model is not readily identifiable visually when
installed below grade, except where the Department identifies the model
visually at the time of installation or subsequent thereto upon excavation of
such interceptor or device.
   (c)   The method for determining the minimum flow rate in gallons per minute
(gpm) and the minimum grease retention capacity in pounds (lb) of a grease
interceptor or automatic grease removal device is provided in Tables I and II
below:
Table I                                 Table II
                    Minimum grease
                    interceptor or
                    automatic grease
                    removal device flow                     Minimum grease
                    rate and grease                         interceptor or
                    retention capacity                      automatic grease
Aggregate volume in for pot sinks, food Aggregate volume in removal device flow
cubic inches of all prep. sinks,        cubic inches of all rate and grease
plumbing fixtures,  scullery sinks,     plumbing fixtures,  retention capacity
vessels,            combination ovens,  vessels,            for: scraper/ pre-
receptacles, and    tilting braisers /  receptacles, and    rinse sinks, woks,
equipment listed in tilting skillets,   equipment listed in automatic hood wash
this table.         any plumbing        this table.         units, rotisserie
                    fixture receiving                       machines, and
                    discharge from soup                     automatic
                    and stock kettles,                      dishwashers.*
                    and floor drains
                    which are used for
                    washdown purposes
                    only.*
Table I                                 Table II
                    Minimum grease
                    interceptor or
                    automatic grease
                    removal device flow                     Minimum grease
                    rate and grease                         interceptor or
                    retention capacity                      automatic grease
Aggregate volume in for pot sinks, food Aggregate volume in removal device flow
cubic inches of all prep. sinks,        cubic inches of all rate and grease
plumbing fixtures,  scullery sinks,     plumbing fixtures,  retention capacity
vessels,            combination ovens,  vessels,            for: scraper/ pre-
receptacles, and    tilting braisers /  receptacles, and    rinse sinks, woks,
equipment listed in tilting skillets,   equipment listed in automatic hood wash
this table.         any plumbing        this table.         units, rotisserie
                    fixture receiving                       machines, and
                    discharge from soup                     automatic
                    and stock kettles,                      dishwashers.*
                    and floor drains
                    which are used for
                    washdown purposes
                    only.*
Up to 2,464         4 gpm / 8 (lb)      Up to 1,232         4 gpm / 8 (lb)
2,465 to 4,312      7 gpm / 14 (lb)     1,233 to 2,156      7 gpm / 14 (lb)
4,313 to 6,160      10 gpm / 20 (lb)    2,157 to 3,080      10 gpm / 20 (lb)
6,161 to 9,240      15 gpm / 30 (lb)    3,081 to 4,620      15 gpm / 30 (lb)
9,241 to 12,320     20 gpm / 40 (lb)    4,621 to 6,160      20 gpm / 40 (lb)
12,321 to 15,400    25 gpm / 50 (lb)    6,161 to 7,700      25 gpm / 50 (lb)
15,401 to 21,560    35 gpm / 70 (lb)    7,701 to 10,780     35 gpm / 70 (lb)
21,561 to 30,800    50 gpm / 100 (lb)   10,781 to 15,400    50 gpm / 100 (lb)
30,801 to 46,200    75 gpm / 150 (lb)   15,401 to 23,100    75 gpm / 150 (lb)
46,201 to 61,600    100 gpm / 200 (lb)  23,101 to 30,800    100 gpm / 200 (lb)
61,601 to 92,400    150 gpm / 300 (lb)  30,801 to 46,200    150 gpm / 300 (lb)
92,401 to 123,200   200 gpm / 400 (lb)  46,201 to 61,600    200 gpm / 400 (lb)
123,201 to 154,000  250 gpm / 500 (lb)  61,601 to 77,000    250 gpm / 500 (lb)
154,001 to 184,800  300 gpm / 600 (lb)  77,001 to 92,400    300 gpm / 600 (lb)
184,801 to 215,600  350 gpm / 700 (lb)  92,401 to 107,800   350 gpm / 700 (lb)
215,601 to 246,400  400 gpm / 800 (lb)  107,801 to 123,200  400 gpm / 800 (lb)
246,401 to 277,200  450 gpm / 900 (lb)  123,201 to 138,600  450 gpm / 900 (lb)
277,201 to 308,000  500 gpm / 1,000     138,601 to 154,000  500 gpm / 1,000
                    (lb)                                    (lb)
308,001 to 616,000  1,000 gpm / 2,000   154,001 to 308,000  1,000 gpm / 2,000
                    (lb)                                    (lb)
616,001 to 924,000  1,500 gpm / 3,000   308,001 to 462,000  1,500 gpm / 3,000
                    (lb)                                    (lb)
924,001 to          2,000 gpm / 4,000   462,001 to 616,000  2,000 gpm / 4,000
1,232,000           (lb)                                    (lb)
1,232,001 to        2,500 gpm / 5,000   616,001 to 770,000  2,500 gpm / 5,000
1,540,000           (lb)                                    (lb)
 
Note: Aggregate volume is the maximum volume (e.g. length times width times
height to the overflow if rectangular) in cubic inches of all plumbing
fixtures, vessels, receptacles, and equipment that are connected to the grease
interceptor or automatic grease removal device.
* Subject to the sizing requirements specified in 15 RCNY §
19-11(i) through (p).
   If a premises contains plumbing fixtures, vessels, receptacles, and/or
equipment listed in Table I and plumbing fixtures, vessels, receptacles, and/or
equipment listed in Table II, all of which are connected to the same grease
interceptor, or automatic grease removal device then the method for determining
the minimum flow rate in gallons per minute and the minimum retention capacity,
in pounds, for the grease interceptor or automatic grease removal device shall
be to separately calculate the aggregate volumes for the plumbing fixtures,
vessels, receptacles, and/or equipment in Table I, and the plumbing fixtures,
vessels, receptacles, and/or equipment in Table II. The aggregate volume for
the plumbing fixtures, vessels, receptacles, and/or equipment in Table II shall
be doubled and added to the aggregate volume for the plumbing fixtures,
vessels, receptacles, and/or equipment in Table I. The sum of the two shall
then be used under the aggregate volume column of Table I to obtain the
corresponding total minimum flow rate and total minimum grease retention
capacity that is required for the grease interceptor or automatic grease
removal device.
   If the aggregate volumes listed in Tables I and II are exceeded, then a New
York State Licensed Professional Engineer or a New York State Registered
Architect shall extrapolate the appropriate grease interceptor or automatic
grease removal device sizing requirements.
   (d)   Grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices must be
equipped with devices to control the rate of water flow so that the water flow
does not exceed the rated flow. The flow control device must be vented and
terminate not less than 6 inches (152 mm) above the flood rim level or be
installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Flow-control
valves and/or fittings that are manually adjustable may not be used to limit
flow to a grease interceptor or automatic grease removal device.
   (e)   Grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices must be rated
by flow rate in gallons per minute and grease retention capacity in pounds. The
grease retention capacity, in pounds, must be at least twice the numerical flow
rate in gallons per minute. Both the minimum required grease retention capacity
in pounds and the minimum required flow rate in gallons per minute must be
satisfied when determining grease interceptor and automatic grease removal
device sizing.
   (f)   Grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices shall remove
an average of 90 percent or more of the grease or other extractable matter in
the wastewater before their rated grease retention capacity is exceeded.
   (g)   The temperature of water entering a grease interceptor or automatic
grease removal device must not exceed 180°F, except where only waste lines
discharging water above 180°F are connected to such interceptor or device. The
Department may require a dedicated grease interceptor or automatic grease
removal device of sufficient capacity for waste lines that only discharge water
above 180°F.
   (h)   All grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices must be
installed in locations such that they are readily accessible for routine
maintenance and inspection. Establishments must provide access to and open
their grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices for inspection
by the Department upon request, and must have the necessary tools readily
available.
   (i)   Grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices for scraper
sinks must be sized in accordance with Table II, except that the minimum flow
rate and grease retention capacity must be 15 gallons per minute and 30 pounds,
respectively. When determining the aggregate volume of all plumbing fixtures,
vessels, receptacles, and equipment specified in Table II that are connected to
a grease interceptor or automatic grease removal device, a minimum of 3,465
cubic inches per scraper sink must be used.
   (j)   Discharges from automatic dishwashers which use chemical sanitizers
must drain to a grease interceptor or automatic grease removal device. The
minimum flow rate of the required grease interceptor or automatic grease
removal device as per Table II for a single rack automatic dishwasher must be
equivalent to the dishwasher's discharge rate in gallons per minute, as
indicated on the manufacturer's specification sheet, or based on the number of
gallons of water the device uses per wash cycle, or a minimum of 1,100 cubic
inches, whichever is greater. The minimum flow rate of the required grease
interceptor or automatic grease removal device as per Table II for a conveyor
or multi-rack automatic dishwasher must be equivalent to the dishwasher's
discharge rate in gallons per minute, as indicated on the manufacturer's
specification sheet, or based on the number of gallons of water the device uses
per wash cycle, or a minimum of 2,200 cubic inches, whichever is greater. The
minimum grease retention capacity in pounds must be that which corresponds to
such flow rate in Table II.
   (k)   Discharges from high-temperature sanitizer cycles of automatic
dishwashers must not drain to a grease interceptor or automatic grease removal
device, except where only waste lines discharging water above 180°F are
connected to such interceptor or device. The Department may require a dedicated
grease interceptor or automatic grease removal device of sufficient capacity
for waste lines that only discharge water above 180°F.
   (l)   Floor drains, including but not limited to floor sinks, trench, and
trough drains, which may receive grease must be connected to a grease
interceptor or automatic grease removal device. The size of such grease
interceptor or automatic grease removal device shall be determined as follows:
      (1)   For floor drains up to 3 inches in diameter where grease may be
discharged during washdowns, Table I shall be used, and 1,540 cubic inches per
floor drain shall be added to the aggregate volume. For floor drains up to 4
inches in diameter, 2,738 cubic inches per floor drain shall be added to the
aggregate volume. For floor drains up to 5 inches in diameter, 4,278 cubic
inches per floor drain shall be added to the aggregate volume. For floor drains
up to 6 inches in diameter, 6,160 cubic inches per floor drain shall be added
to the aggregate volume. Trench and trough drains shall be sized in accordance
with the above requirements using their corresponding drain diameters except
that the actual volume of the trench or trough shall be used if greater than
the above minimum volumes.
      (2)   Grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices for floor
drains which receive discharges directly from plumbing fixtures, receptacles,
vessels, and/or equipment must be sized in accordance with paragraph (1) above
except that where the volume of the plumbing fixtures, receptacles, vessels,
and/or equipment is greater than that of the volume in cubic inches specified
in paragraph (1) above for the diameter of the floor drain, or in the case of
trench and trough drains, greater than the actual volume of the trench or
trough, the grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices must be
sized in accordance with the Table and corresponding sizing requirements
applicable to such plumbing fixtures, vessels, receptacles, and/or equipment.
      (3)   Floor drains receiving discharges from a grease interceptor or
automatic grease removal device must be surrounded by a water-proof collar a
minimum of 1 1/2 inches in height for the purpose of preventing liquids from
the floor from entering such drains. If installing such a collar would create a
trip hazard, a properly sized grease interceptor or automatic grease removal
device must be installed downstream of the drain instead.
   (m)   For soup and/or stock kettles, the calculation of aggregate volume to
be used in Table I must be made based upon the total volume of all soup and
stock kettles connected to the grease interceptor or automatic grease removal
device even if the discharges from these vessels are made to a floor drain or
similar plumbing fixture.
   (n)   (1)   Where a wok table, either alone or combined with other types of
plumbing fixtures, is connected to a grease interceptor or automatic grease
removal device, each wok shall be deemed to contribute 1,617 cubic inches to
the aggregate volume of Table II. For the purpose of determining such volume,
the number of woks shall be deemed to be equivalent to the number of gas
burners at the corresponding wok table, regardless of the actual number of woks
that are used.
      (2)   A minimum of 3,234 cubic inches shall be added to the aggregate
volume of Table I when calculating the grease interceptor or automatic grease
removal device for 1/2 size or smaller combination ovens with automatic or
manual cleaning systems, or calculated based on the actual amount of water
usage during the wash cycle, or the discharge rate in gallons per minute,
whichever is greater. A minimum of 4,851 cubic inches shall be added to the
aggregate volume of Table I when calculating the grease interceptor or
automatic grease removal device for 2/3 size combination ovens with automatic
or manual cleaning systems, or calculated based on the actual amount of water
usage during the wash cycle, or the discharge rate in gallons per minute,
whichever is greater. A minimum of 6,468 cubic inches shall be added to the
aggregate volume of Table I when calculating the grease interceptor or
automatic grease removal device for full size combination ovens with automatic
or manual cleaning systems, or calculated based on the actual amount of water
usage during the wash cycle, or the discharge rate in gallons per minute,
whichever is greater.
   (o)   Discharges from the cleaning of kitchen hoods which may extract grease
from cooking operations must be made to receptacles or floor drains that are
connected to a grease interceptor or automatic grease removal device. The
minimum flow rate of the required grease interceptor or automatic grease
removal device as per Table II for an automatic hood wash unit shall be
equivalent to such unit's discharge rate in gallons per minute, as indicated on
the manufacturer's specification sheet or based on the number of gallons of
water the device uses per wash cycle, or based on the length of the hood system
(0.7 gallons per minute per foot), whichever is greater. The minimum flow rate
of the required grease interceptor or automatic grease removal device as per
Table I for an electrostatic precipitator shall be equivalent to the
precipitator's discharge rate in gallons per minute, as indicated on the
manufacturer's specification sheet, or based on the number of gallons of water
the precipitator uses per wash cycle, whichever is greater.
   (p)   Grease interceptors or automatic grease removal devices smaller than
those described in Tables I and II may be used, but only if connected in
parallel to another grease interceptor or automatic grease removal device, and
the aggregate flow rate and grease retention capacity of such interceptors or
devices must either equal or exceed the minimum flow-through rate and grease
retention capacity required by Tables I and/or II. For parallel connections,
vented flow control fixtures must be installed on each grease interceptor or
automatic grease removal device. Grease interceptors or automatic grease
removal devices connected in parallel must be of equal flow rate in gallons per
minute and grease retention capacity in pounds. The flow of wastewater must be
evenly distributed into each grease interceptor or automatic grease removal
device.
   (q)   Grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices must be
correctly installed, maintained in good working order, and operated properly to
ensure that the requirements of this section and other applicable sections of
the regulations are met. This must include routine cleaning and fat, oil,
grease, and solids removal as needed to ensure proper operation and to prevent
the rated grease retention capacity from being exceeded. However, the minimum
cleaning frequency shall be such that the accumulated fat, oil, grease, and
solids do not exceed 25% of the total liquid depth that the grease interceptor
or automatic grease removal device was designed to hold.
   (r)   New York State Licensed Professional Engineers and New York State
Registered Architects may petition the Commissioner in writing for acceptance
of an alternative pretreatment device, technology, equipment or procedures
varying from, but equivalent to, those listed in this section. Such a petition
must contain detailed documentation and calculations substantiating their
equivalency. In no event shall any alternative pretreatment device, technology,
equipment or procedures be less stringent than the requirements of this
section.
   (s)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, (1) existing
grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices must conform to the
specific requirements of this section, as amended, no later than one year after
the effective date of the amendments to this section, except where engineering
plans showing such interceptors and devices and the specific plumbing fixtures,
vessels, receptacles, or equipment they are connected to had been approved by
the Department and such interceptors and devices and plumbing fixtures,
vessels, receptacles, or equipment are in accordance with the approved plans,
conformity with the specific requirements of this section, as amended, must be
attained upon replacement of such interceptors and devices; no such plans shall
be deemed to waive, nor be held to limit the power of the Commissioner to
enforce any requirements of this section where such plans fail to accurately
and completely represent such installations, or their actual use, or fail to
show a connection to a properly sized grease interceptor or automatic grease
removal device and (2) grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices
installed after the effective date of the amendments to this section pursuant
to an application filed before such effective date must conform to the specific
requirements of this section, as amended, no later than 90 days after such
effective date.
   (t)   Notwithstanding anything contained in 15 RCNY §
19-11, the Commissioner, in his or her discretion, may require any grease
interceptor or automatic grease removal device to be installed at any time and
to have a flow rate and a retention capacity equal to those listed in Tables I
and/or II.
   (u)   The use of emulsifiers, enzymes, chemicals, microbial agents, or other
additives in grease interceptors or automatic grease removal devices is
prohibited.
   (v)   (1)   Yellow grease (waste cooking oil) must only be disposed of
through collection by a carter having a trade waste removal license from the
City of New York Business Integrity Commission, and that provides written proof
of collection to the establishment that generated the yellow grease, each time
a pickup is made from the establishment. The written proof must be maintained
by such establishment on site for at least one year from the date of disposal,
and must be made available to the Department upon request.
      (2)   It is the responsibility of all yellow grease generating
establishments to secure their yellow grease from theft so as to ensure that
the written proof required in Subdivision (v)(1) above is obtained for every
batch of yellow grease disposed of.
(Amended City Record 2/18/2020, eff. 3/19/2020; amended City Record 8/26/2021,
eff. 9/25/2021)
§ 19-12 Best Management Practices for Perchloroethylene Discharges to the
Public Sewer System from Dry Cleaning Facilities.
   (a)   Perc-contaminated wastewater management. Perc-contaminated wastewater
generated by all new and existing perc dry cleaning facilities must be managed
as follows: 
      (1)   Perc-contaminated wastewater discharges. Perc-contaminated
wastewater that is discharged to the public sewer must be treated by physical
separation (water separator) and double carbon filtration, or an equivalent
control which has been approved by the New York State Department of
Environmental Conservation, which has been properly designed to assure an
effluent quality that is less than or equal to 20 ppb perc without evaporation;
and 
      (2)   Evaporation of perc-contaminated wastewater. Perc-contaminated
wastewater that is evaporated must be treated by physical separation (water
separator) and double carbon filtration prior to evaporation. 
   (b)   Perc-contaminated wastes. Except as provided for by paragraph (a)(1)
of this section, no person may discharge into the public sewer system any perc-
contaminated wastewater or wastes resulting from dry cleaning processes
including, but not limited to, still bottom or sludge residues, dirt, lint,
soil or any other deposits or residues extracted as a result of dry cleaning
processes. The discharge into the public sewer system of filters or other
filter media used in dry cleaning processes is prohibited. 
   (c)   Operation and maintenance. 
      (1)   Dry cleaning facilities must be maintained and operated to minimize
the release of perc to the environment. All components of the dry cleaning
system must be properly operated and maintained in accordance with the
provisions of these, as well as applicable Federal, State and other local,
regulations.
      (2)   Perc-contaminated wastewater treatment units. 
         (i)   Carbon filtration units. Carbon cartridges must be replaced
according to a schedule as specified by the manufacturer to assure an effluent
quality that does not exceed 20 ppb perc. 
         (ii)   Evaporators. Perc-contaminated wastewater evaporators must be
operated to ensure that no liquid perc or visible emulsion is allowed to
vaporize. 
         (iii)   Water Separators. Water separators must be maintained as
recommended by manufacturer specifications. 
   (d)   Preparedness and prevention. All dry cleaning operations must be
equipped with the following: 
      (1)   adequate spill control equipment including sorbent materials, or
alternative methods for absorbing spills;
      (2)   vapor-proof containers dedicated exclusively for storing spill-
contaminated material and labeled "FOR SPILL CONTAINMENT USE ONLY"; and
      (3)   fire control equipment.
   (e)   Reporting and record keeping. 
      (1)   Each owner or operator of a dry cleaning facility or their
designees must record the following:
         (i)   The date, duration and nature of any malfunction, spill,
incident, or emergency response at the facility, the notification procedures
and the corrective action taken;
         (ii)   The dates of perc-contaminated wastewater treatment unit carbon
cartridge replacement;
         (iii)   The date and volume of any perc-contaminated hazardous waste
shipments;
         (iv)   The dates when the dry cleaning system components are inspected
for perceptible leaks, and the name or location of dry cleaning system
components where perceptible leaks are detected;
         (v)   The dates of repair and records of written or verbal orders for
repair parts for the dry cleaning system; and
         (vi)   The dates of maintenance of water separators.
      (2)   Each owner or operator of a dry cleaning facility must keep
receipts of perc purchases, and a log listing the volume of perc purchased each
month by the dry cleaning facility, and the number of loads dry cleaned each
month.
      (3)   Each owner or operator of a dry cleaning facility must retain on
site a copy of the design specifications and the operating manuals for each dry
cleaning system and each emission control device located at the dry cleaning
facility.
      (4)   All records must be maintained on site for at least five years and
must be made available to the Department upon request.
(Amended City Record 2/18/2020, eff. 3/19/2020)
§ 19-13 Appeal of Commissioner's Orders.
   (a)   Within the time specified for compliance in a Commissioner's Order
issued, pursuant to Subdivision (a) of § 24-524 or § 24-581 of Administrative
Code, and/or as otherwise specified in the Order, the party named in the Order
may submit a written statement appealing the Commissioner's Order in the manner
directed on the Order. In the event that the Department determines that non-
compliance with the Order poses a significant risk of imminent harm to public
health or safety or to the environment, the party shall be so notified and
shall comply with the order forthwith, or otherwise within the time specified
by the Department, notwithstanding that an appeal is taken.
   (b)   Appeals shall be reviewed by the Department and a final determination
regarding the appeal shall be made within a reasonable period of time.
   (c)   If an appeal is sustained in whole or in part, then the stated terms
of the final determination on appeal shall replace the original requirements of
such Order. If an appeal is denied, the final determination shall specify a
reasonable period of time for compliance based on the circumstances, except in
the case of an Order where compliance is required at an earlier time as
described in Subdivision (a) of this section.
(Added City Record 2/28/2018, eff. 3/30/2018; amended City Record 2/18/2020,
eff. 3/19/2020)
Chapter 19.1: Stormwater Management for Water Pollution Control
(Title amended City Record 1/2/2024, eff. 2/1/2024)
§ 19.1-01 General Administration and Enforcement.
§ 19.1-01.1 Applicability.
Applicability. This chapter applies to discharges from industrial stormwater
sources within those portions of the city of New York served by the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) and the discharge of stormwater from covered
development projects.
(Added City Record 4/1/2019, eff. 6/1/2019; amended City Record 2/15/2022, eff.
2/15/2022)
§ 19.1-01.2 Definitions.
Allowable runoff. The term "allowable runoff" means non-stormwater discharges
associated with firefighting activities or as otherwise authorized by the
commissioner pursuant to
15 RCNY Chapter 19.
Applicant. The term "applicant" means the person filing the online application
for a stormwater construction permit or a stormwater maintenance permit. This
may be the owner, developer, qualified professional or other person that is a
registered user in the online application system.
Authorized inspection agent. The term "authorized inspection agent" means an
individual who has been authorized pursuant to a contract entered into by the
department to conduct inspections on behalf of the department.
Best management practices or BMPs. The term "best management practices" or
"BMPs" means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance
procedures and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the state. BMPs also include treatment requirements (if
deemed necessary by the department), operating procedures, and practices to
control site runoff, spillage and leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage
from raw material storage.
Certification of no exposure. The term "certification of no exposure" means the
document submitted to NYSDEC to obtain a conditional exclusion of no exposure
from NYSDEC under the Multi-Sector General Permit for Stormwater Discharges
Associated with Industrial Activity (MSGP).
Commence (Commencement of) development activities. The term "commence
development activities" means the initial disturbance of soils associated with
clearing, grading or excavation activities; or other construction related
activities that disturb or expose soils such as demolition, stockpiling of fill
material, and the initial installation of erosion and sediment control
practices required in the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP).
Commissioner. The term "commissioner" means the commissioner of the New York
City department of environmental protection.
Commissioner's order. The term "commissioner's order" means any order issued by
the Commissioner that may be necessary for the enforcement of these rules.
Covered development project. The term "covered development project" means
development activity, private or public, that involves or results in an amount
of soil disturbance greater than or equal to 20,000 square feet or creation of
5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface, or covered roadway
maintenance. Such term includes development activity that is part of a larger
common plan of development or sale involving or resulting in soil disturbance
greater than or equal to 20,000 square feet or creation of 5,000 square feet or
more of impervious surface.
Covered Roadway Maintenance. The term “covered roadway maintenance” means
maintenance work that involves 20,000 square feet or more in the municipal
right-of-way (ROW) including milling and filling of existing asphalt pavements
(“milling and paving”) and replacement of concrete pavement slabs.
Department. The term "department" means the New York City department of
environmental protection.
Detention system. The term "detention system" means a system designed to slow
and temporarily hold an accumulation of stormwater runoff and release it, at a
controlled rate.
Developer. The term “developer” means a person that owns or leases land on
which development activity that is part of a covered development project is
occurring, or a person that has operational control over the plans and
specifications for the development activity or covered roadway maintenance,
including the ability to make modifications to the construction plans and
specifications.
Development activity. The term "development activity" means creation of
impervious surface and/or soil disturbance on a site including but not limited
to land contour work, clearing, grading, excavation, demolition, construction,
reconstruction, stockpiling activities or placement of fill. Clearing
activities include but are not limited to logging equipment operation, the
cutting and skidding of trees, stump removal, and/or brush root removal. Such
term does not include routine maintenance.
Discharge. The term "discharge" means the introduction or release of any
substance, whether knowing or unknowing, accidental or otherwise, to a public
sewer or private sewer connected to a public sewer or to waters of the State,
and shall include indirect discharges as defined herein.
Erosion and sediment controls. The term "erosion and sediment controls" means
stormwater management practices designed to minimize the discharge of
pollutants during development activities including, but not limited to,
structural erosion and sediment control practices, construction sequencing to
minimize exposed soils, soil stabilization, dewatering control measures, and
other pollution prevention and good housekeeping practices appropriate for
construction sites.
Final stabilization. The term "final stabilization" means that all soil
disturbance activities have ceased and a uniform, perennial, vegetative cover
with a density of 80 percent over the entire pervious surface has been
established; or other equivalent stabilization measures, such as permanent
landscape mulches, rock rip-rap or washed/crushed stone, have been applied on
all disturbed areas that are not covered by permanent structures, concrete or
pavement.
Flood management project. The term "flood management project" means a project
designed and functioning to capture, detain or convey overland flow from a
large drainage area to prevent downstream flooding associated with a 100-year
or greater storm event, excluding projects such as installation and maintenance
of storm sewers, high level storm sewers, Bluebelt storm sewers and drainage
inlets, and other projects to improve drainage, alleviate localized flooding or
reduce coastal flooding.
Impaired water. The term "impaired water" includes (i) a water body for which
NYSDEC has established a total maximum daily load ("TMDL"), (ii) a water body
for which NYSDEC expects that existing controls such as permits will resolve
the impairment, and (iii) a water body identified by NYSDEC as needing a TMDL.
A list of impaired waters is issued by NYSDEC pursuant to section 303(d) of the
federal water pollution control act, chapter 26 of title 33 of the United
States code.
Impervious area (cover). The term “impervious area (cover)” means all
impermeable surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall, including
paved, concrete and gravel surfaces (e.g., parking lots, driveways, roads,
runways and sidewalks); building rooftops; miscellaneous impermeable structures
such as patios, pools, and sheds; and any portion of the site of a covered
development project from which impervious cover was removed within five (5)
years before SWPPP submission to the Department.
Indirect discharge. The term "indirect discharge" means a discharge from a
private sewer to a public sewer, or a discharge to any street, gutter, pipe,
channel, pumping station, catch basin, drain, waterway, or other conveyance
leading to or connecting with a public sewer, including but not limited to the
placement or abandonment of any substance which could reasonably enter a public
sewer under the force of stormwater or other influence.
Industrial activity. The term "industrial activity" means the categories of
activities designated as industrial by the SPDES Multi-Sector General Permit
for Stormwater Discharges Associated with Industrial Activity (MSGP) (GP-0-17-
004).
Industrial stormwater source. The term "industrial stormwater source" means any
premises or facility that is subject to the Multi-Sector General Permit for
Stormwater Discharges Associated with Industrial Activity (MSGP).
Larger common plan of development or sale. The term "larger common plan of
development or sale" means a contiguous area where multiple separate and
distinct development activities are occurring, or will occur, under one plan.
The term "plan" in "larger common plan of development or sale" is broadly
defined as any announcement or piece of documentation including a sign, public
notice of hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application,
uniform land use review procedure (ULURP) application, state environmental
quality review act (SEQRA) or city environmental quality review (CEQR)
application, application for a special permit, authorization, variance or
certification pursuant to the zoning resolution, subdivision application,
computer design, or physical demarcation (including boundary signs, lot stakes,
and surveyor markings) indicating that development activities may occur on a
specific plot. Such term does not include area-wide rezonings or projects
discussed in general planning documents. For discrete development activities
that are located within a larger common plan of development or sale that are at
least 1/4 mile apart, each activity can be treated as a separate plan of
development or sale provided that any interconnecting road, pipeline or utility
project that is part of the same "common plan" is not concurrently being
disturbed.
MS4 area. The term "MS4 area" means those portions of the city of New York
served by separate storm sewers and separate stormwater outfalls owned or
operated by the city of New York or areas served by separate storm sewers owned
or operated by the city of New York that connect to combined sewer overflow
pipes downstream of the regulator owned or operated by the city of New York,
and areas in which municipal operations and facilities drain by overland flow
to waters of the state, as determined by the department.
MS4 Project. The term "MS4 project" means a covered development project that is
subject, to the NYSDEC construction general permit.
Multi-sector general permit or "MSGP." The term "multi-sector general permit"
or "MSGP" means the NYSDEC SPDES Multi-Sector General Permit for Stormwater
Discharges Associated with Industrial Activity, Permit No. GP-0-17-004 or its
successor.
Municipal operations and facilities. The term "municipal operations and
facilities" means any operation or facility serving a New York city
governmental purpose and over which the City of New York has operational
control.
No exposure. The term "no exposure" means that all industrial materials or
activities are protected by a storm-resistant shelter to prevent exposure to
rain, snow, snowmelt, or runoff.
Nonpoint source. The term "nonpoint source" means any source of water pollution
that does not meet the definition of "point source," as defined in these rules.
Notice of intent or NOI. The term "notice of intent" or "NOI" means for MS4
projects or industrial stormwater sources in the MS4 area the document
submitted to NYSDEC to obtain coverage under the NYSDEC construction general
permit or the MSGP.
Notice of termination or NOT. The term "notice of termination" or "NOT" means
for MS4 projects or industrial stormwater sources in the MS4 area the document
submitted to NYSDEC to terminate coverage under the NYSDEC construction general
permit or the MSGP. For non-MS4 area projects, the term "notice of termination"
or "NOT" means the document submitted to DEP to terminate coverage under the
DEP SW construction permit.
NYC MS4 permit. The term "NYC MS4 permit" means the SPDES permit for MS4s of
New York city, SPDES No. NY-0287890 or its successor.
NYC Stormwater Manual. The term "NYC Stormwater Manual" (the "Manual") refers,
to the procedural and technical guidance document developed to inform owners/
developers/applicants how to meet stormwater requirements set forth in this
chapter and in 15 RCNY
Chapter 31; the Manual is attached as an
appendix to this chapter.
NYSDEC. The term "NYSDEC" means the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
NYSDEC construction general permit. The term "NYSDEC construction general
permit" means the SPDES general permit for stormwater discharges from
construction activities, Permit No. GP-0-15-002 or its successor.
Owner. The term "owner" means a person having legal title to premises, a
mortgagee or vendee in possession, a trustee in bankruptcy, a receiver, or any
other person having legal ownership or control of premises.
Person. The term "person" means an individual, corporation, partnership,
limited-liability company or other legal entity.
Point source. The term "point source" means any discernible, confined and
discrete conveyance, including but not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel,
tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated
animal feeding operation, vessel or other floating craft, or landfill leachate
collection system from which pollutants are or may be discharged.
Pollutant. The term "pollutant" means dredged soil, filter backwash, solid
waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical
wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste
discharged into water; which may cause or might reasonably be expected to cause
pollution of the waters of the State in contravention of the standards or
guidance values adopted as provided in 6 NYCRR § 750-1.2(a).
Pollutants of concern (POCs). The term "pollutants of concern" or "POCs" means
pollutants causing the impairment of an impaired water segment listed in
Appendix I of the New York City MS4 permit, including nitrogen, phosphorus,
fecal coliform, and garbage and refuse.
Post-construction stormwater management facility or post-construction facility.
The term "post-construction stormwater management facility" or "post-
construction facility" means a stormwater management practice serving a
developed site and consisting of technology or strategies designed to reduce
pollutants in stormwater runoff or reduce runoff rate or volume from the
developed site through infiltration, retention, detention, direct plant uptake,
filtration, or other method or treatment. Such term includes, but is not
limited to, detention systems and retention systems.
Premises. The term "premises" means any building, lot, parcel of land, or
portion of land, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks
and parking strips.
Private sewer. The term "private sewer" means a private sanitary, storm, or
combined sewer that is designed and constructed in accordance with the
requirements of the City drainage plan to serve a specific development and
discharges into an approved outlet.
Public sewer. The term "public sewer" means a sewer that is owned by the City
of New York.
Qualified inspector. The term "qualified inspector" means a person who is
knowledgeable in the principles and practices of erosion and sediment control,
such as a licensed Professional Engineer, a Certified Professional in Erosion
and Sediment Control (CPESC), or a Registered Landscape Architect.
It can also mean someone working under the direct supervision of, and at the
same company as, the licensed Professional Engineer or Registered Landscape
Architect, provided that person has training in the principles and practices of
erosion and sediment control. Training in the principles and practices of
erosion and sediment control means that the individual working under the direct
supervision of the licensed Professional Engineer or Registered Landscape
Architect has received four (4) hours of NYSDEC endorsed training in proper
erosion and sediment control principles from a Soil and Water Conservation
District, or other NYSDEC endorsed entity. After receiving the initial
training, the individual working under the direct supervision of the licensed
Professional Engineer or Registered Landscape Architect shall receive four (4)
hours of training every three (3) years.
It can also mean a person that meets the Qualified Professional qualifications
in addition to the Qualified Inspector qualifications.
Note: Inspections of any post-construction stormwater management practices that
include structural components, such as a dam for an impoundment, shall be
performed by a licensed Professional Engineer.
Qualified professional. The term "qualified professional" means a person who is
knowledgeable in the principles and practices of stormwater management and
treatment such as a licensed professional engineer or a registered landscape
architect or other NYSDEC endorsed individual(s).
Individuals preparing SWPPPs that require the post-construction stormwater
management practice component must have an understanding of the principles of
hydrology, water quality management practice design, water quantity control
design, and, in many cases, the principles of hydraulics. All components of the
SWPPP that involve the practice of engineering, as defined by Article 145 of
the NYS Education Law, shall be prepared by, or under the direct supervision
of, a professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of New York.
Retention system. The term "retention system" means a system designed to
capture an accumulation of stormwater runoff on site through infiltration,
evapo-transpiration, storage for reuse, or some combination of these.
Routine maintenance activity. The term "routine maintenance activity" means a
maintenance activity including, but not limited to:
   •   Re-grading of gravel roads or parking lots;
   •   Stream bank restoration projects (does not include the placement of
spoil material);
   •   Cleaning and shaping of existing roadside ditches and culverts that
maintains the approximate original line and grade, and hydraulic capacity of
the ditch;
   •   Cleaning and shaping of existing roadside ditches that does not maintain
the approximate original grade, hydraulic capacity and purpose of the ditch if
the changes to the line and grade, hydraulic capacity or purpose of the ditch
are installed to improve water quality and quantity controls (e.g. installing
grass lined ditch);
   •   Placement of aggregate shoulder backing that makes the transition
between the road shoulder and the ditch or embankment;
   •   Removal of sediment from the edge of the highway to restore a previously
existing sheet-flow drainage connection from the highway surface to the highway
ditch or embankment; and
   •   Replacement of curbs, gutters, sidewalks, and guide rail posts; and
   •   Repairs made to SMPs to restore them to former condition or to operating
order.
Separate stormwater outfall. The term "separate stormwater outfall" means a
point where stormwater from a storm sewer or other source of concentrated
stormwater flow, owned or operated by the city of New York, is discharged into
a water of the state or to a separate storm sewer system that requires coverage
under the NYSDEC MS4 general permit.
Sewer. The term "sewer" means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage and/or
stormwater. Except where otherwise specified or where the context clearly
dictates otherwise, the term "sewer" as used in this chapter must refer to a
public sewer.
Storm sewer. The term "storm sewer" means a sewer which conveys only
stormwater.
Stormwater or stormwater runoff. The term "stormwater" or "stormwater runoff"
means the runoff that is generated when precipitation from rain events or
snowmelt flows overland and does not percolate into the ground.
Stormwater construction permit. The term "stormwater construction permit" means
a permit issued by the department authorizing development activity on land on
which there is a covered development project with an approved SWPPP.
Stormwater maintenance permit. The term "stormwater maintenance permit" means a
permit issued by the department where maintenance is required of post-
construction stormwater management facilities by owners of real property
benefited by such facilities.
Stormwater management practices or SMPs. The term "stormwater management
practices" or "SMPs" means measures to prevent flood damage or to prevent or
reduce point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff
and water bodies. Such term includes erosion and sediment controls, post-
construction stormwater management facilities, and practices to manage
stormwater runoff from industrial activities.
Stormwater pollution prevention plan or SWPPP. The term "stormwater pollution
prevention plan" or "SWPPP" means (i) when used in connection with a covered
development project, a plan for controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants
during construction and, where required by these rules, after construction is
completed, or (ii) when used in connection with an industrial stormwater
source, a plan, which is required by the MSGP, for controlling stormwater
runoff and pollutants.
Surface waters of the state or waters of the state. The term "surface waters of
the state" or "waters of the state" means lakes, bays, sounds, ponds,
impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes,
inlets, canals, the Atlantic ocean within the territorial seas of the state of
New York and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland
or coastal, fresh or salt, public or private (except those private waters that
do not combine or effect a junction with natural surface or underground
waters), which are wholly or partially within or bordering the state or within
its jurisdiction.
SWPPP acceptance form. The term " SWPPP acceptance form" means the form used to
indicate acceptance of a SWPPP by the department.
Temporary shutdown. The term "temporary shutdown" means the suspension of
development activity at a site with an approved stormwater construction permit.
Trained contractor. The term "trained contractor" means an employee of a
contracting (construction) company, who has received four hours of NYSDEC-
endorsed training in proper erosion and sediment control principles from a soil
and water conservation district, or other NYSDEC-endorsed entity. After
receiving the initial training, the trained contractor must receive four hours
of training every three years. The term can also mean an employee of a
contracting (construction) company who meets the qualifications required to be
a qualified inspector. The trained contractor is responsible for the day-to-day
implementation of the SWPPP during development activities.
(Added City Record 4/1/2019, eff. 6/1/2019; amended City Record 2/15/2022, eff.
2/15/2022; amended City Record 1/2/2024, eff. 2/1/2024)
§ 19.1-01.3 Inspectors and Authorized Inspection Agents.
As provided for Subchapter 4 of Chapter 5-A of Title 24 of the Administrative
Code of the City of New York, §§ 24-581 through 24-590, inspectors and
authorized inspection agents may issue orders and summonses for failure to
comply with any provision or section of these rules, any condition of any
permit issued under these rules, or any term or condition of a SWPPP approved
by the department pursuant to these rules. All orders and summonses issued by
inspectors and authorized inspection agents are subject to approval by the
department.
(Added City Record 4/1/2019, eff. 6/1/2019)
§ 19.1-01.4 Penalties and Sanctions.
Any person who is in violation of or fails to comply with any provision of any
section of these rules; any condition of any permit issued under these rules or
any term or condition of a SWPPP; or any order or determination issued pursuant
to this chapter will be subject to the fines, penalties and other sanctions
provided in § 24-558 and Subchapter 4 of Chapter 5-A (§§ 24-580 through 24-587)
of Title 24 of the Administrative Code of the City of New York.
(Added City Record 4/1/2019, eff. 6/1/2019)
§ 19.1-01.5 Appeals of Commissioner's Orders.
   (a)   Within the time specified for compliance in a commissioner's order
issued pursuant to Chapter 5-A of the Administrative Code of the City of New
York, or as otherwise specified in the order, the party named in the order may
submit a written statement appealing the commissioner's order to the department
in the manner specified in the order except that the time for appeal of a
commissioners order shall not be less than 10 days from the date of service of
such order.
   (b)   In the event that the department determines that non-compliance with
the order poses a significant risk of imminent harm to public health or safety
or to the environment, the party will be notified and will be required to
comply with the order in the specified time, or within an alternative time
specified by the department, notwithstanding that an appeal is taken.
   (c)   The department must review appeals and make a final written
determination regarding the appeal within a reasonable period of time. The
department will mail final determinations to the party named in the order.
      (1)   If the department sustains an appeal in whole or in part, then the
stated terms of the final determination on appeal will replace the original
requirements of such order.
      (2)   If an appeal is denied, the final determination will specify a
reasonable period of time for compliance based on the circumstances, except in
the case of an order where compliance is required at an earlier time as
described in subdivision (b) of this section. The final determination by the
department is subject to review pursuant to article 78 of the civil practice
laws and rules.
(Added City Record 4/1/2019, eff. 6/1/2019)
§ 19.1-02 Industrial and Commercial Stormwater Sources.
§ 19.1-02.1 General Requirements.
   (a)   Applicability. This section applies to industrial stormwater sources
within the MS4 area and industrial or commercial premises or facilities in the
MS4 area that the department determines may contribute a significant pollutant
load to the MS4.
   (b)   Compliance Requirements. All industrial stormwater sources must comply
with all applicable conditions of the MSGP, including, but not limited to, all
applicable effluent limitations, reporting requirements, and the requirement to
develop and implement a SWPPP.
   (c)   Providing False or Misleading Information. It shall be unlawful to
make any material false statement, representation, or certification in any
application, record, report, plan, or other document filed with the department
or required to be maintained under the MSGP or by the Commissioner.
(Added City Record 4/1/2019, eff. 6/1/2019; amended City Record 2/15/2022, eff.
2/15/2022)
§ 19.1-02.2 Notification to the Department.
Upon submittal to NYSDEC, an industrial stormwater source must submit to the
department at the address provided on the department's website copies of the
following documents: (i) completed NOI, (ii) certification of no exposure (if
applicable), and (iii) NOT. Such facility must also submit copies of any
correspondence between the facility and NYSDEC to the department at the address
provided on the department's website.
(Added City Record 4/1/2019, eff. 6/1/2019)
§ 19.1-02.3 Inspections.
   (a)   MSGP-permitted facilities. The department or an authorized inspection
agent may enter and inspect any industrial stormwater source, including, but
not limited to, its equipment, practices, operations and records, and will, at
a minimum, conduct inspections of such sources in accordance with the schedule
and requirements for such inspections set forth in the NYC MS4 Permit and these
rules. The department or an authorized inspection agent must conduct such entry
and inspection during normal operating hours for purposes of determining
compliance with the MSGP and these rules. Such inspections may include, but
need not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Conducting a visual observation for evidence of unauthorized
discharges, illicit connections, and potential discharges of pollutants to
stormwater;
      (2)   Evaluating the facility's compliance with applicable MSGP
requirements; and
      (3)   Evaluating the facility's compliance with any other relevant local
stormwater requirements.
   (b)   Unpermitted industrial and commercial facilities. The department or an
authorized inspection agent may enter and inspect any unpermitted premises or
facilities within the MS4 area, as required by the MS4 permit, during normal
operating hours. The department will inspect unpermitted facilities to identify
those that may contribute a significant pollutant load to the MS4 and will
refer those to NYSDEC. The department or an authorized inspection agent may
inspect the facility, including, but not limited to, its equipment, practices,
operations and records, consistent with applicable law.
   (c)   Access for inspections. If access to property the department seeks to
inspect pursuant to this section is denied, the department may seek judicial
authorization, and an authorized representative of the department may enter
pursuant to such authorization. In the event of exigent circumstances, an
authorized representative of the department may enter on any property without
such judicial authorization to inspect for compliance with these rules or
Chapter 5-A of Title 24 of the Administrative Code of the City of New York or
to execute orders of the commissioner issued pursuant thereto.
   (d)   Interference with department personnel. No person shall interfere with
or obstruct a duly authorized representative of the department, bearing proper
credentials and identification, from inspecting or from otherwise entering all
properties, public or private, including providing access to equipment,
plumbing, or industrial or commercial processes as necessary for the completion
of such inspection, in accordance with paragraph (c) of this subdivision, for
the purpose of inspection, observation, sampling and testing as necessary to
determine compliance with these rules or Chapter 5-A of Title 24 of the
Administrative Code or to execute the orders of the Commissioner issued
pursuant thereto.
(Added City Record 4/1/2019, eff. 6/1/2019; amended City Record 2/15/2022, eff.
2/15/2022)
§ 19.1-02.4 Recordkeeping.
   (a)   Industrial stormwater sources must submit to the department copies of
all documents submitted to NYSDEC under the MSGP, including, but not limited
to, Discharge Monitoring Reports (DMRs), Annual Certification Reports, and
Corrective Action Forms, and must copy the department on all permit-related
correspondence with NYSDEC.
   (b)   Industrial stormwater sources shall maintain and preserve copies of
the NOI, NOT, Acknowledgement Letters, and the SWPPP for no fewer than five
years from the date that the NYSDEC receives a complete NOT submitted in
accordance with the MSGP, and shall maintain and preserve all monitoring
records for a period of at least five years from the date of the sample,
measurement, report, or application.
   (c)   Industrial stormwater sources must retain on-site and, upon request,
make immediately available to the department, in accordance with applicable
law, the following documents as evidence of compliance with applicable MSGP
requirements:
      (1)   Copies of the MSGP and NOI, as submitted to NYSDEC;
      (2)   SWPPP;
      (3)   Annual Certification Reports;
      (4)   Comprehensive site inspection results;
      (5)   Quarterly visual monitoring;
      (6)   Annual dry weather flow monitoring;
      (7)   Required monitoring data, including, but not limited to numeric
benchmark monitoring;
      (8)   Compliance monitoring for discharges subject to numeric effluent
limitations;
      (9)   Monitoring of discharges from secondary containment at storage and
transfer areas; and
      (10)   Monitoring of discharges to impaired waterbodies.
(Added City Record 4/1/2019, eff. 6/1/2019)
§ 19.1-03 Construction and Post-Construction Stormwater Sources.
§ 19.1-03.1 Applicability.
   (a)   15 RCNY §
19.1-03 applies to covered development projects, public and private.
      (1)   The following activities are not considered covered development
projects:
         (i)   Routine maintenance activities; and
         (ii)   Emergency activities that are immediately necessary for the
protection of life, property or natural resources.
   (b)   Applicability to Existing Projects. 
      (1)   15 RCNY §
19.1-03 does not apply to any development activity with a letter of
acknowledgment of notice of intent for coverage under the NYSDEC construction
general permit issued by NYSDEC before June 1, 2019.
      (2)   15 RCNY §
19.1-03 does not apply to any development activity with a valid individual
State Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (SPDES) permit issued by NYSDEC
for construction activity before June 1, 2019.
      (3)   15 RCNY §
19.1-03 does not apply to any covered development project, other than an MS4
project, where an application for construction document approval for the
construction of such project was filed with the Department of Buildings or the
Department of Small Business Services, as applicable, prior to March 26, 2021.
      (4)   The amendments to this chapter effective on February 15, 2022 do
not apply to any development activity with an MS4 SWPPP acceptance form issued
within two years prior to such date.
      (5)   15 RCNY §
19.1-03 does not apply to any covered development project of less than 1 acre
(other than a project of less than 1 acre all or any part of which is within an
area that was rezoned as a result of a zoning map amendment application filed
by the Department of City Planning, that received final approval after November
15, 2021, and which project seeks to develop a parcel of land pursuant, to the
rezoning), if prior to February 15, 2022 an application for construction
document approval was filed with the Department of Buildings or the Department
of Small Business Services for such project.
      (6)   15 RCNY §
19.1-03 does not apply to any covered development project of less than 1 acre
all or any part of which is within an area that was rezoned as a result of a
zoning map amendment application filed by the Department of City Planning, that
received final approval after November 15, 2021, and which seeks to develop a
parcel of land pursuant, to the rezoning, if prior to December 10, 2021, a
permit for the construction of such project was issued by the Department of
Buildings or the Department of Small Business Services, as applicable.
(Added City Record 4/1/2019, eff. 6/1/2019; amended City Record 2/15/2022, eff.
2/15/2022; amended City Record 1/2/2024, eff. 2/1/2024)
§ 19.1-03.2 Inspections by the Department.
   (a)   The department or an authorized inspection agent may inspect, at a
reasonable time and in a reasonable manner, anything that affects or may affect
the quality of the waters of the state, including but not limited to the
premises where a covered development project is being conducted; or the
premises for which an application has been filed with the department for plan
or permit approval; or the premises for which the department has issued a
stormwater construction permit or stormwater maintenance permit.
   (b)   The department or an authorized inspection agent may enter onto
property subject to a maintenance easement in accordance with the terms of such
easement. For property that is not subject to a maintenance easement, an
authorized representative of the department may enter on any property to
inspect for compliance with this chapter or Chapter 5-A of Title 24 of the
Administrative Code of the City of New York or to execute orders of the
commissioner issued pursuant thereto. If access to such property is denied, the
department may seek judicial authorization, and such representative may enter
pursuant to such authorization. In the event of exigent circumstances, an
authorized representative of the department may enter on any property without
such judicial authorization to inspect for compliance with these rules or
Chapter 5-A of Title 24 of the Administrative Code of the City of New York or
to execute orders of the commissioner issued pursuant thereto. Inspections
pursuant to this paragraph may include observation, sampling and testing as
necessary.
(Added City Record 4/1/2019, eff. 6/1/2019)
§ 19.1-03.3 Permits.
   (a)   Permit Program Requirements. 
      (1)   Permit applications and applications to amend permits must be filed
electronically on the department's web site.
      (2)   The developer and owner of a site must certify that the application
is being submitted on their behalf.
      (3)   Qualified professionals who have prepared application materials are
required to certify that the materials submitted meet the technical standards
included in the NYSDEC construction general permit and these rules.
      (4)   In addition to technical standards included in this section,
stormwater management practices must be designed and constructed in accordance
with the following technical standards for performance and design:
         (i)   The New York City Stormwater Manual, incorporated as an
appendix to this chapter.
         (ii)   The New York State Stormwater Management Design Manual January
2015 or its successor including the enhanced phosphorus removal standards.
         (iii)   New York Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment
Control, dated November 2016, or its successor.
      (5)   Where, in any specific case, different provisions of this chapter
or of the technical standards incorporated by reference specify different
materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive
shall govern.
      (6)   Exemptions for certain covered development projects. 
         (i)   A permit is not required for a covered development project that
drains to waters of the state through an outfall approved by NYSDEC unless the
outfall is owned or operated by the city of New York.
         (ii)   Upon receiving an application, DEP may determine that a permit
is not required for a covered development project where a public combined or
storm sewer is not available.
         (iii)   Covered roadway maintenance must implement erosion and
sediment control practices in accordance with the NYC Stormwater Manual
(Chapter 7 Roadway Maintenance requirements) but does not require a permit
under this section.
   (b)   Stormwater Construction Permit. 
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (6) of subdivision (a) of
this section or subdivision (b) of 15 RCNY §
19.1-03.1, no developer may perform development activity in connection with a
covered development project, public or private, without having first obtained a
stormwater construction permit from the department. The commissioner, in his or
her discretion, may impose such terms and conditions in the permit as he or she
deems necessary to protect the sewer system or to protect the public health or
welfare.
      (2)   Recordkeeping. The developer must keep and maintain records of all
inspections and tests required to be performed during construction throughout
the period of construction and for five years after completion of construction.
      (3)   Permit application requirements. 
         (i)   To obtain a permit, an applicant must complete and file an
application available on the department's website. The application must be
accompanied by a processing fee of $1,000 dollars in addition to a $2,000
dollar fee per acre of land disturbed.
         (ii)   When a covered development project consists entirely of
installation of an environmental enhancement project made up of one or more
stormwater management practices, and does not include other development, DEP
may exempt the owner or developer from payment of any fees associated with
these rules.
         (iii)   The application must include certification by a developer that
the covered development project that is the subject of the application is in
full compliance with City Environmental Quality Review, 62 RCNY
Chapter 5.
         (iv)   The application must include a SWPPP prepared, signed, and
sealed by a qualified professional.
         (v)   All components of the SWPPP that involve the practice of
engineering, as defined by Article 145 of the NYS Education Law, must be
prepared by, or under the direct supervision of, a professional engineer
licensed to practice in the State of New York. The SWPPP must be submitted in
an electronic format acceptable, to the department, as further detailed on the
department's website. The SWPPP must contain all applicable elements required
in the NYSDEC construction general permit and in this chapter, as determined by
the Department, as follows:
            A.   Background information about the scope of the project,
including type and size of project;
            B.   Site map/construction drawing(s) for the project, including a
general location map., at a minimum, the site map should show:
               (1)   The total site area;
               (2)   All improvements including underground utilities;
               (3)   Areas of disturbance;
               (4)   Areas that will not be disturbed;
               (5)   Existing vegetation;
               (6)   On-site and adjacent off-site surface water(s);
               (7)   Floodplain/floodway boundaries;
               (8)   Wetlands and drainage patterns that could be affected by
the development activity;
               (9)   Existing and final contours;
               (10)   Location of soil types with boundaries;
               (11)   Material, waste, borrow or equipment storage areas
located on adjacent properties; and
               (12)   Location(s) of the stormwater discharge(s).
            C.   A description of the soil(s) present, at the site;
            D.   A construction phasing plan describing the intended sequence
of development activities, including clearing and grubbing, excavation and
grading, utility and infrastructure installation and any other activity, at the
site that results in soil disturbance;
            E.   A description of the pollution prevention measures that will
be used to control litter, construction chemicals and construction debris from
becoming a pollutant source in stormwater runoff;
            F.   A description of the minimum erosion and sediment control
practices to be installed or implemented for each development activity that
will result in soil disturbance or creation of impervious surface and for each
covered maintenance activity, including a schedule that identifies the timing
of initial placement or implementation of each erosion and sediment control
practice and the minimum time frames that each practice should remain in place
or be implemented;
            G.   A site map or construction drawing or drawings specifying the
location, size and length of each erosion and sediment control practice;
            H.   Dimensions, material specifications and installation details
for all erosion and sediment control practices, including the siting and sizing
of any temporary sediment basins and structural practices that will be used to
divert flows from exposed soils;
            I.   A temporary and permanent soil stabilization plan that meets
the requirements of these rules and the technical standard, for each stage of
the project, including initial land clearing and grubbing to project completion
and achievement of final stabilization;
            J.   A maintenance inspection schedule for the trained contractor
(s), to ensure continuous and effective operation of the erosion and sediment
control practices;
            K.   The name or names of the receiving waters;
            L.   A delineation of SWPPP implementation responsibilities for
each part of the site;
            M.   A description of structural practices designed to divert flows
from exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit the runoff and the
discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of the site, to the degree,
attainable; and
            N.   Any existing data that describe the stormwater runoff, at the
site including but not limited to calculations to size n control practices.
            O.   Identification of any elements of the design that are not in
conformance with the design criteria in the technical standards listed in (a)
(4) of this section. Include the reason for the deviation or alternative design
and provide information which demonstrates that the deviation or alternative
design is equivalent, to the technical standard.
            P.   Development activities that are on Table 2.3 of the NYC
Stormwater Manual in covered development projects under these rules must
prepare a SWPPP that includes post-construction stormwater management
practices. However, with respect to covered development projects for road
construction or reconstruction that are less than one acre and for covered
maintenance activities, erosion and sediment control practices will be
required, but no post-construction stormwater management practices will be
required.
      (4)   Development activities that alter hydrology, reduce perviousness or
include the reconstruction of an impervious surface that disturbs soil, must
develop a SWPPP that includes post-construction stormwater management
practices.
      (5)   SWPPPs for projects that require post-construction stormwater
management practices must be prepared, signed, and sealed by a qualified
professional who has an understanding of the principles of hydrology, water
quality management practice design, water quantity control design, and, in many
cases, the principles of hydraulics, and the SWPPPs must include the following
items:
         (i)   All information required in 15 RCNY §
19.1-03.3(b)(3), above;
         (ii)   A description of each post-construction stormwater management
practice designed to retain or infiltrate stormwater or documentation, as
further required by the NYC Stormwater Manual, that retention or infiltration
is not possible and a description of the selected practice;
         (iii)   A site map or construction drawing or drawings showing the
specific location and size of each post-construction stormwater management
practice;
         (iv)   Dimensions, material specifications and installation details
for each post-construction stormwater management practice;
         (v)   A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for all structural
components of the stormwater management system for the applicable design storms
that includes, but is not limited to:
            A.   Map or maps showing pre-development conditions, including
watershed / subcatchments boundaries, flow paths/routing and design points;
            B.   Map or maps showing post-development conditions, including
watershed / subcatchments boundaries, flow paths/routing, design points and
post-construction stormwater management practices;
            C.   Results of stormwater modeling (i.e. hydrology and hydraulic
analysis) for the required storm events. Include supporting calculations (model
runs), methodology, and a summary table that compares pre- and post-development
runoff rates and volumes for the different storm events;
            D.   Summary table, with supporting calculations, which
demonstrates that each post-construction stormwater management practice has
been designed in conformance with the sizing criteria included in the technical
standards, as further described in 15 RCNY §
19.1-03.3(a)(4) above; and
            E.   Identification of any elements of the design that are not in
conformance with the performance criteria in the technical standards. Include
the reason or reasons for the deviation or alternative design and provide
information, which demonstrates that the deviation or alternative design is
equivalent, to the technical standards.
         (vi)   Soil testing results and locations (test pits, borings);
         (vii)   Infiltration testing results and locations when an
infiltration practice will be implemented;
         (viii)   An operations and maintenance plan that includes inspection
and maintenance schedules and actions, to ensure continuous and effective
operation of each post-construction stormwater management practice. The plan
must identify the entity that will be responsible for the long-term operation
and maintenance of each practice;
         (ix)   For flood management projects, the SWPPP must include an
analysis of the impact of the project on existing water quality of receiving
waters;
         (x)   For covered development projects located in the watersheds
identified in Appendix 1 of the NYC MS4 permit NY-0287890, or most current, and
for which there is an increase in impervious area, the SWPPP must include a
pollutant loading analysis that demonstrates that the proposed post-
construction stormwater management practices meet the no net increase
requirement as further provided in the New York City Stormwater Manual; and
         (xi)   Plans, drawings and maps that are part of the SWPPP must be
submitted, at a scale not smaller than 1" = 50' unless otherwise specified by
the department.
      (6)   Additional requirements for projects that disturb five acres or
more. The owner or developer of a development activity must not disturb greater
than five acres of soil, at any one time without prior written authorization
from the department., at a minimum, the owner or developer must comply with the
following requirements in order to be authorized to disturb greater than five
acres of soil, at any one time:
         (i)   The owner or developer must have a qualified inspector conduct,
at least two site inspections in accordance with the NYSDEC construction
general permit every seven-calendar days, for as long as greater than five
acres of soil remain disturbed. The two inspections must be separated by a
minimum of two full calendar days;
         (ii)   In areas where soil disturbance activity has temporarily or
permanently ceased, the application of soil stabilization measures must be
initiated by the end of the next business day and completed within seven days
from the date the current soil disturbance activity ceased. The soil
stabilization measures selected must be in conformance with the technical
standard, New York State Standards and Specifications for Erosion and Sediment
Control, dated November 2016;
         (iii)   The owner or developer must prepare a phasing plan that
defines maximum disturbed area per phase and shows required cuts and fill; and
         (iv)   The owner or developer must install any additional site-
specific practices needed to protect water quality.
      (7)   Application review and determinations. 
         (i)   The department or a qualified professional employed by the City
of New York will review applications for compliance with the NYSDEC
construction general permit and these rules.
         (ii)   The department will issue a determination within 45 days of
submittal of the complete application and fee, to the department. However, with
respect to submissions that include non-conforming designs per 15 RCNY §
19.1-03.3(b)(3)(iv)(O) and 15 RCNY §
19.1-03.3(b)(4)(v)(E), the department will issue a determination within 60 days
of submittal of the complete application and fee, to the department.
         (iii)   If an application meets the standards set forth herein, the
department will provide the applicant with a SWPPP acceptance form. If the
developer does not obtain a stormwater construction permit for the project
within two years from the date of issuance of the SWPPP acceptance form, the
plan approval will expire and a new permit application must be submitted.
         (iv)   If an application does not meet the standards set forth herein,
the department will send notice, to the developer indicating the specific
deficiencies that caused the department to reject the application. Applicants
may re-apply upon addressing the deficiencies.
      (8)   Issuance of the Stormwater Construction Permit. 
         (i)   Permit issuance under the rule is not subject to environmental
review, pursuant to 6 NYCRR § 617.5(c)(25).
         (ii)   The owner or developer must file a Permit Initiation Form,
including the name and contact information for a qualified inspector.
         (iii)   Before the department will issue a stormwater construction
permit for an MS4 project, the applicant must provide a copy of the NYSDEC
SPDES permit number and NOI acknowledgement letter.
         (iv)   The contractor with primary responsibility for the project site
must file a Permit Request Form that includes a certification that the
contractor will comply with these rules, with the SWPPP and with the terms and
conditions of this permit, and provides credentials for the trained contractor
who will be responsible for overseeing day-to-day operations, at the project
site during construction.
         (v)   When the department requires post-construction stormwater
management practices, it must not issue a stormwater construction permit for
the project until the execution and recording of a maintenance easement, as
follows:
            A.   The maintenance easement will be binding on all subsequent
owners of the real property served by such post-construction stormwater
management practice.
            B.   The maintenance easement must provide for access to post-
construction stormwater management practices, at reasonable times in accordance
with the law for periodic inspection by the department or qualified
professionals authorized by the department, to ensure that such practices are
maintained in good working condition to meet the applicable design standards.
            C.   The grantor must record the maintenance easement in the office
of the city register or, if applicable, the county clerk, after approval by the
corporation counsel.
            D.   A maintenance easement is not required when the corporation
counsel has determined that such a maintenance easement is not necessary due,
to the property's ownership or use by a public agency or instrumentality. For
post-construction stormwater management practices subject to such an exception,
when there is a subsequent conveyance or cessation of public use, the
corporation counsel may require the execution and recording of a maintenance
easement, at that time.
      (9)   Permit conditions. 
         (i)   The applicant and all contractors and subcontractors responsible
for implementation of the SWPPP must comply with these rules, the SWPPP, NYSDEC
construction general permit, if applicable, and the terms and conditions of the
stormwater construction permit.
         (ii)   A stormwater construction permit must be renewed every two
years from date of issuance.
         (iii)   An application for permit renewal for two years or for a
permit extension for up to one year must be submitted, to the department,
pursuant to 15 RCNY §
19.1-03.3(b)(10).
         (iv)   The contractor or developer must notify the department no fewer
than 7 days prior, to the start of development activity.
         (v)   A copy of the permit must be retained and displayed, at the site
of the development activity during construction, from the date of initiation of
development activities, to the date of final stabilization of the site.
         (vi)   A copy of the approved SWPPP must be retained, at the site of
the development activity from the date of initiation of development activities,
to the date of final stabilization
         (vii)   The developer must have a trained contractor inspect daily the
erosion and sediment control practices and pollution prevention measures being
implemented within the active work area, to ensure that they are being
maintained in effective operating condition, at all times. The trained
contractor must document (e.g., log) these daily inspections. If deficiencies
are identified, the contractor shall begin implementing corrective actions
within one business day and shall complete the corrective actions in a
reasonable time frame.
         (viii)   The developer must have a qualified inspector conduct site
inspections and document the effectiveness of all erosion and sediment control
practices every seven days, as detailed in the NYSDEC construction general
permit. If deficiencies are identified, the contractor must begin implementing
corrective actions within one business day and must complete the corrective
actions in a reasonable timeframe.
         (ix)   The developer must notify the department of an anticipated
temporary shutdown a minimum of seven days before the shutdown, and must submit
documentation showing that the site is stable and that all stormwater
management practices are operational. The developer will be responsible for
having a qualified inspector visit the site and inspect it, at least once every
30 days during the shutdown. In addition, all permits must be kept current
during the suspension of development activity.
         (x)   If the developer terminates construction without completing the
project, the developer must submit a closure plan demonstrating that the site
will remain stable and that all completed stormwater management practices are
operating as designed and in compliance with department rules. Any project that
has post-construction stormwater management practices that are constructed and
operating must comply with 15 RCNY §
19.1-03.3(c).
         (xi)   All amendments, to the SWPPP must be submitted, to the
department.
         (xii)   Major amendments, to the SWPPP must be submitted, to the
department and will be processed and approved or disapproved in the same manner
as the original SWPPP. An application must be accompanied by a $1,000 fee per
disturbed acre for processing of the amendment. Major amendments include, but
are not limited to:
            A.   Changes to structural stormwater management practices; or
            B.   Changes that require new stormwater modeling or changes to
modeling methodology.
      (10)   Expiration and extension of plan approval and permit, and permit
renewal. 
         (i)   A plan approval will expire if the permit is not requested
within two years of issuance of the SWPPP acceptance form. The department may,
upon written presentation of sufficient justification for delay and a fee of
$1,000 per disturbed acre, made 30 days prior, to the expiration of a plan
approval, grant an extension of time of up to one year to request a permit. If
the plan approval expires, a new permit application must be submitted.
         (ii)   A stormwater construction permit will expire if:
            A.   The commencement of development activities does not take place
within one year of the permit issuance; or
            B.   Development activity is not completed by a date specified in
the permit; or
            C.   The permitted work is suspended or abandoned for a continuous
period of 12 months (or less than 12 months if the permit expires earlier).
         (iii)   The department may, upon written presentation of sufficient
justification for delay and a fee of $1,000 per disturbed acre made 30 days
prior, to the expiration of a permit, grant a one-time extension of time of up
to one year to begin or complete the work prescribed under the permit. Expired
permits will require re-application as detailed in the permit conditions.
         (iv)   An application for permit renewal for two years must be
submitted, to the department no less than 30 days prior, to the permit
expiration date and must be accompanied by a processing fee in the amount of
$1,000 dollars in addition to a $2,000 dollar fee per acre of land disturbed.
      (11)   Notice of Termination. 
         (i)   An owner or developer of a covered development project that has
completed all development activities must submit a completed NOT, to the
department for sign-off prior to submitting the NOT to NYSDEC. The department
will review the completed NOT, to ensure that the following conditions have
been met:
            A.   All development activities identified in the SWPPP have been
completed;
            B.   All areas of disturbance have achieved final stabilization;
            C.   All temporary structural erosion and sediment control measures
have been removed; and
            D. Any post-construction stormwater management practices identified
in the SWPPP have been constructed in conformance with the SWPPP and are
operational.
         (ii)   An owner or developer of a covered development project that
requires a planned shutdown with partial project completion must submit a
completed NOT, to the department for sign-off prior to submitting the NOT to
NYSDEC. The department will review the completed NOT, to ensure that the
following conditions have been met:
            A.   All soil disturbance has ceased;
            B.   All areas disturbed as of the project shutdown date have
achieved final stabilization;
            C.   All temporary structural erosion and sediment control measures
have been removed; and
            D.   Any post-construction stormwater management practices required
for the completed portion of the project have been constructed in conformance
with the SWPPP and are operational.
   (c)   Stormwater Maintenance Permit. 
      (1)   Permit application. 
         (i)   Upon final stabilization of the site, covered development
projects requiring a SWPPP that includes post-construction stormwater
management practices under these regulations will be required to obtain and
maintain a stormwater maintenance permit.
         (ii)   To obtain a permit, an owner must file an application on the
department's website. The application must be accompanied by the following:
            A.   NYSDEC NOT as provided for under 15 RCNY §
19.1-03.3(b)(11);
            B.   As-built plan of the site's stormwater management practices,
including inverts in and out of all structures, at a scale no less than 1" to
50' in an electronic format acceptable, to the department signed and sealed by
a qualified professional;
            C.   An operation and maintenance manual, in an electronic format
acceptable, to the department;
            D.   Name and contact information for the person or company
designated to maintain the practices; and
            E.   Sewer certification, as required by the department (pursuant
to 15 RCNY
Chapter 19).
      (2)   Post-construction stormwater management practices are not required
for the following covered development projects:
         (i)   Covered development projects identified as activities that
require only an erosion and sediment control component in the NYSDEC
construction general permit except for the installation of underground, linear
utilities, such as gas lines, fiber-optic cable, cable TV, electric, telephone,
sewer mains, and water mains; and
         (ii)   Installation of underground, linear utilities, such as gas
lines, fiber-optic cable, cable TV, electric, telephone, sewer mains, and water
mains where surface will be restored, to the existing condition.
      (3)   Permit conditions. 
         (i)   The Maintenance Entity must document (e.g., log) any maintenance
activities undertaken pursuant, to the operation and maintenance plan.
         (ii)   The owner must submit, to the department annually, not more
than 30 days before and not later than the anniversary date of the issuance of
the stormwater maintenance permit, a certification signed by the owner that the
stormwater management practices are operating as designed.
         (iii)   The owner of the site must renew the stormwater maintenance
permit every five years. An application for renewal must be submitted, to the
department no less than 30 days prior, to the permit expiration date and must
be accompanied by a report certified by a qualified professional that the
stormwater management practices are operating as designed and a fee of $1,500.
         (iv)   A licensed professional engineer must perform inspections and
certifications of any post-construction stormwater management practices that
include structural components, such as a dam for an impoundment.
         (v)   The owner of the site must notify the department of any sale or
conveyance of the premises and must provide the name of and contact information
for the new owner.
      (4)   Modification of a practice covered by a stormwater maintenance
permit. 
         (i)   Should the owner wish to modify a stormwater management practice
covered by a stormwater maintenance permit, the owner must submit an
application for modification of the stormwater maintenance permit (available on
the department's website).
         (ii)   The application for modification of the stormwater maintenance
permit must include calculations and supporting documentation to demonstrate
that the practice is, at least as protective of water quality as the existing
practice and that it controls stormwater flows as required by the NYSDEC
construction general permit.
         (iii)   The department will review the application following the
criteria for new applications.
      (5)   Inspections. As also provided in 15 RCNY §
19.1-03.2, the department or an authorized inspection agent may conduct
periodic inspections, to ensure that post-construction stormwater management
practices are maintained in good working condition to meet the applicable
design standards.
      (6)   Recordkeeping. The owner must keep and maintain records of all
required post-construction inspections and tests for five years after
performance of such inspections or tests. The owner must keep and maintain all
as-built drawings for the life of the post-construction stormwater management
practice.
      (7)   Should any provision of these rules and a provision in the NYS
construction general permit differ, the more stringent of the two provisions
will apply.
(Added City Record 4/1/2019, eff. 6/1/2019; amended City Record 2/15/2022, eff.
2/15/2022; amended City Record 1/2/2024, eff. 2/1/2024)
§ 19.1-03.4 Selecting SMPs Using the SMP Hierarchy.
   (a)   SMPs must be selected, using the SMP hierarchy, as follows, and as
more fully described in the NYC Stormwater Manual:
      (1)   Vegetated retention practices must be used, to the maximum extent
practicable to meet requirements.
      (2)   Where vegetated retention practices are not possible or cannot meet
the entire runoff reduction volume due to site constraints, the site
constraints must be documented in the SWPPP and non-vegetated retention
practices must be used, to the maximum extent practicable to meet requirements.
      (3)   Where both vegetated and non-vegetated retention practices are not
possible or cannot meet the entire runoff reduction volume due to site
constraints, the site constraints must be documented in the SWPPP and:
         (i)   In the combined sewer service area, any remaining requirements
must be met using either vegetated or non-vegetated detention practices;
         (ii)   In the MS4 area, any remaining requirements must be met using
either vegetated or non-vegetated treatment practices.
   (b)   When SMPs are deemed infeasible due to site constraints, including
soil, subsurface, "hotspot," surface and space constraints, the designer must
provide the appropriate documentation that demonstrates each constraint.
   (c)   All documentation for constraints and justification for the selection
of practices must be included in the SWPPP and are subject to review and
approval by the Department.
(Added City Record 2/15/2022, eff. 2/15/2022)
§ 19.1-04 Effective Date.
In accordance with subdivision 2 of section 22 of local law number 97 for the
year 2017 the effective date of sections 4 and 8 through 21 of such local law
shall be the same as the effective date of these rules, which shall be June 1,
2019.
(Added City Record 4/1/2019, eff. 6/1/2019)
Appendix: New York City Stormwater Manual
To view or download the New York City Stormwater Manual, click_here.
To view or download the various appendices to the New York City Stormwater
Manual, click below:
   Appendix_A: Stormwater Management Practice Hierarchy Checklist
   Appendix_B: Nitrogen No Net Increase Calculator Guide
   Appendix_C: Stormwater Management Practice Siting Criteria
   Appendix_D: Stormwater Management Practice Sizing Examples
   Appendix_E: Site Design Example
   Appendix_F: Controlled-Flow Pump Workbook [Excel format]
   Appendix_G: Detention in Series Workbook and Examples
      Workbook [Excel format]
   Appendix_H: Right-of-Way Guidance Materials
      Tracking_Form [Excel format]
(Added City Record 2/15/2022, eff. 2/15/2022; amended City Record 1/2/2024,
eff. 2/1/2024; amended City Record 8/30/2024, eff. 9/29/2024)
Chapter 20: Governing and Restricting the Use and Supply of Water
§ 20-01 Permits.
   (a)   General information. Subject to the provisions of this chapter,
permits will be issued for the following purposes upon receipt of proper
applications and permit fees:
      Hydrant, Use of
      Meter Accuracy Test
      Meter Attachment
      Meter Disconnect for Repair or Change of Piping ("Break Seal")
      Meter Setting, New, Replacement or Additional
      Meter Testing and Repair Company
      Plug, Tap/Wet Connection (Termination of Service)
      Service Connection, Relay of
      Service Connection, Repair of
      Service Connection, Thawing of
      Tap Installation
      Tap Installation and Plug of Prior Tap
      Tap Location, Electrical Indicator
      Wet Connection Installation (including Internal Water Main)
      Wet Connection Installation and Plug of Prior Tap or Wet Connection
   All work under a permit must be performed by the permit holder and/or
persons directly employed and supervised by the permit holder. Permits are not
transferable and valid for the work described thereon.
   (b)   Issuance. Permit applications shall be submitted, and permits shall be
obtained before commencement of any work requiring a permit. Where permits
involving plumbing work are required, such permits will be issued only to
Licensed Master Plumbers, and to plumbers in the employ of municipal, state or
federal agencies and authorities. Permits to set, reset, repair, or disconnect
a water meter on service pipes with a diameter of less than one and one-half (1
1/2) inches may be issued to persons who may lawfully perform such work under
15 RCNY §
20-05(c). Meter repair permits may also be issued to meter repair companies for
repair on the premises of water meters.
      (1)   Any work performed without a permit as required by these Rules
shall be a violation.
      (2)   Permits for all emergency work must be obtained within forty-eight
(48) hours or by the end of the second business day following commencement of
the work.
      (3)   Upon the expiration date of a plumber's license, if such license is
not renewed within 60 days after such expiration date, all permits issued under
that license shall also expire.
      (4)   (i)   The Commissioner may deny any permit application, and may
revoke, suspend, cancel, or terminate any previously issued permit, where any
party related to the work, including but not limited to the contractor,
building owner, or licensed master plumber, has docketed, unpaid civil
penalties imposed by the New York City Environmental Control Board or a
tribunal of the Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings for violations of
15 RCNY §§
20-01,
20-02,
20-04,
20-05,
20-06, or
20-08 or §§ 24-308, 24-337 or 24-339 of the Administrative Code.
         (ii)   In determining whether to exercise the power granted by
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, the Commissioner shall consider whether
such applicant or permittee has other unpaid penalties, taxes or other debt
owed to the city; the amount of the unpaid civil penalties imposed by the
environmental control board or a tribunal of the office of administrative
trials and hearings; whether the violation underlying the unpaid penalties
imposed by the environmental control board or a tribunal of the office of
administrative trials and hearings was issued by the Department of
Environmental Protection or another agency; whether such violation is one of a
series of violations returnable to such board or tribunal and the nature of the
underlying violation; whether the unpaid civil penalties imposed by the
environmental control board or a tribunal of the office of administrative
trials and hearings were imposed pursuant to a finding of default that was
subsequently vacated or whether the applicant or permittee has made a request
to vacate such default and obtain a new hearing pursuant to the rules of such
board or tribunal; or any other consideration the commissioner deems
appropriate.
   (c)   Regulation of permit work. If a Licensed Master Plumber or meter
repair company fails to comply with three (3) or more provisions, standards or
requirements of these Rules, or the terms and conditions of any permit already
issued under these Rules, during a three (3) month period, the Commissioner or
his/her designee, in accordance with § 24-309 of the Administrative Code, may
make a determination not to issue additional permits from applications
submitted from such Licensed Master Plumber or meter repair company until such
time as all the violations or non-compliances are corrected.
      (1)   In the event the Commissioner or his/her designee makes such a
determination, the BCS Deputy Commissioner shall mail the determination to the
address set forth in the Department of Building's (DOB) records.
      (2)   The Licensed Master Plumber or meter repair company, as applicable,
may appeal the Commissioner's determination by filing a notarized petition
within 60 days from the date of the Commissioner's determination with the
Commissioner, 59-17 Junction Boulevard, 19th Floor, Flushing, New York 11373-
5108. The appeal shall state the name and address of the petitioner, include a
short and plain statement of the matters to be adjudicated, address each of the
violations mentioned in the Commissioner's determination, with a statement of
the reason or reasons why the petitioner believes the determination was
incorrect, including supporting documentation, and include the Commissioner's
determination. During the review of the appeal, the Commissioner shall continue
to issue permits to the Licensed Master Plumber or meter repair company.
      (3)   Upon review of the appeal, the Commissioner or his/her designee
may, in his/her discretion, grant or deny the petition. Appeals shall be
processed within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of such appeal. If the
Department fails to process an appeal within thirty (30) calendar days the
appeal shall be granted, provided that the petitioner has responded to all
requests for information submitted by the Department.
      (4)   The filing of an appeal shall not relieve the petitioner from
complying with any requirements of the Rules, and shall not immunize any person
or entity from any civil or criminal prosecution authorized pursuant to the
Rules.
   (d)   Department of Transportation approvals. All permits for work requiring
opening or obstructing a street and/or sidewalk shall be contingent upon
approval by the Department of Transportation (DOT) or the agency having
jurisdiction to authorize such opening.
   (e)   Permits at work site. All permits required by the Department must be
displayed at the work site. Failure to display necessary permits shall be a
violation of these Rules.
   (f)   Emergency repairs.
      (1)   A Licensed Master Plumber may perform emergency repairs where a
defective service or defective interior piping results in leakage of City water
and/or immediate danger to the public safety. All required permits must be
obtained in accordance with the provisions of 15 RCNY §
20-01(b)(2).
      (2)   Where it is necessary to open a street for emergency repairs, a
Licensed Master Plumber shall obtain an emergency permit from DOT or the agency
having jurisdiction to authorize such an opening.
   (g)   Return of permit after completion of work. Within ten (10) business
days following the completion of any work for which a meter permit has been
issued, the permit, carrying a certification of the date of completion of the
work, shall be returned to the Department. A permit shall expire after 365 days
for new construction work and after 30 days for meter replacements or first-
time meter installations in existing buildings. If the work is to be performed
after that time, the applicant must apply for a permit extension before the
original permit expires. If a completed meter permit is not returned upon
completion of the work, the official meter set date shall be 30 days after
issuance of the permit for meter replacements or first-time meter installations
in existing buildings or 365 days after issuance of the permit for new
construction work.
   (h)   Department of Parks and Recreation Permits. Excavation work for water
services or for outdoor pit meters immediately adjacent to or under the drip
line of a street tree requires a permit from the Department of Parks and
Recreation and compliance with its "Forestry Protocol for Planned and Emergency
Utility Work."
(Amended City Record 7/26/2021, eff. 8/25/2021)
§ 20-02 Taps to City Water Mains.
   (a)   Separate supply. A separate corporation stop (tap) and service
connection shall be installed for each building supplied with City water,
except for buildings that have service connections supplied by internal water
mains as described in 15 RCNY §
20-03(b). One tax lot cannot be supplied with water from another tax lot. Y-
type corporation stops (taps) or service connections on the inlet side of the
main house control valve or upstream of the backflow prevention device are
prohibited. A service connection connected to the City main by a T-connection,
or by any means other than a corporation stop (tap) or a wet connection, shall
be controlled by a gate valve placed in the service connection, and located
within two (2) feet of the point of connection to the main. Any property that
meets any of the following conditions must be in full compliance with this
subdivision:
      (1)   Any property constructed after January 1, 1992.
      (2)   A sale of property either supplying City water to another tax lot
or being supplied with City water from another tax lot;
      (3)   The installation of a new service connection and/or renovation of
an existing service connection where such installation or renovation shall
constitute a substantial improvement to or alteration of the property, as
defined in § 24-334(2) of the Administrative Code of the City of New York;
      (4)   The renovation of a property supplying City water to another tax
lot or being supplied with City water from another tax lot where such
renovation shall constitute a substantial improvement to or alteration of the
property, as defined in § 24-334(2) of the Administrative Code of the City of
New York; and
      (5)   Conversion of a property's billing from metered to flat-rate or
flat-rate to metered.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subdivision, any property
that receives a written waiver from the Department dated after January 1, 2021
shall be considered in full compliance with this subdivision.
   (b)   Connections to city mains.
      (1)   Corporation stops (taps) and wet connections to a City Main shall
be inserted or installed only by Department employees. Waivers may be granted
for T-connections in extenuating circumstances (i.e. connections to two (2)
inch mains and two (2) or three (3) inch connections to a four (4) inch main).
      (2)   A two (2) or three (3) inch connection to any main four (4) inches
in diameter or less shall be made by a T-Connection with an adjacent valve.
      (3)   Direct corporation stop connections (taps) shall not exceed one (1)
inch in diameter for mains four (4) inches or less in diameter. Each one and
one-half (1 1/2) inch corporation stop connection (tap) to such a main shall be
made through a tapping saddle, as directed by the Department. The tapping
saddle is to be provided and set by the Licensed Master Plumber.
      (4)   Direct corporation stop connections (taps) shall not exceed one and
one-half (1 1/2) inches in diameter for six (6) inch mains. Larger connections
to mains of this size shall be wet connections.
      (5)   Direct corporation stop connections (taps) shall not exceed two (2)
inches in diameter for all mains larger than six (6) inches in diameter. All
connections larger than two (2) inches shall be wet connections.
      (6)   Tapping saddles shall be provided by the Licensed Master Plumber
whenever, in the opinion of the Department, a pipe to be tapped lacks
sufficient wall thickness to securely hold the corporation stop (tap).
   (c)   Spacing of corporations stops (taps) and wet connections.
      (1)   No corporation stop (tap) or wet connection shall be inserted on a
fitting or within twenty-four (24) inches of a hub, fitting, hydrant branch,
dead end, etc.
      (2)   The minimum spacing interval for corporation stops (taps) and wet
connections shall be twelve (12) inches for both three quarter (3/4) inch and
one (1) inch corporation stops (taps), and eighteen (18) inches for one and
one-half (1 1/2) and two (2) inch corporation stops (taps) and wet connections.
      (3)   No corporation stop (tap) or wet connection shall be installed
below the horizontal diameter of the main.
   (d)   Location of corporation stops (taps) and wet connections. Water main
corporation stops (taps) or wet connections shall be installed in front of the
property to be supplied with water. All old taps or wet connections shall be
plugged or destroyed prior to the installation of the new tap or wet
connection, unless interruption of service to building occupants dictates that
installation of the new tap or wet connection be completed prior to plugging or
destroying the old tap or wet connection.
   (e)   Charges for corporation stops (taps) and wet connections. The charges
for the installation of a corporation stop (tap) or a wet connection shall be
as fixed by the New York City Water Board Water and Wastewater Rate Schedule.
   (f)   Permits at work site. Permits for corporation stops (taps), wet
connections and plugs shall be displayed at the work site.
   (g)   Plugs. If an approved excavation for the removal or destruction of a
single corporation stop (tap) reveals that the service connection is supplied
by two (2) or more corporation stops (taps), the Licensed Master Plumber making
the excavation must plug or destroy the additional corporation stops (taps).
The Department will make its records relative to the location of any
corporation stop (tap) to be plugged or destroyed available to the licensed
plumber. The Licensed Master Plumber shall be solely responsible for locating
the corporation stop (tap). A separate permit will be required for each
corporation stop (tap) destroyed.
   (h)   Destruction of wet connections, corporation stops (taps) and three-way
connections.
      (1)   Destruction of a wet connection shall be performed by the Licensed
Master Plumber engaged by the owner or the owner's duly authorized
representative. The valve shall be closed, the stuffing box gland thoroughly
tightened, the valve stem cut off flush with the stuffing box gland, the
service pipe disconnected, and a plug inserted in the outlet end of the valve.
The plug and wet connection valve shall be anchored to the main as directed by
the Department.
      (2)   A screw corporation stop (tap) shall be destroyed by removing a
diagonal portion of the corporation stop thread. The corporation stop (tap)
shall be closed, and the service pipe shall be disconnected. A driven
corporation stop (tap) shall be removed and replaced with a screw plug, unless
otherwise authorized by the Department.
      (3)   All corporation stops (taps) and wet connections which are
destroyed shall have the service pipes disconnected, the curb box (if any)
removed, and a portion of the service pipe at the entry to the building
removed.
      (4)   When a corporation stop (tap) or wet connection has been shut off
and the service pipe connected thereto is not to be used, the Licensed Master
Plumber shall take the necessary steps to plug the corporation stop (tap), as
outlined above.
      (5)   Three-way connections to be abandoned must have all piping
disconnected and removed from the branch hub of the three-way, and an approved
plug inserted into the hub. The plug must be anchored to the main as directed
by the Department. All work must be done by a Licensed Master Plumber, and the
permit holder must pay all costs associated with shutting the main.
   (i)   Use of tap location electrical indicator. When a building is to be
demolished and the Tap Location Electrical Indicator Permit has been obtained,
the Department will assist a Licensed Master Plumber in locating a tap through
the use of an electrical indicator. If the indicator fails to locate the tap
within five (5) feet of the expected location, the Licensed Master Plumber will
be relieved of the obligation to plug and destroy the tap. No refund or credit
of the permit fee will be granted if the indicator fails to locate the tap.
   (j)   Sizes of corporation stops (taps) and services pipes. The size of the
corporation stop (tap) and service pipe to supply a premise shall be determined
by the water demand load (gpm) of the premises, as determined by fixture units.
In premises used for commercial and industrial purposes, where it is not
feasible to determine the size of the tap and service pipe as indicated above,
these sizes shall be determined solely by the water demand load (gpm) of the
premises. (Tables for determining the appropriate sizes of taps and service
pipes are found in Appendix Tables #1, #2 and #3.) The minimum tap shall be
three quarter (3/4) inch, and the service pipe shall be at least one (1) inch
in diameter. Unless otherwise approved by the Department, all taps shall be the
same size as their corresponding service pipes and the goosenecks required by
15 RCNY §
20-03(n) shall be the same size as the service pipes.
   (k)   Fire connections and supply.
      (1)   Fire connections. The Department of Buildings shall determine the
size and type of all fire water service connections to be installed. The size
of corporation stops (taps) or wet connections for fire service connections
shall be subject to the approval of the Department.
      (2)   Combined service connections/dual fire and domestic service
connections. A connection for combined purposes may be made from either a fire
service connection or a domestic service connection, only upon approval of the
Department of Buildings. For such installations, valve(s) and meter(s) must be
installed as required by 15 RCNY §
20-05.
      (3)   Prohibitions. Fire service connections shall not be cross-connected
with any system of piping except as described in 15 RCNY §
20-02(k)(2), in accordance with the approved water system by the Department.
   (l)   Appointments for tapping, wet connections, and inspections.
      (1)   The Licensed Master Plumber shall provide the Department with
advance notification of the requested corporation stop (tap) or wet connection
installation date.
      (2)   An inspection shall also be requested by the Licensed Master
Plumber before backfill is placed on new or repaired service pipes.
      (3)   The Department shall schedule corporation stop (tap) and wet
connection installations during business hours, for the next available date.
   (m)   Rescheduling of corporation stop (tap), wet connection installation or
service pipe inspection.
      (1)   When a permit holder fails to provide a safe and adequately sized
excavation for installation of a corporation stop (tap) or wet connection on
the date and time for which an appointment has been scheduled, the installation
will not be made and the permit holder will be required to schedule a new
appointment.
      (2)   When a permit holder fails to have a completed service connection
installation or plug ready for inspection on the date and time for which an
inspection has been scheduled, the permit holder will be required to schedule a
new appointment.
      (3)   If a permit holder must leave an excavation open for a subsequent
corporation stop (tap)/ wet connection or service connection inspection, the
excavation must be made safe, in accordance with DOT requirements.
   (n)   Size of excavation. Sizes of excavations for wet connections and
corporation stops (taps) shall be in accordance with the requirements of
Appendix Table #4. If subsurface conditions prevent a plumber from making an
excavation of the dimensions indicated therein, the plumber shall immediately
notify the Department. The Department has the discretion to determine whether
the dimensions should be changed, and what the new dimensions for the
excavation shall be. All excavations shall be made safe by sheeting and
bracing, where necessary, and shall conform with all applicable laws, rules and
regulations.
   (o)   Driven corporation stops (taps). Where a drive corporation stop (tap)
is uncovered, it must be maintained and protected. If a driven corporation stop
(tap) is disturbed, it must be replaced with a screw corporation stop.
   (p)   Service pipe leak.
      (1)   Upon discovery of a leaking service pipe, the Department will shut
the corporation stop (tap) or wet connection unless it determines that there is
no immediate threat to life or property. When there is no immediate threat to
life or property, a Three-Day Notice to Repair will be served upon the owner or
occupant of the premises. If the notice is not complied with, the Department
will shut the corporation stop (tap) or wet connection.
      (2)   When the corporation stop (tap) or wet connection is shut off by
the Department, the owner/occupant must engage a Licensed Master Plumber to
assume responsibility for the street excavation and make the necessary repairs.
If the owner/occupant fails to engage a Licensed Master Plumber, the
corporation stop (tap) or wet connection will remain closed, the excavation
will be backfilled, and the street will be properly restored.
   (q)   Shut-off of tap by licensed master plumber. A Licensed Master Plumber
must secure a permit to open or shut a tap controlling a service connection to
a City water main for any repair, replacement or installation. If it is
necessary to shut off the water main while repairing, replacing or installing a
service connection, the Licensed Master Plumber must immediately notify the
Department. The shut off must be made only by the Department, and the permit
holder must pay all costs associated with shutting off the main. If a property
is vacant and sealed longer than one year, the property owner must have the tap
destroyed or plugged and the service line plugged. If the property owner fails
to take this action, the Department may perform the work upon written notice to
the property owner at the mailing address on file with the Department and
assess the cost to the property owner.
(Amended City Record 7/26/2021, eff. 8/25/2021)
§ 20-03 Water Service Pipes.
   (a)   Advance conceptual design approval.
      (1)   A Licensed Professional Engineer, Registered Architect or Licensed
Master Plumber may obtain advance conceptual design approval for corporation
stops (taps), wet connections, service connections or relays by submitting a
conceptual design drawing to the Department and paying the required fee.
Information on the related water demand, existing service material, length of
service connection, proposed size of the corporation stop (tap)/ wet
connection, type of service connection and fire sprinkler and/or standpipe
systems to be utilized must also be provided.
      (2)   The advance review and approval of a conceptual design may be the
basis for a permit application for a period of two (2) years.
      (3)   Prior to the expiration of an advance conceptual design approval,
the Department may extend the approval for an additional sixty (60) days upon
receipt of a written request for an extension.
   (b)   Internal water main approval.
      (1)   Design stage approval for internal water mains must be obtained
from both the Department and the Department of Buildings. Approval for a meter
must be obtained from the Department's Bureau of Customer Services and for
Backflow Prevention Devices settings from the Department's Bureau of Water and
Sewer Operations (Cross Connection Control Unit). Requests for approval must be
made by a New York State-Licensed Professional Engineer or Registered
Architect.
      (2)   Internal water mains must have, in addition to any meters required
by 15 RCNY §
20-05(a), approved hydrants and backflow prevention devices in a meter vault or
above-ground enclosure ("hot box") installed inside the property within two (2)
feet of the property line. After installation, such hydrants and backflow
prevention devices will be owned, maintained and repaired by the property owner
while meters at the property line will be owned, maintained, and repaired by
the Department. The meter at the property line shall be used solely for
monitoring purposes and any individual meters in the development shall be used
for billing unless the tax lot contains only one building in which case the
property line meter will be used for billing.
      (3)   Design stage approval to install and repair internal water mains
will be issued under the following conditions:
         (i)   Owners of the internal water mains shall be responsible for
their maintenance and repair.
         (ii)   Internal water mains and any connections thereto shall be
installed and repaired only with design stage approval, and may be inspected by
the Department.
         (iii)   Internal water mains shall be sized in accordance with the
Department's sizing table (Table #3) or as approved by the Department of
Buildings. Where fire hydrants are required, internal water mains shall be a
minimum of eight (8) inches in diameter.
         (iv)   Internal water mains shall be controlled by a gate valve placed
approximately two feet from the property line on the street side. A DOT-rated
extension street box shall be placed over the gate valve. An additional gate
valve and extension street box shall be installed for each three hundred (300)
linear feet section of the water main and at each point where a lateral is
connected to the water main.
         (v)   Taps and wet connections to internal water mains must be
installed by the Department. Service connections must be installed by a New
York City-Licensed Master Plumber with design stage approval to perform the
work and must be inspected by the Department.
         (vi)   Internal water mains must be disinfected in accordance with
American Water Works Association (AWWA) Standard C651-14 for disinfection of
water mains, prior to being accepted for individual service connections or
being placed into service. A water quality sample result acceptable to the
Department must be obtained for internal water mains prior to placing them into
service or issuing design stage approval for connection to such internal water
mains.
         (vii)   Written approval from the Fire Department is required before
the Department may issue design stage approval of internal water mains.
   (c)   Department of buildings approval.
      (1)   Evidence of prior Department of Buildings approval of service pipe
size will be required before DEP approval of a permit application for:
         (i)   Any new corporation stop (tap), wet connection and/or service
pipe installation which supplies water to a sprinkler, fire or standpipe
system.
         (ii)   Any corporation stop (tap), wet connection and/or service pipe
installation for a sprinkler, fire or standpipe system for a major renovation,
or for any location where a new certificate of occupancy is required.
         (iii)   Any corporation stop (tap), wet connection and/or service pipe
installation for a domestic water supply system to which fire sprinkler heads
are connected.
         (iv)   Any corporation stop (tap) or wet connection installed in order
to supply an internal water main.
      (2)   For premises that are not under the jurisdiction of the Department
of Buildings, or where the owner/developer is exempt from obtaining Department
of Buildings approval, a Licensed Professional Engineer or Registered Architect
may submit a letter to the Department that certifies that the corporation stop
(tap), wet connection and service pipe are adequately sized, and will provide
an adequate degree of fire protection and a sufficient supply of water for
domestic purposes. This certification will be accepted by the Department in
lieu of Department of Buildings approval for the purposes of processing a
permit application.
   (d)   Sizing services.
      (1)   Acceptable sizes of corporation stops (taps), wet connections and
service connections that provide domestic water supply shall be determined by
the Department sizing tables. (See Appendix Tables #1, #2 and #3.) The minimum
tap size shall be three-quarter (3/4) inch and the service connection shall be
at least one (1) inch in diameter.
      (2)   Where the Department sizing tables indicate that a two (2) inch tap
and a two and one half (2 1/2) inch service line are required, approval will
also be granted for a two (2) inch tap and a three (3) inch service line.
      (3)   Where a Licensed Professional Engineer, Registered Architect, or
Licensed Master Plumber proposes sizes of taps, wet connections, service pipes,
or internal water mains using methods other than Department sizing tables, all
calculations shall be submitted to the Department for review and approval.
   (e)   Department of buildings service pipe sizing. For service pipes that
supply water to both domestic and fire protection systems, the service pipe
size shall be the larger of the size determined by the Department of Buildings
or the size as determined by the Department sizing tables. (See Appendix Tables
#1, #2 and #3.)
   (f)   Materials for service pipes and fittings.
      (1)   New service pipes two (2) inches in diameter or less shall be brass
pipe or copper tubing.
      (2)   Service pipes larger than two (2) inches in diameter shall either
be brass or ductile iron, except that the above-ground portion of the service
pipe, up to four (4) inches in diameter, may be Type K or Type L copper.
      (3)   Only new materials shall be used for service pipes.
      (4)   Service pipes shall be of uniform diameter and material unless
otherwise approved by the Department.
      (5)   All service connections must conform to the most recent revision of
the following standards, except that all service connections, corporation
stops, tail pieces, nuts and other fittings must not have a lead content that
exceeds 0.250%:
         (i)   New York City Plumbing Code section PC 605, except that above-
ground, copper indoor service connection four (4) inches or smaller, including
the meter setting and piping for any backflow prevention device, must be Type K
or Type L copper.
         (ii)   For three (3) inch and four (4) inch diameter iron pipe: ANSI/
AWWA C151/A21.51, Class 52, Standard for Ductile Iron Pipe, Centrifugally Cast,
for Water or Other Liquids.
         (iii)   For greater than four (4) inch diameter pipe: ANSI/AWWA C151/
A21.51, Class 56, Standard for Ductile-Iron Pipe, Centrifugally Cast, for Water
or Other Liquids.
   (g)   Approved dimensions and weights. Pipe dimensions and weights shall be
in accordance with Appendix Tables #5, #6 and #7. Ductile iron pipes shall be
lined with a cement-mortar lining and coated with an asphaltic coating, in
accordance with the latest revision of ANSI/AWWA C104/A21.4.
   (h)   Joints. Ductile iron piping must have mechanical or push on joints
with field-lock gaskets. Rodding of fittings, when necessary, must be in
accordance with NYC DEP Standard Sewer and Water Main Specifications (July 2014
or later editions).
   (i)   Mechanical and flare joints. Connections of existing lead service
pipes to copper tubing or brass service pipes shall be made using either a
compression coupling or an equivalent approved by the Department.
   (j)   House control valves. House control valves, which must be made of
material similar to the corresponding service connections, must be gate OS&Y
type with the exception of those between the sizes of three-quarter (3/4) inch
and two (2) inches, which may be full port ball valves. The lead content of
such valves must not exceed 0.25% as determined by current NSF International
Standard/American National Standard NSF/ANSI 61. The house control valve must
be placed on the service connection inside the building within two (2) feet of
the building wall, and must be located where it is accessible at all times. All
valves must be designed for a 150 psi minimum working pressure. For fire,
sprinkler, and/or standpipe service connections, and for any service connection
which supplies sprinkler heads, the house control valve must be an OS&Y Valve.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, for fire or combined service
connections two (2) inches or smaller, the house control valve may be an OS&Y
valve or a UL/FM-approved full-port ball valve approved by the Department of
Buildings.
   (k)   Curb valves.
      (1)   Curb valves must be full port ball valves or non-rising stem gate
valves designed for a minimum of 150 psi of working pressure.
      (2)   Curb valves must be included on all water service connections that
supply all systems. All curb valves must be set in the service connection in
the sidewalk area, and must be located eighteen (18) inches from the curb line
or other such locations as may be approved by the Department.
      (3)   All curb valves shall be provided with a tar coated iron extension
box with a cover which is flush with the sidewalk. Each curb valve larger than
two (2) inches in diameter shall be equipped with an operating nut at least one
and one quarter (1 1/4) inch square. Curb valves two (2) inches and smaller in
diameter may be full port ball valves equipped with a quarter turn shutoff nut.
      (4)   The property owner shall protect the curb valve/box from any damage
and shall promptly report in writing to the Department any circumstances that
may adversely affect the operation of the curb valve.
   (l)   Straight service pipes. Service pipes shall be laid in a straight line
at right angles to the street main, and shall extend from the corporation stop
(tap) or wet connection to the main house control valve. Where conditions
preclude such an installation, a Licensed Master Plumber shall submit a
proposed alternate for review and approval.
   (m)   Gooseneck and offset swing joints on service pipe connections. Each
brass or copper tubing service pipe must have at least three (3) feet of copper
tubing formed in a gooseneck connection to the corporation stop (tap) and laid
to the right hand facing the tap, as shown in Appendix Figure #2. Each brass
service pipe with threaded joints shall be installed as shown in Appendix
Figure #2. No offset swing joint shall be made for ductile iron connections.
Swing joints and/or goosenecks shall be located at the corporation stop (tap)
or wet connection, and may also be placed immediately outside a building laid
to the right hand facing the building where the building is constructed on a
pile foundation or other unyielding support.
   (n)   Service connection depth. All service connections must be installed at
a depth of at least three and one-half (3 1/2) feet, no more than six (6) feet
below ground, unless a written waiver is obtained from the Department. Where a
service connection is installed with less than three and one-half (3 1/2) feet
of cover, it must be insulated and protected in accordance with the
requirements described in 15 RCNY §
20-03(y). A service connection must not be laid within six (6) inches of any
other sub-surface structure, conduit or pipe. A service connection must not be
laid directly below, and parallel within six (6) inches of any other sub-
surface structure, conduit or pipe.
   (o)   Service in construction trench. Service connections laid in a
construction trench must be adequately supported and protected from settlement
(deflection).
   (p)   Service pipe in subway air vent. Where service pipes are installed
through a subway vent or similar construction, the method of installation shall
be as illustrated in Appendix Figure #4.
   (q)   Backfill. Backfill around and one foot over a service connection must
be of clean earth, free of stones, and must be carefully tamped and compacted
in accordance with the latest NYC DOT Standard Highway Specifications (2015 or
later editions). The remainder of the backfill must be free of stones larger
than three (3) inches in diameter, and must be satisfactorily compacted either
by tamping, flushing or both. Where tunneling has been permitted, the
backfilling of the tunnel portion must be well compacted with clean earth fill
free of stones.
   (r)   Test of service connection. Each new or repaired service connection
shall be subject to a pressure test performed under street main pressure. This
test must be conducted by the Licensed Master Plumber in the presence of a
Department inspector. All service connections and accessories must remain
uncovered for the duration of the test for observance of leakage.
   (s)   Service connection repairs. A new service connection must be installed
where more than one-half (1/2) of an existing service connection is in need of
a repair or when any repairs are required and the existing service connection
is lead, galvanized steel or galvanized iron. All repairs must conform with the
standards described in this section.
   (t)   Service pipe damaged by electrolysis, galvanic action or other local
conditions. When a service pipe has been damaged by electrolysis, galvanic
action or other local conditions, it shall be repaired and protected against
such damage in a manner approved by the Department.
   (u)   Thawing. Thawing of water service pipes shall be performed under
permit only by Licensed Master Plumbers.
   (v)   Protection of service connection and house control valve. 
      (1)   The property owner, and not the Department, is responsible for:
         (i)   Preventing physical deterioration of the service, curb valve,
house control valve or distribution pipe which may damage a meter or prevent
its maintenance or replacement;
         (ii)   Repairing or replacing equipment, service or distribution
piping to allow maintenance, proper operation or replacement of the meter; and
         (iii)   The maintenance of the service and distribution pipe and its
associated fittings and equipment.
      (2)   The meter setting is the responsibility of the Department.
   (w)   Replacement of old service pipes upon establishment of new water
service. If a tap or wet connection has been destroyed or shut off due to
vacancy of a building, the service pipe must be replaced as part of any new tap
or wet connection unless the existing service pipe is less than 40 years old,
has a functioning curb valve and is neither lead, galvanized steel or
galvanized iron.
   (x)   Installation of a meter on unmetered properties whenever a domestic
service connection is replaced, repaired or relaid. Whenever a domestic or
combined service connection for an unmetered property is installed, replaced,
repaired or relaid, a water meter must be installed to cover the entire
premises in accordance with 15 RCNY §
20-05. When the work is not performed under emergency conditions, DEP will
indicate on the permit that the property is unmetered. When the service
connection relay, repair or replacement occurs on an emergency basis, the
Licensed Master Plumber may install a set of meter inlet and outlet valves and
a spool piece of a length similar to the displacement meter for that size
service if the Licensed Master Plumber does not have a meter available for
installation at the time of the emergency visit.
   (y)   Insulation. Insulation, where required by 15 RCNY §
20-03(n), shall be cellular glass insulation manufactured in accordance with
ASTM C552 "Standard Specification for Cellular Glass Thermal Insulation", where
a quality system for manufacturing, inspecting and testing insulation is
certified in accordance with the requirements of ISO 9002. The insulation shall
be fabricated in half sections wherever possible. For large diameter piping
where half sections are not practical, curved sidewall segments are preferred.
Wherever possible, the insulation should be factory jacketed with a 70 mil
thick self-sealing high polymer asphaltic membrane with an integral glass scrim
and aluminized mylar film on the surface. Mastic finish shall be pitcote 300 or
an asphalt cutback mastic. Reinforcing fabric shall be an open mesh polymer
fabric with 6 x 5.5 mesh per inch configuration. Sealant shall be a nonsetting
butyl sealant with a minimum 85% solids content. The Department shall maintain
a list of approved insulation materials. Alternate materials may be submitted
for approval by the Department.
(Amended City Record 7/26/2021, eff. 8/25/2021)
§ 20-04 Backflow Prevention Devices, Water Hammer Arresters, Pumps and
Separation Valves.
   (a)   Backflow prevention devices. Air Gap, Reduced Pressure Zone Assemblies
(RPZs), and Double Check Valve Assemblies (DCVs) are approved backflow
prevention devices (BFPs). Double Check Detector Assemblies (DCDAs) and Reduced
Pressure Detector Assemblies (RPDAs), which are an outgrowth of DCVs, can be
used only on the fire water service. BFPs must be installed to prevent possible
backflow from a commercial property or dwelling unit into a City water main,
private water main, or internal water main (see15 RCNY §
20-05(a)(2)(ii)). A property owner must install an approved BFP in every water
service connection that has a potential or actual cross connection hazard, as
determined by the Commissioner.
   (b)   Backflow prevention device requirements. Containment backflow
prevention assemblies shall be installed on the service line upon entrance into
the property, to address actual or potential hazards, as follows:
DEP Containment Requirement 
 
Degree of Hazard                       Protection Required
Hazardous                              Air Gap or Reduced Pressure Zone
                                       Assembly
Aesthetically Objectionable            Double Check Valve Assembly
                                       Double Check Valve Assembly (provided
Non-Hazardous with Hazardous Fixtures  that internal protective devices are
(large/chemically treated boilers,     installed for these hazardous fixtures
cooling towers, etc.)                  in accordance with Department of
                                       Building requirements)
Non-Hazardous Facilities               Internal Plumbing Control
 
Subject to review by the Department, the degree of hazard shall be assessed by
the property owner's New York State Licensed Professional Engineer, or
Registered Architect in accordance with regulations established by the New York
State Department of Health (NYSDOH). Refer to the latest Supplement to the
NYSDOH Handbook for Cross Connection Control, as revised by DEP.
   (c)   Cross connection control reviews. A Cross Connection Control Review is
required prior to approval of a permit application for installation of a
corporation stop (tap) or wet connection that will be used to supply water to a
property that poses a backflow hazard. A Cross Connection Control Review is
also required prior to installation of a wet connection. Approval of Cross
Connection submissions are for backflow prevention devices only and does not
constitute approval of the meter setting or other aspects of the water service
design. Cross Connection Control Reviews are valid for two (2) years from the
date of approval.
   (d)   Installation of backflow prevention devices and initial testing
requirements. 
      (1)   Where the Commissioner determines that a facility poses a potential
or actual hazard to the City Water Supply, he or she must direct the property
owner to install an approved backflow prevention device in the service
connection.
      (2)   A Professional Engineer or Registered Architect must submit an
application and installation plans for a backflow prevention device to the
Department for approval to install a RPZ or a Double Check Valve Assembly along
with the appropriate filing fee. After plan approval, a Licensed Master Plumber
must submit an application to the Department of Buildings for a work permit to
install a RPZ or a Double Check Valve Assembly. RPZs and Double Check Valve
Assemblies must be installed in accordance with plans approved by the
Department, and metering shall be permitted from the Department's Bureau of
Customer Services, prior to work. A Professional Engineer or Registered
Architect and a Licensed Master Plumber must inspect and certify that the
completed installation conforms to the plans approved by the Department and is
in proper working order by submitting an initial test report (From Gen 215-B)
for each device to the Department within 30 days of testing the backflow
prevention device.
      (3)   A property owner who fails to install a backflow prevention device
as directed by the Commissioner or fails to submit an initial test report to
the Department within 30 days of testing of the RPZs or Double Check Valve
Assemblies is subject to the issuance of summonses, cease and desist orders,
other civil and criminal actions and proceedings, and such fines, penalties and
other enforcement measures as may be imposed pursuant to § 24-346 of the
Administrative Code, including but not limited to the termination of the water
supply to the property or to any portion thereof or a facility therein which
the Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings or the Commissioner may deem
necessary to prevent or alleviate any hazard to the City Water Supply.
      (4)   The property owner must pay any fees which the New York City Water
Board may establish and publish in the Water and Wastewater Rate Schedule in
connection with the termination or restoration of Water service to the property
owner.
   (e)   Backflow prevention device testing requirements after initial
testing. 
      (1)   In addition to the initial test required in subdivision (d), each
RPZ or Double Check Valve Assembly must be tested upon device repair or device
replacement, at least once annually, and as otherwise required by the Building
or Health Codes.
      (2)   Within 12 months of the date on which the initial test report is
submitted, an annual test report certifying that the backflow prevention device
is operating properly must be submitted to the Department. Every annual test
report thereafter must be submitted within 12 months of the date the last
annual test report was submitted.
      (3)   Failure of a property owner to provide an annual test report, or a
test report otherwise required by this section, certifying that an existing
backflow prevention device installed pursuant to this section or otherwise is
properly operating is a violation of these rules and subjects the property
owner to the issuance of a summons.
      (4)   Testing must be performed by a backflow preventer tester who is
certified by the New York State Department of Health and employed by a Licensed
Master Plumber.
      (5)   Any submitted RPZ or Double Check Valve Assembly test report must
be complete originals. Initial test reports must include the Registered
Architect or Professional Engineer stamp and the Licensed Master Plumber seal.
Annual test reports must include the Licensed Master Plumber seal.
      (6)   Initial or annual test reports that do not show a properly working
device will not be accepted by the Department. Defects in any device tested
must be repaired within thirty (30) days, and the repair must be followed by a
retest. Retest results must be submitted to the Department within thirty (30)
days of completion of the repair.
      (7)   Test reports must be submitted as specified at the bottom of Form
GEN215-B.
   (f)   Suspension of service due to backflow.
      (1)   Where a backflow is detected from premises into a City water main
or a private water main, the water supply to the premises may be terminated by
the Department.
      (2)   Prior to restoration of water service, a Licensed Master Plumber
must certify to the Department that the backflow has been eliminated, and an
approved backflow prevention device has been installed.
      (3)   The customer shall pay any fees that the New York City Water Board
may establish in connection with the termination or restoration of water
service to the customer.
   (g)   Water hammer arresters. Where flushometers, suction tanks, other
fixtures or piping are equipped with quick closing valves and are supplied by
direct street pressure, an approved water hammer arrester shall be installed in
the service pipe two (2) feet downstream of the meter setting or as required by
the New York City Plumbing Code.
   (h)   Suction tanks.
      (1)   Domestic water connections to premises with a pumped supply which
exceeds 400 gpm (total) must be equipped with either a suction or a surge tank,
as required by the Department of Buildings.
      (2)   Suction tanks shall have a capacity of 7,500 gallons if the total
connected pump capacity is between 400 and 500 gpm, and 10,000 gallons if the
total connected pump capacity is 501 gpm or more.
      (3)   For premises with a pumped supply greater than 400 gpm and more
than one water service pipe, the pumped capacity shall not be divided among the
multiple service pipes for the purpose of determining the need for a suction
tank.
   (i)   Backflow prevention assembly decommission / swapping / removal. 
      (1)   Containment backflow prevention assemblies shall not be
ineffective, by-passed, made inoperative, or removed without a prior approval
from the Department.
      (2)   A property having no auxiliary (untreated) water system is eligible
to decommission the containment RPZ assembly that may not be required by
current DEP regulations and local codes provided that:
         (i)   A Professional Engineer or Registered Architect shall inspect
the property owner/customer's plumbing system(s), to confirm that no cross-
connections are present, and submit an elaborated decommission report and plans
on the backflow prevention assembly will be physically replaced with proper
containment that is deemed adequate and effective for the ongoing degree of
associated hazard.
         (ii)   The premises shall be surveyed by the Department authorized
inspectors to determine the presence and prevalence of potential hazards to
ensure the water system protection is in accordance with the Program
requirements.
      (3)   A prior approval of the Department shall be obtained before a
containment BFP assembly is removed, by-passed, relocated, replaced (swapped)
or other assembly substituted.
         (i)   Removal: The use of an assembly may be discontinued and removed
from service upon presentation of sufficient evidence to the Department to
verify that a health hazard no longer exists. A Professional Engineer or
Registered Architect shall submit an exemption request for the containment
backflow prevention assembly to the Department. A property owner who removes a
backflow prevention assembly without the approval of the Department is in
violation of these rules and is subject to the issuance of a summons.
         (ii)   Relocation: An assembly may be relocated following
confirmation/approval by DEP that the relocation will continue to provide the
required level of protection and satisfy the installation requirements. Testing
and certification of the relocated assembly shall be required upon relocation.
         (iii)   Replacement (Swapping): An assembly may be removed for
replacement (swapping) or repair provided that the water use is discontinued
until the replaced assembly is installed or repair is completed and the
assembly is returned to service. All replaced assemblies shall be commensurate
with the degree of health hazard involved. Water use may be continued if the
service connection is equipped with another backflow protection approved by the
Department. Testing and certification of the replaced/repaired assembly shall
be required upon replacement/repair. Lead-Free assembly shall be installed for
the human domestic consumption.
(Amended City Record 7/26/2021, eff. 8/25/2021)
§ 20-05 Meters.
   (a)   Placement – General. 
      (1)   An approved water meter shall be installed wherever City water is
supplied and for all wells or other water sources that discharge into the City
sewer system, in new construction, upon replacement or repair of a service line
in an unmetered property, or on a retrofit basis the rules of the New York City
Water Board (15 RCNY 42, Appendix A (Part VII, § 1)). The Department may
require installation of additional meters as a condition for certain New York
City Water Board rate or billing programs.
      (2)   (i)   Each building must have one (1) meter on each service
connection supplying the building set at the point of entry. However, the
Department may issue a variance or approval allowing two (2) or more separate
meters to serve residential and non-residential (or rate-eligible and
ineligible) occupancies in the same building or lot to comply with a rate or
billing program established by the New York City Water Board.
         (ii)   Properties with internal water mains must have a meter and
backflow prevention devices in a vault or above-ground enclosure located at the
property line at each connection to the city water system.
         (iii)   Unmetered properties with a lead or galvanized metal service
pipe shall not be permitted to install a water meter except when accompanied
with complete replacement of the lead or galvanized service line.
      (3)   Placement during building construction
         (i)   All water used in the construction of buildings 75 feet or six
(6) or more stories in height shall be metered.
         (ii)   Prior to the commencement of actual building construction, a
meter of proper size shall be installed on each tap or service pipe supplying
the premises.
         (iii)   The meter shall be placed in an accessible location at a point
to be designated by the Department.
         (iv)   The meter shall be close to the point of entry of the service
pipe, and shall be enclosed in a vault or box of ample size and substantial
construction which will provide adequate protection against damage or injury
from frost or any other cause.
         (v)   Each meter shall remain in service throughout the entire period
of building construction. If a different meter is to be used during operation
of the completed building, a separate meter permit is required for that
replacement.
         (vi)   Where the meter is inoperable, has not accurately measured the
water supplied to the premises, or has not been maintained in good working
order during the entire period of building operations, the charge for water
consumed during building construction shall be established as provided by the
New York City Water Board in accordance with the Water and Wastewater Rate
Schedule.
      (4)   All water used in the construction of buildings less than six (6)
stories in height shall either be metered or be supplied by a hydrant permitted
in accordance with 15 RCNY §
20-08. If water used during construction is metered, the meter shall be placed
as described in 15 RCNY §
20-05(a)(3). Permit applications for temporary water service during
construction shall include the name and contact information for the Licensed
Master Plumber or construction management company.
      (5)   Metering of fire service pipes and combined service pipes.
         (i)   Fire service connections: Fire service connections in premises
supplied with City water must have an approved backflow prevention assembly. It
can be either a double check detector or reduced pressure detector assemblies.
Fire service connections of two-and-one-half (2 1/2) inches in diameter must be
provided with valves, and fittings required for a three (3) inch service
connection. Fire service connections supplying private hydrants must have fire
service valves and fittings.
         (ii)   Service connections supplying both domestic and fire protection
uses: DOB-approved combined services three inches (3") or larger in diameter
must have either a single fire rate meter at the head of the service or, if
separation between domestic and fire service piping branches occurs within
sight of the head of the service, a meter approved for domestic service on the
domestic service piping branch to domestic end uses and an approved backflow
prevention assembly on the fire service piping branch serving fire protection
system. Domestic services three inches (3") or larger in diameter with fire
sprinkler heads take off must use a fire rate meter. Domestic services smaller
than three inches (3") in diameter with fire sprinkler heads take off must have
a meter approved by the Department. Pumped services to house tanks where the
fire protection design is met by the volume of water in the house tank must use
a turbine type or electronic type meter.
         (iii)   The use of water through meters or detector assemblies
approved for fire sprinkler systems only is prohibited, except for fire
suppression or the testing of the fire sprinkler system.
         (iv)   Inlet and outlet valves are not required for fire service
meters or detector assemblies on combined service pipes, except for the
building shut-off valve. A test tee must be provided for meter testing purposes
on fire service meters. A test port shall not be placed on the bypass meter on
a Detector Check Valve Assembly.
   (b)   Meter permits.
      (1)   No person shall set, reset, repair or disconnect a water meter used
for Department billing purposes without having obtained a meter permit, except
for sets, resets, repairs or disconnects done by the Department, its authorized
agents or contractors. Applications for permits shall be made by a Licensed
Master Plumber duly authorized by the customer; provided, however, that
applications for permits to reset, repair or disconnect a water meter may be
made by a meter repair company authorized by the Department.
      (2)   Within ten (10) business days following the completion of any work
for which a meter permit has been issued, the permit, carrying: (i) a
certification of the date of completion of the work, (ii) the final reading
from the old meter (for replacements or repairs) and (iii) the meter
manufacturer's accuracy test document for the new meter shall be returned to
the Department. The Department may, in its discretion, grant an extension of
the 10-day timeframe in which the permit must be returned, upon a submission by
the permittee showing that there is a practical difficulty in complying with
the 10-day timeframe and providing a timetable for return of the permit. A
permit shall expire after 365 days for new construction work and after 30 days
for meter replacements or first-time meter installations in existing buildings.
If the work is to be performed after that time, the Licensed Master Plumber
must apply for a permit extension before the original permit expires. [
      (3)   After acceptance by the Department of the meter work, indicated by
installation of a seal, or after one year from the return of a completed permit
with access to the property available for the Department to inspect the work,
whichever comes first, such meters will be owned, maintained, repaired and read
by the Department. If access to the property is not made available to the
Department, a denial of access notice shall be issued to the property owner.
      (4)   Design approval for water meter installations shall be obtained
from the Department's Bureau of Customer Services as required by Sections 603.3
and 603.5 of the New York City Plumbing Code. Approval of a backflow prevention
design as required by 15 RCNY §
20-04 shall not constitute approval of the meter installation.
   (c)   Work on small meters.
      (1)   No person other than authorized Department personnel, its
contractors or permit holders shall set, reset, repair or disconnect a water
meter on service pipes of less than one and one-half (1 1/2) inch diameter.
      (2)   Meter testing or repair companies. A meter testing or repair
company authorized by the Department may obtain permits to perform testing or
repairs of water meters by demonstrating that it has detailed written testing
or repair procedures that have been approved by the Department and a detailed
written training program.
         (i)   A permit applicant's written procedures and written training
programs must include, at a minimum:
            (a)   Meter accuracy testing and reporting of results, as specified
in the most recent version of American Water Works Association (AWWA) Manual
M6;
            (b)   Written procedures that reflect a detailed understanding of
the application of different meter technologies to different buildings and
plumbing systems; and
            (c)   Detailed written instructions for performing meter repairs,
meter accuracy tests, and other inspection procedures.
         (ii)   A permittee shall annually submit to the Department documentary
proof that any portable or bench test equipment has been tested and calibrated
by a National Institutes of Standards and Technology (NIST)-certified lab or
company, to confirm accurate operation of the testing equipment.
         (iii)   The Department reserves the right to withdraw its
authorization if it finds that the meter testing or repair company is not
abiding by the standards set forth in the work procedures approved by the
Department.
   (d)   Approved water meters. Meters shall meet the following requirements:
      (1)   All water meters used for billing purposes must comply with
applicable specifications of the most recent AWWA Standards for Water Meters,
and/or be specifically tested and approved by the Department as to their
accuracy, performance and construction. The Department shall maintain and
regularly update a list of approved water meters, detector assemblies, pit
meter equipment, meter attachments and meter-associated equipment.
      (2)   The following information shall be on all meters used for billing
purposes:
         (i)   Size and model of meter;
         (ii)   Trade or brand name of meter; and,
         (iii)   Direction of flow.
      (3)   The serial number of the meter shall be imprinted on the case,
meter body, or flange in a permanent manner and all meter serial numbers shall
be unique for the manufacturer.
      (4)   All meters used for billing purposes shall read in cubic feet.
Meters sized five-eighths (5/8), three-fourths (3/4), or one (1) inch shall
have a remote read resolution of no more than one (1) cubic foot. Meters sized
one-and-a-half (1 1/2) or two (2) inches shall have a remote read resolution of
no more than ten (10) cubic feet. Meters three (3) inches and larger shall have
a remote read resolution of no more than one hundred (100) cubic feet. Meter
registers shall have an error rate, including any missed reads, of no more than
0.000150% on an annualized basis.
      (5)   All meters used for billing purposes shall be compatible with the
Department's automatic meter reading system. Such compatibility shall be
certified by the Department.
      (6)   Positive displacement meters 5/8" through 1 1/2" must conform to
the most recent version of AWWA Standard C700. 2" positive displacement meters
are not approved for use after January 1, 2021.
      (7)   All meters must have a main case composed of an alloy which does
not have a lead content that exceeds current NSF/ANSI Standard 61/372 limits.
Upon request by DEP the meter manufacturer must submit all documentation
associated with its product's compliance with NSF 61/372.
      (8)   Meter manufacturers shall notify the Department at least thirty
(30) days after any changes in design, serial numbering, or other matter that
might affect the use of the water meter or billing processes.
      (9)   Any main meter case made of plastic or other non-metallic material
shall be commercially recyclable or shall be recycled by the manufacturer or
its agent. Any main meter case made of plastic shall have metallic threaded
connections unless specifically approved by the Department for composite or
plastic threads.
      (10)   Any meter that requires a battery other than for temporary backup
power for proper operation shall be provided with a manufacturer's warranty at
least equal to the claimed life of the battery, or ten years for meters one-
and-a-half (1 1/2) inch and larger or 15 years for meters smaller than one-and-
a-half (1 1/2) inch, whichever is longer.
      (11)   The manufacturer must provide each meter supplied to a distributor
after January 1, 2020 with a removable barcode tag and sticker meeting the
Department's Enhanced Barcode Specifications available on the DEP website.
      (12)   All meters installed in any pit or vault, or installed in the
basement of a building lying in a designated floodplain, shall have factory,
waterproof wiring connections and shall be rated by the manufacturer for
submersion in water.
   (e)   Compound, turbine, electromagnetic, and single-jet meters.
      (1)   Meter Applications.
         (i)   Effective May 1, 2014, compound or dual-register meters may no
longer be approved for use in new or replacement installations.
         (ii)   Horizontal turbine meters shall be used wherever water is
supplied to roof tanks by pumps or to buildings by other pumped, constant flow
application, and may be used in buildings with booster pumps or pressurized
supply systems as long as such systems' minimum non-zero flow rate is greater
than the low-flow end of the 98.5% AWWA operating range for the specific meter
model.
         (iii)   Electromagnetic meters may be used in place of turbine meters
where the flow rating of the pump does not exceed the high end of the published
normal operating flow rate range for the electromagnetic meter.
         (iv)   Single-jet, electromagnetic, or other meters designed for
variable flow rates must be used on services one-and-a-half (1 1/2) inch and
larger in diameter and operating on street pressure, and may be used in
buildings with booster pumps or pressurized system applications.
         (v)   Single-jet meters must be installed on a level horizontal plane
+/- 10 degrees. Turbine, electromagnetic, and other meter types may be
installed on an incline or vertical plane if a horizontal installation is not
possible and the configuration is supported by the meter manufacturer's
specifications. The meter register must always face outward for reading.
Electromagnetic meters must be grounded according to the manufacturer's
requirements and must not be located in the same room as a significant source
of an electromagnetic field such as a motor generator.
      (2)   An approved flat plate or "Z" meter strainer shall be installed on
all new or replacement turbine meter installations, unless the turbine meter is
manufactured with an internal strainer. Such a strainer is not required for
electromagnetic or single-jet meters, but its use is permitted.
      (3)   [Repealed.]
      (4)   [Repealed.]
   (f)   Used or repaired meters. No used or repaired meter shall be installed
to cover a service pipe at the same or a different location unless it has been
repaired, tested for accuracy, found to conform to AWWA new meter accuracy
standards and has been approved by the Department.
   (g)   Sizing.
      (1)   A meter shall be restricted to a size and type that will insure
accurate registration on the basis of the water requirements of the premises,
or portion of the premises, to be metered. For residential premises, the permit
applicant shall perform a fixture count and develop a peak flow estimate using
Appendix Tables #1 and #2. The meter shall be sized according to Appendix Table
#8. For non-residential premises, the flow rate shall be based on the analysis
of a Licensed Professional Engineer or Registered Architect. The meter shall be
sized according to that flow rate and Appendix Table #8.
      (2)   A meter shall not be larger than the service pipe supplying the
meter, the piping in the meter setting, or the water distribution piping in the
building, unless specifically approved in writing by the Department or as noted
in 15 RCNY §
20-05(a)(5) for two-and-one-half (2 1/2) inch fire services or combined
services. If two meters both cover the calculated peak flow rate, the smaller
of the two meters shall be used unless approved in writing by the Department.
Unless a fixture count and flow analysis, as described in 15 RCNY §
20-05(g)(1), has been approved by the Department, a one- or two-family home
with gravity-flush water closets shall not have a meter on a domestic service
without fire sprinklers larger than three-quarters (3/4)) inch and three-,
four-, five- and six-family homes shall not have a meter on a domestic service
larger than one (1) inch. Exceptions to these requirements, and the use of
Appendix Table #8 for meter sizing, will be considered by the Department only
when a building's plumbing system uses only street water pressure and
documented incoming water pressure is less than 35 psi for buildings four (4)
through six (6) stories high, or less than 30 psi for buildings less than four
(4) stories in height.
      (3)   The minimum size meter for new installations and replacements shall
be five-eighths (5/8) inch.
      (4)   The appropriate low-flow range for compound meters varies with the
manufacturer. The ranges of sizes in Appendix Table #8 refer to the high-flow
side. The Department may require that a permit applicant provide a basis for
using a compound meter instead of another type of meter. That justification
must outweigh the higher maintenance and other operating costs to the
Department of the compound meter.
   (h)   Tests. The permit applicant shall submit the manufacturer's meter
accuracy test results to the Department at the time of permit application. The
Department retains the right, in specific instances, to require that a new,
used or repaired meter be sent to a designated Department facility for testing
at the owner's expense.
   (i)   Settings. Notwithstanding any other provisions to the contrary, all
meters shall be set or reset according to the following requirements:
      (1)   Meters shall be set as near as possible to the point of entry of
the service pipe through the building or vault wall and shall be placed so that
they may be easily inspected, maintained and replaced. Evaporative cooling
tower meters or other meters used to calculate a wastewater allowance when
located downstream of a billing meter shall be placed as close to the end use
as practical. A property owner shall not erect or maintain any physical barrier
that prevents access to, or repair or replacement of, the water meter.
         (i)   Displacement meters shall not be set beyond three (3) feet of
the entry point without written approval from the Department.
         (ii)   Turbine and compound meters shall be set with straight sections
of pipe as provided in Appendix Figures #7, #7A, #9, #9A, #10 and #10A. If pipe
lengths cannot conform to those indicated in Appendix Figures #7, #7A, #9, #9A,
#10 and #10A, a meter technology shall be used which does not require minimum
straight pipe lengths. The Department shall identify such meter technologies in
its list of approved meters. An approved meter strainer is required unless one
is included in the meter design or in the case of single-jet or electromagnetic
meters, is not required by the meter manufacturer.
      (2)   No fittings capable of a branch connection are permitted in the
section of connection upstream of the meter or meter setter with the exception
of an approved strainer. The strainer must be located immediately before the
inlet side of the meter. The service connection between the point of entry and
the meter setting must be kept visible. No fittings, devices, or equipment are
permitted in the section of connection upstream or downstream of the meter that
interferes with the required laminar flow through the meter, except as
otherwise approved by the Department, Bureau of Customer Services.
      (3)   If conditions exist that prevent the setting of a meter in
accordance with the above requirements, the meter may be set outside the
building in a meter pit, vault or above-ground meter box (See 15 RCNY §
20-05(k)).
      (4)   Meter settings must have an inlet valve immediately upstream of the
meter and any strainer, and an outlet valve downstream of the meter. For meters
two (2) inches in size or smaller, the valves must be full-port ball valves.
For meters larger than two (2) inches in size, the valves must be rising stem,
resilient seated, and epoxy-coated gate valves. If a backflow prevention device
is located after the meter setting and both the backflow prevention device and
meter setting are located on the same floor of a building, then an outlet valve
serving the meter setting may be placed immediately after the device. If a
backflow prevention assembly is located after the meter setting, then an outlet
valve shall be placed immediately after the assembly and the meter test tee.
         (i)   Except for meters two (2) inches or smaller where space
constraints prevent any approved meter technology from being installed with an
inlet valve, or as noted in 15 RCNY §
20-05(a)(5), a house control valve must not be used in lieu of a meter inlet
valve.
         (ii)   On a dedicated fire service line, an approved backflow
prevention assembly (DCDA or RPDA with by-pass meter) in conjunction with the
building control valve are required. Additional valves are optional.
         (iii)   A plain tip test tee must be provided for meters 3/4" or 1" in
diameter before the meter outlet valve or incorporated into the design of the
meter outlet valve. For meters 1-1/2 inches in diameter, the test tee must be
the same size as the meter. For meters 2 inches or larger than two (2) inches
in diameter, the test tee must be two (2) inches. An exception shall be
provided for installations using an outlet valve that incorporates an one-and-
a-half (1 1/2) inch rather than two (2) inch test tee into the design of its
two (2) inch outlet valve. Factory-fabricated setters five-eights (5/8) inch
through two (2) inches must have test ports as described in paragraph 6 of this
subdivision. Test port plugs on meter bodies must be drilled for seal wire.
Test tees shall not be used as water supply connections. Where a meter is
placed in a pit alongside a sewer trap, the meter test tee must be located
outside of the pit in an accessible location.
      (5)   Connections must be made by coupling, union, flange union or
approved compression fittings and bored for sealing with holes not less than
three thirty-seconds (3/32) of an inch in diameter. Compression fittings are
permitted for three quarter (3/4) inch through two (2) inch meters only.
Unions, couplings or compression fittings that permit removal of the meter and/
or setter without breaking the seal wire are prohibited. Grooved end mechanical
pipe joining systems are not permitted between the meter inlet valve and the
outlet side of the meter. If used on the service side of the house valve, such
systems must be drilled for seal wire. In all other circumstances, pipe joining
specifications must conform to the New York City Plumbing Code. All water meter
settings of two (2) inches and smaller sizes must utilize valves and fittings
constructed of bronze with a lead content that must not exceed current NSF/ANSI
Standard 61 limits. Bolts, studs, nuts, screws and other external fastening
devices used from the house valve through the meter outlet valve must be made
of a bronze alloy or stainless steel conforming to AWWA standards, and must be
designed for easy removal following lengthy service. Above-ground, indoor
service connection, including the meter setting and any backflow prevention
device, must comply with standards for water distribution pipe contained in the
New York City Plumbing Code Section 604.
      (6)   Meter setters & resetters. Meter setters and resetters five-eighths
inch (5/8) through two inch (2) shall conform to the following:
         (i)   Seamless copper tubing having a type K wall thickness in
accordance with ASTM B 88 specifications shall be used for all prefabricated
water meter setters. All bronze parts shall be an alloy with a lead content
that shall not exceed 0.250%.
         (ii)   The internal waterway shall be equal to the meter size to be
installed, i.e. one (1) inch meter = one (1) inch internal diameter.
         (iii)   The end of the copper tubing at the meter coupling for three
quarter (3/4) inch and one (1) inch meters shall be spun and/or formed to
produce a strong positive bearing surface on the full face of the gasket and
meter spud.
         (iv)   Copper tubing arms shall be affixed to the setter body using
leadless solder at the cup joint.
         (v)   All setters, valves and compression adapters shall be designed
to ensure positive electrical bonding continuity with, or without, the meter
being set, via an approved external method which can be confirmed visually.
         (vi)   All setters shall be designed to avoid any significant head
loss.
         (vii)   An approved test port located between the meter and the outlet
control valve shall be included in the design of all setters. The test port
shall be capable of delivering flows from at least one quarter (1/4) to two (2)
gpm, but no more than four (4) gpm.
      (7)   Above-ground, indoor service pipe, including the meter setting and
any backflow prevention device shall be Type K or Type L copper, if copper is
acceptable for that size service pipe.
      (8)   Valves. All new displacement type water meter settings must utilize
full port ball valves for the inlet and outlet control of the meter. All valves
must be furnished with handles for the manual operation of the valves without
the need of a wrench. Other meter types must be installed with full port ball
valves (through two (2) inch only) or gate type OS&Y valves for meters larger
than two (2) inches.
      (9)   Meters shall be set as shown in Figures #7, #7A, #9, #9A, #10 and
#10A.
      (10)   All meter settings shall contain a test tee or test valve
downstream of the meter and before the outlet valve. The test tee/valve can be
incorporated as part of the outlet valve design.
      (11)   Any connection to a test tee assembly or to any point ahead of a
meter used for billing purposes is strictly forbidden.
      (12)   Electrical continuity. All settings shall be designed to ensure
positive electrical continuity with, or without, the meter being set, via
bronze grounding clamps with stainless steel screws and electrical bonding
cables (#6 THHN-THWN) which can be confirmed visually, unless a pre-fabricated
setter designed for electrical continuity is used or the water service is known
not to be used as an electrical ground.
      (13)   Meters settings shall be provided with holes for running seal wire
to be installed by the Department. The meter installation shall include either
one-eighth (1/8) inch holes drilled in a bolt on each end flange, or an one-
eighth (1/8) inch hole drilled in one or both flanges.
   (j)   By-pass.
      (1)   Unmetered by-passes around meters are prohibited. Properties that
wish to avoid lengthy interruptions of water supply may install a metered by-
pass or a set of two parallel meters, under permit and at their expense.
      (2)   If a by-pass is permitted by the Department, the installation shall
conform to Appendix Figure #10 or #10A. The by-pass shall be configured so that
the top case and interior meter can be removed for repairs or replacement.
      (3)   Properties that wish to avoid lengthy shutdowns related to
replacement of large meters may install paired meters that can supply the
building through one or the other meter on a service connection.
   (k)   Meter pit/meter box requirements. Meter pits shall be constructed in
accordance with the following requirements:
      (1)   All meter electrical connections shall be factory sealed to be
water proof.
      (2)   The Department shall maintain detailed specifications for three
quarter (3/4) inch and one (1) inch pit meter installations and equipment
including setters, enclosures and covers.
      (3)   Meter pits for meters less than 3".
         (i)   For meters less than three (3) inches, the enclosure shall be
frost-proof and shall follow one of these alternate requirements:
            (a)   Thermoplastic polyvinyl chloride (PVC) conforming to ANSI/
ASTM D 1785, Type I, Grade 1, seamless, extruded pipe with white interior. The
enclosure shall be as uniform as commercially practicable in color, opacity,
density and other physical properties. Thickness shall be at least one-half (1/
2) inch.
            (b)   Polyethylene (PE) enclosures shall be constructed in
accordance with the ANSI/ASTM D 2104 latest revision. The PE shall be of medium
density. Polyethylene shall conform to all applicable sections of the latest
edition of ASTM D 1598, and ASTM D 1599. Thickness shall be at least one-half
(1/2) of an inch.
            (c)   A composite of polyester resin, fiberglass and calcium
carbonate. The composite material shall consist of non-aggregate base materials
using the bulk molded compound process or the thick molded compound process.
The thickness shall be at least one-half (1/2) inch.
         (ii)   Covers and lids shall be constructed in accordance with the
following requirements:
            (a)   Covers shall be of polymer concrete, heavy duty plastic, or
other composite materials that allow transmission of an AMR signal and meet
load requirements set by the department. The department shall publish a list of
approved products and materials in its list of approved meters and equipment.
            (b)   Lids shall have a lifter worm lock with a standard waterworks
pentagon nut constructed of bronze.
            (c)   Extra heavy lids and covers shall be used for driveway and
sidewalk applications.
            (d)   For three quarter (3/4) inch and one (1) inch meter sets,
covers shall fit on twenty (20) inch nominal I.D. meter vaults. Covers shall
have thirteen and one-half (13 1/2) inch to fifteen (15) inch openings and lid
sizes.
            (e)   For one and one-half (1 1/2) inch and two (2) inch meter
sets, covers shall fit on thirty-six (36) inch nominal I.D. meter vaults.
Covers shall have eighteen (18) inch to fifteen (15) inch openings and lid
sizes.
      (4)   Meter vaults for meters 3" and larger. For meters three (3) inches
in size and larger, a meter vault shall be constructed as follows (See Appendix
Figures #11 through #17 for typical meter pit and vault installation details):
            (a)   Waterproof and frost proof and of sufficient size to permit
easy access to all portions of the meter and connections with at least one (1)
foot clearance on each side of meter.
            (b)   In conformance with any requirements of the U.S. Occupational
Safety and Health Administration.
            (c)   Pits less than four (4) feet in depth shall not be less than
two feet, six inches (2'6") wide and three feet, six inches (3'6") long. Pits
less than four (4) feet in depth shall be provided with a hinged cover not to
exceed forty (40) pounds in weight, with suitable handle and so constructed as
to permit the uncovering of entire pit, or a circular cover as described above
in (ii) provided that there is sufficient clearance to remove and replace the
meter.
            (d)   Pits four (4) feet or more in depth shall be provided with an
access opening of at least two feet, six inches (2'6") square or at least
thirty (30) inches in diameter, but of sufficient size to remove and replace
the meter. If the access opening is square, the cover of such opening shall be
hinged and shall be provided with a suitable handle. Doors exceeding forty (40)
pounds in weight shall be counter balanced. Approved composite lids or covers
for vaults are available from the Department.
            (e)   Pits three (3) feet or more in depth shall be provided with
permanent steps or a metal ladder.
            (f)   Pits containing sewer traps shall be provided with an air
vent.
      (5)   Meter boxes (above-ground enclosure).
         (i)   The enclosure must be capable of housing the water meter with
all required valves, strainer and above-ground accessories. It must have easy
access for testing and maintenance including at least one (1) foot, clearance
around the meter, piping and valves. The boxes must have lockable access doors
or lids to prevent theft or vandalism. The enclosure must be anchored to a
concrete base of eight (8) inches minimum for meters one and one-half (1 1/2)
inches or larger, and four (4) inches for meters less than one and one-half (1
1/2) inches. The enclosure must have an approved remote meter reading
receptacle mounted on the exterior.
         (ii)   The enclosure shall be a minimum of:
            (a)   Eighteen (18) gauge reinforced aluminum, or;
            (b)   Extra heavy duty fiberglass reinforced polyester with high-
gloss gelcoat finish, or;
            (c)   Twelve (12) gauge steel finished with three coats of baked
enamel.
         (iii)   The enclosure shall be insulated with a material in addition
to the enclosure itself which has a thermal resistance ("R-value") of at least
8.0.
         (iv)   The enclosure shall have a thermostatically-controlled heat
source mounted to the interior wall for freeze protection down to -10°F.
   (l)   Metering condominium and homeowners' association developments.
      (1)   An individual water meter to be read by the Department shall be
installed for each separately-owned dwelling unit in all new condominium and
homeowners' associations structures of three (3) stories or less when each such
unit is supplied with hot water and space heat by its own separate domestic hot
water heater and space heating system, and not by a common water heater or
space heater. If fire protection sprinklers are present they shall be supplied
by a separate dedicated service pipe. Any hose bib or irrigation supply shall
be connected to one of the unit's metered branches. Such individual water
meters shall be located in a common location immediately after the point of
entry in each structure, with each meter clearly labeled as to the unit it
supplies. MTUs shall be mounted on the exterior walls of the building. New and
existing condominiums and homeowners' associations structures of six (6)
stories or fewer with in-unit hot water heaters and space heating systems may
apply to install individual water meters at their cost and in the same manner
and governed by the same conditions as meters for new condominiums and
homeowners' associations structures of three (3) stories or fewer, unless the
work is physically impractical or the owners do not agree to individual water
meters or required MTU placement. Such existing structures requesting
individual water meters shall not be in arrears with their water or sewer
accounts or payment agreements at the time of application to the Department.
The Department shall set specific written requirements for such applications.
For all cases, if there are building common end uses, such as but not limited
to irrigation and heating boilers, then individual water meters in the name of
the condominium or homeowners' association shall be installed for those uses.
Properties served by internal water mains shall be metered as specified in 15
RCNY §
20-05(a)(ii).
      (2)   Condominiums and homeowners' associations that cannot be
individually metered as described in 15 RCNY §
20-05(l)(1) shall have a meter at the point of entry of the water service for
the building or buildings, except that those properties served by internal
water mains shall be metered as specified in 15 RCNY §
20-05(a)(ii).
      (3)   Each individual unit/meter shall have its own account under the
"75XX" joint condominium lot.
   (m)   Removal.
      (1)   If a meter has been disconnected without securing a permit as per
15 RCNY §
20-05(b) and 15 RCNY §
20-05(c), it shall not be reset but shall be replaced with a new meter approved
by the Department.
      (2)   When a tap or wet connection is destroyed on a metered service pipe
(See 15 RCNY §
20-02(g) and 15 RCNY §
20-02(h)), the meter shall be removed under permit and returned to the
Department.
      (3)   If a meter is moved, a permit shall be obtained to report the new
location. Relocation of a meter from an outdoor pit to an indoor location shall
include filling the pit with clean sand and restoring the surface in kind.
   (n)   Seals. A seal placed by the Department for the protection of any
meter, valve, fitting or other water connection shall not be tampered with or
defaced. The seal shall not be broken except after securing a permit from the
Department. Breaking the seal without such a permit shall be a violation,
except for emergency repairs as described in 15 RCNY §
20-01(f). The Department may also remove the meter for testing and resetting or
replacement. The customer shall be responsible for safeguarding and protecting
the seal and the meter. Application of a seal on a new or replacement meter
shall denote approval by the Department.
   (o)   Meter shut-off. Where water is obtained through more than one (1)
meter, and where tests indicate accurate registration is not being obtained by
reason of the divided delivery of water, the Department may, at its discretion,
shut off and seal the meter(s) to ensure accuracy of registration.
   (p)   Protection of meters and settings.
      (1)   The property owner shall protect the meter, setting, AMR
transmitter, wiring and remote against physical damage, freezing conditions and
abuse. The property owner shall be responsible for any break or disconnection
of wire within the building. The property owner is responsible for preventing
physical deterioration or other conditions of the service pipe which may damage
a meter or prevent its maintenance or replacement. In such cases the owner
shall be responsible for repairing or replacing equipment, service piping or
any other physical barriers, including asbestos insulation, needed to allow
maintenance, proper operation or replacement of the meter.
      (2)   The property owner is prohibited from relocating the remote
receptacle or AMR transmitter except upon securing a permit from the
Department.
      (3)   The property owner's installation of branch meters or submeters for
the owner's use shall not interfere with the City's meter setting.
   (q)   Encoding registers. When used, all encoder-type remote registration
systems must comply with all applicable requirements of AWWA Standard C707 and
the following requirements:
      (1)   The register must encode at least the six (6) most significant
digits which will be read from the remote receptacle.
      (2)   The unit must employ a leak detection indicator, gpm display or a
test sweep hand on the face of the meter register.
      (3)   Registers must read in cubic feet.
      (4)   The assembly must have a tamper resistant locking device as well as
a provision for seal wire, or other method approved by the Department.
      (5)   The data stream must be, or be convertible to, ASCII format, and is
to be capable of interfacing directly to a Department-approved automatic meter
reading device.
      (6)   All encoder registration systems must be capable of transmitting
the data for a minimum distance of three hundred (300) feet utilizing solid
twenty-two (22) gauge minimum non-shielded copper cable between the register
and the remote receptacle or interface device.
      (7)   All encoding registers must be subject to the approval of the
Department.
      (8)   The register must be capable of being read through a remote
receptacle, and /or an automatic meter reading system.
      (9)   All registers must be installed with wire to a AMR transmitter with
all three wires properly connected at the register head.
   (r)   Remote receptacles and AMR transmitters ("MTU").
      (1)   Temporary use of remote receptacles or pads. The licensed plumber
performing the meter installation or replacement shall run wire from the meter
register to an exterior wall. If the licensed plumber installs a meter
manufacturer's remote receptacle or pad for temporary use, installation shall
be in a location consistent with the specifications in paragraph 2 for
placement of an MTU until the Department replaces the remote receptacle or pad
with an MTU. Any splices of wire running from the meter register to the remote
receptacle or pad must be sealed with gel caps. All three of the wire
connections at the meter register must be connected to wires running to the
remote receptacle or pad, even if only two wires are connected at the remote
receptacle or pad. The third wire shall be tucked behind the remote pad.
      (2)   Placement of MTU or temporary remote receptacle. Placement of the
MTU shall comply with the following guidelines:
         (i)   Location. The MTU shall be located on the front or side exterior
of the building, unless such building and an immediately adjacent building have
aluminum siding or other signal reflective material in which case the MTU shall
be located on the front exterior only. The MTU must be located above ground
level, and must not be placed behind permanently-sited large metal objects. All
wire splices shall be sealed with gel caps. For apartment or office buildings
with glass, marble or other similar facades, a smaller optional remote antenna
MTU is available from the Department, or the MTU may be located inside a
building if transmissions can be received by the AMR system. The location of
the MTU must be indicated in the meter permit as returned to the Department.
            For all underground meter installations, the remote pad shall be
mounted in the meter pit lid or some support or structure immediately adjacent
to the pit, to allow meter readings without opening the lid.
         (ii)   Height. The receptacle shall be set at forty-two (42) inches
above ground, but may be set between twelve (12) and sixty (60) inches if
circumstances preclude a better height. Receptacles may be installed beyond
these limits only when approved in writing by the Department.
      (3)   AMR transmitter. AMR radio transmitters (MTUs) for domestic meters
shall be mounted on the exterior surface of an exterior building wall above
ground level, unless otherwise specified by the Department. AMR radio
transmitters for evaporative cooling tower makeup water meters or other meters
located on the upper floors of a building shall be mounted on the exterior of
the building wall, at a roof parapet or other location to permit effective
transmission of the radio signal. Meters placed in outdoor pits or vaults shall
have MTUs mounted on the underside of approved composite plastic pit lids or
covers available from the Department.
   (s)   Meter attachments.
      (1)   No customer shall attach any device to the water meter unless such
device has been submitted to, and approved by, the Department.
      (2)   No device submitted for approval shall interfere with or affect the
operation, inspection or reading of the meter in any way.
      (3)   Any device approved is solely the responsibility of the property
owner unless it is installed by the Department. The Department is not liable
for any maintenance or replacement of any approved attachments to the meter,
and shall not perform any additional steps to salvage the devices should the
meter require replacement. Meter attachments are not recognized as a source of
data for billing purposes. A technical representative of a meter attachment
manufacturer may be a permit holder for Meter Attachment permits only.
      (4)   The Department shall publish a list of approved meter attachments
as part of its list of Approved Meters.
   (t)   Ownership of water meters. All water meters used for billing purposes
are the property of the Department. At the time of replacement or removal, one
or more photographs of the meter must be provided to the Department that must
include the serial number of the meter and the final meter read. The Department
may, upon written request prior to the removal or replacement of a meter,
require the return of a meter to the Department for testing or other purposes.
Failure to 1) provide photographs of a meter; and 2) return a meter to the
Department when requested by the Department, at the time of replacement or
removal is a violation of this rule.
(Amended City Record 7/26/2021, eff. 8/25/2021; amended City Record 1/18/2023,
eff. 2/17/2023) [
§ 20-06 Air Conditioning and Refrigeration.
   (a)   General rules.
      (1)   Air conditioning and refrigeration.
         (i)   Each direct water connection to a refrigeration or air
conditioning unit using City water for cooling purposes shall be equipped with
a check valve set not more than two (2) feet from the unit.
         (ii)   Each unit containing more than twenty (20) pounds of
refrigerant shall be provided with a relief valve installed between the check
valve and the unit. The relief valve shall be set at five (5) pounds above the
maximum water pressure at the point of installation.
         (iii)   All water-cooled air conditioning or refrigeration systems
shall be connected to a metered supply.
         (iv)   Water conserving devices shall be designed and operated in
accordance with American Society for Heating, Refrigeration and Air
Conditioning (ASHRAE) standards that consumes City water for make-up purposes
at no more than two (2) percent of the total flow of water through the system.
An additional two (2) percent shall be allowed for the purpose of bleeding and
wash down.
         (v)   Where the City water is piped to a water conserving device, the
piping supplying such water shall discharge at least two (2) inches above the
over-flow rim of the pan.
         (vi)   Condensate from steam used directly or indirectly to produce
the cooling effect in air conditioning or refrigeration systems shall be
collected and used as part of the make-up water to the water conserving device
or shall be put to some other beneficial use which displaces potable water.
      (2)   Refrigeration.
         (i)   All refrigeration systems in excess of six (6) tons of rated
capacity using City water and installed before January 1, 2011 must be equipped
with approved water conserving devices. Once-through, water-cooled
refrigeration systems are prohibited in new construction effective January 1,
2011, in accordance with § 428.1.1 of the New York City Plumbing Code.
         (ii)   All refrigeration systems of six (6) tons of rated capacity or
less using City water without an approved water conserving device shall be
equipped with an automatic water regulating device on each individual unit.
      (3)   Air Conditioning.
         (i)   All air conditioning systems in excess of two (2) tons of rated
capacity using City water and installed before January 1, 2011 must be equipped
with an approved water conserving device. Once-through, water-cooled air
conditioning equipment is prohibited in new construction effective January 1,
2011, in accordance with § 428.1.1 of the New York City Plumbing Code.
         (ii)   All air conditioning systems of two (2) tons of rated capacity
or less using City water without an approved water conserving device shall be
equipped with an automatic water regulating device on each individual unit.
   (b)   Hours of use of air conditioning systems.
      (1)   Hours of use of air conditioning systems may be limited by the
Department from time to time as water supply conditions so warrant.
      (2)   Lists of "permissible hourly operation" will be on file in the
Department and may be obtained upon request.
      (3)   The hours during which air conditioning using City water is allowed
shall be posted prominently in each building and establishment using such air
conditioning.
   (c)   Variances. The Department will receive and review requests for
variances from this section due to demonstrated peculiar individual situations.
§ 20-07 Inspections.
   (a)   General regulations. All corporation stops (taps), wet connections
(including internal water main), meters, service connection installations,
repairs, plugs and relays are subject to inspection by the Department. A
Licensed Master Plumber must certify that all work was performed in accordance
with these Rules and all other applicable rules.
   (b)   Mandatory inspections. The Licensed Master Plumber must request an
inspection as described in 15 RCNY §
20-02(l) and 15 RCNY §
20-02(m). Inspections are mandatory for the following categories of work:
      (1)   Corporation stops (taps/wet connections) and service connections
supplying water to the fire suppression systems: sprinkler and/or standpipe and
fire hydrants (private).
      (2)   Corporation stops (taps/wet connections) and service connections
supplying combined water systems or domestic water systems to which fire
systems are connected.
      (3)   Water service terminations (plug only).
      (4)   Destruction of any tap or wet connection which requires an
excavation separate from the one required for the new tap or wet connection.
      (5)   Installed new wet connections and corresponding service
connections.
      (6)   Relay or repair of sprinkler, fire, standpipe and domestic service
connections to which fire sprinkler heads are connected.
   (c)   Inspection waiver. For domestic water service connection installations
where inspections are mandatory, as described in 15 RCNY §
20-07(b), the Department in its discretion may waive such inspections. If the
Department waives an inspection, the Licensed Master Plumber must submit the
tap location with certification that all work was performed in accordance with
these Rules and all other applicable rules.
   (d)   Fee for inspections. An upfront fee must be paid for each inspection
in accordance with the Water and Wastewater Rate Schedule of the New York City
Water Board.
   (e)   Inside flow test.
      (1)   A Licensed Master Plumber may submit a written request for
permission to conduct an Inside Flow Test in lieu of a mandatory inspection.
Such requests may be granted, at the discretion of the Department, but only
upon demonstration of substantial hardship.
      (2)   Where a request for an Inside Flow Test is denied, the Licensed
Master Plumber shall re-excavate and make the work available for an inspection.
      (3)   When performing an Inside Flow Test, the Licensed Master Plumber
shall provide all necessary tools, gauges, hoses, etc.
      (4)   An Inside Flow Test shall be conducted, in the presence of a
Department inspector, as follows:
         (i)   The Licensed Master Plumber installs a pressure gauge on the
water service pipe near the entry to the premises.
         (ii)   The Department inspector records the static pressure.
         (iii)   The Licensed Master Plumber runs a large quantity of water to
waste within the premises.
         (iv)   The Department inspector records the dynamic (with flow)
pressure. Pressure readings with a measurable difference between the static
pressure and the dynamic (with flow) pressure shall be acceptable.
   (f)   Permit at work site. The Licensed Master Plumber must display the
permit at the work site except for emergencies.
   (g)   Inspection hours. The Department will conduct inspections Monday
through Friday (except holidays) between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.,
except upon a demonstration of substantial hardship.
   (h)   Backfilling before 2:00 p.m. Backfilling on installations where
mandatory inspections are not required may not commence before 2:00 p.m.
Failure to observe this requirement may result in the suspension of the
Licensed Master Plumber's privilege to self-inspect. The Licensed Master
Plumber must comply with all DOT requirements.
   (i)   Water sampling test. Before taps are installed in a new internal water
main, the main must pass a water sampling test. The main must be disinfected
and a satisfactory water sample must be obtained by the Contractor in the
presence of the Department representative only. A water sample will be
considered satisfactory if it is free of bacteria, with acceptable color, odor,
taste, temperature, turbidity, and has measurable residual chlorine, as
determined by the Department.
(Amended City Record 7/26/2021, eff. 8/25/2021)
§ 20-08 Water Use Restrictions and Fire Hydrant Use.
   (a)   Water use restrictions. The use of water is permitted, subject to the
following restrictions:
      (1)   Prohibition of Use as a Source of Energy. The use of the pressure
or flow of water as a source of energy is prohibited, except when specifically
approved by the Department or for charging the battery of an electronic
plumbing fixture.
      (2)   Restrictions on Use for Coolant Purposes. The use of City water for
coolant purposes in industrial and commercial equipment is prohibited, except
with the use of an approved "water conservation device," in accordance with 15
RCNY §
20-06.
      (3)   Required Recirculation in Fountains, Ornamental Pools, Aquariums
and Similar Structures. Display fountains, ornamental pools, aquariums, and
similar structures using water in excess of the rate of one-half (1/2) gpm
shall be recirculated.
      (4)   Shutoffs Required for Drinking Fountains and Recreational
Sprinklers. Drinking fountains shall operate only when activated by a user.
Recreational sprinklers shall be equipped with a timer to stop flow if the
sprinkler is not being used or shall not operate when not in use.
      (5)   [Reserved.]
      (6)   Watering of lawns and gardens.
         (i)   The use of a hose, automatic sprinkler or other means to water
lawns or gardens is prohibited between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
Automatic irrigation systems shall include a sensor or control which shall
prevent operation during or within 24 hours of substantial rain.
         (ii)   Between the first day of November and the last day of the
following March, the following activities are prohibited using City water: (a)
the use of hoses and sprinklers, and (b) the watering of lawns and gardens,
except for the watering of non-turf plants with a hand-held container.
         (iii)   The following activities are prohibited at all times: (a) the
use of hoses which flow at more than five (5) gpm at sixty (60) psi or which,
regardless of flow rate, are not equipped with an automatic shutoff mechanism
which will turn off the flow of water if a handle or trigger is not actively
held or compressed, and (b) the practice of allowing sprinklers to flood
sidewalks, gutters and roadways.
      (7)   Sidewalks flushing. The flushing of sidewalks is prohibited between
the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. In addition, the flushing of sidewalks by
means of a hose or piping is prohibited between the first day of November and
the last day of the following March. This provision, however, shall not be
construed to prohibit the washing of such surfaces, particularly the exterior
surface of a building, where such washing is required as part of repairs
mandated by the Administrative Code or to protect the health and safety of the
public. For one, two, or three-family homes, any hose used to supply City water
for sidewalk cleaning purposes must be equipped with a nozzle which limits flow
to no more than five (5) gpm at sixty (60) psi and which is equipped with an
automatic shutoff mechanism which will turn off the flow of water if a handle
or trigger is not actively held or compressed. For multiple dwellings,
commercial occupancies, or where required by the Administrative Code or by the
Department for health and safety purposes, any hose used to supply City water
for sidewalk cleaning purposes shall use a fixture that flows at no more than
2.5 gpm, irrespective of pressure.
      (8)   Temporary Suspension of Permission to Use City Water for Purposes
Listed in paragraphs (6) and (7). The Commissioner may suspend the
authorization granted herein for the flushing of sidewalks and the watering of
lawns and gardens. Such a suspension may be implemented without formal notice,
through advisories issued via broadcast or print media. Upon the declaration of
either a Water Pressure Alert or a Water Pressure Emergency, the use of City
water to flush sidewalks and to water lawns or gardens is prohibited until the
alert/emergency has ended.
      (9)   Car washing.
         (i)   The use of City water for commercial car washing purposes is
prohibited, except (a) where at least seventy-five (75) percent of the water is
reused by means of a recirculating system which uses City water for the final
rinse only, or (b) where coin operated automatic high pressure equipment is
employed. Any premise using City water for commercial car washing must install
an approved backflow prevention device.
         (ii)   Garages, gasoline service stations, and other similar
establishments which furnish car washing as part of their regular service and
do not employ automatic car washing equipment, as described above, may use
buckets of water only.
         (iii)   Any hose used to supply City water for non-commercial car
washing purposes must be equipped with a nozzle which limits flow to no more
than five (5) gpm at sixty (60) psi and which is equipped with an automatic
shutoff mechanism which will turn off the flow of water if a handle or trigger
is not actively held or compressed.
   (b)   Fire hydrant use.
      (1)   Fire hydrants on the raw may be routinely opened only by authorized
employees of the Department and/or the Fire Department. All others seeking
permission to open a fire hydrant must secure a permit from the Department,
Bureau of Customer Service. Fire Hydrant Use Permits shall be secured at the
site where water is being used. Permits for the use of hydrants may not be
granted when, in the view of the Department, water from a metered source is
available to serve the end use described in the permit application. Permit
applicants are required to describe the proposed use in detail and indicate why
another alternative (e.g., existing metered source or construction meter)
cannot be used. Only approved hydrant wrenches may be used. Water must be
obtained from the smaller size hydrant nozzle only. Caps and chains are not to
be broken and must be securely replaced after use.
      (2)   Fire Hydrant Use Permits are valid only on the days specified
therein, unless otherwise approved by the Department.
      (3)   Permits shall not be issued for use of fire hydrants supplied by
water mains which are twenty (20) inches or larger in diameter. Fire hydrants
may not be obstructed, and shall be available, at all times, for use by the
Fire Department.
      (4)   With the exception of hoses used to extinguish fires, any hose
connected to a fire hydrant must be equipped with an approved Reduced Pressure
Zone backflow prevention assembly (RPZA). Applications which do require a RPZA
include, but are not limited to, demolition dust control, pavement breaking,
cutting and sawing, mixing and curing of concrete or mortar, well digging,
washing/pumping of manholes, basements or sewers, application of pesticides,
herbicides, paints, curing agents or fertilizers, washing down roadway
construction, or make-up water. (See Appendix Figure #6).
      (5)   Connections to fire hydrants shall be made by valve and couplings
which can be readily detached in case of emergency. Where valve and couplings
are used, the hydrant must be fully open at all times. The rate of flow shall
be governed by the installed valve, and all such connections shall be uncoupled
immediately after use.
      (6)   All fire hydrants used during the period from November 1st to April
15th shall be pumped out immediately after use. Hydrants Use Permits shall be
invalid when the temperature is below thirty-two (32) degrees Fahrenheit.
      (7)   Defective hydrants shall immediately be reported to the Department
by the permit holder.
      (8)   Opening a fire hydrant without a permit shall be a violation.
   (c)   Installation and maintenance of corporation stops (taps), wet
connections, service pipes and curb valves.
      (1)   Installation and maintenance. The property owner shall be
responsible for installation and maintenance of corporations stops (taps), wet
connection sleeves and valves, three-ways, service pipes, and curb valves.
      (2)   Shut-off charges. Should the Department shut a tap because of a
leaking service pipe, non-payment of a bill, denial of access for an inspection
or meter replacement or repair, failure to make repairs required for the
installation or replacement of a meter, or non-compliance with Department
rules, the owner shall pay a shut-off charge in accordance with the Water and
Wastewater Rate Schedule of New York City Water Board.
(Amended City Record 7/26/2021, eff. 8/25/2021)
§ 20-09 Enforcement.
Any person who is in violation of or fails to comply with any provision,
standard or requirement of these Rules or the terms and conditions of any
permit issued pursuant to these Rules shall be subject to the issuance of
notice(s) of violation and other civil or criminal enforcement action(s)
pursuant to the provisions of § 24-346 of the Administrative Code of the City
of New York, including but not limited to payment of civil penalties and
compliance with orders of the Commissioner and/or the Environmental Control
Board. In addition to any civil and criminal enforcement pursuant to § 24-346
of the Administrative Code of the City of New York, the Department may refuse
to issue permits to any person who is in violation of, or fails to comply with,
any provision, standard or requirement of these Rules or the terms and
conditions of any permit, in accordance with 15 RCNY §
20-01(c).
§ 20-10 Glossary.
For the purposes of "The Rules Governing and Restricting the Use and Supply of
Water", the following definitions shall apply:
   Aesthetically objectionable. A condition which could be objectionable to
other water consumers, but would not adversely affect human health. Substances
such as food-grade dyes, hot water, and stagnant water from fire lines in which
no chemical additives are used may result in aesthetically objectionable
conditions.
   Air gap separation. Air Gap Separation means the unobstructed vertical
distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe
or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the
flood level rim of the receptacle. The differential distance shall be at least
double the diameter (D) of the supply pipe. In no case shall the air gap be
less than 1 inch.
   Applicant. Any person applying for a permit pursuant to these Rules.
   AMR – Automatic Meter Reading. The use of radio or telephone-based
technology to read water meters.
   ANSI. The American National Standards Institute.
   ASCII. American Standard Code for Information Interchange.
   ASTM. The American Society for Testing Materials.
   Automatic water regulating device. A self regulating valve or other device,
the purpose of which shall be to limit the maximum use of City water on air
conditioning and refrigeration units that do not have a water conserving device
to 1.5 gpm per ton of refrigeration or air conditioning.
   AWWA. The American Water Works Association.
   Backflow prevention device. An approved air gap, reduced pressure zone (RPZ)
device, or double check valve assembly (DCV) used to contain potential
contamination within a facility.
   Backflow. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into
the distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from any source or sources
other than its intended source. Backsiphonage is one type of backflow.
   Ball valve. A valve capable of regulating, stopping or starting flow with a
one-quarter (90°) turn of the valve by means of a movable ball which fits in a
spherical seat.
   BCS. Bureau of Customer Services.
   Booster system. A pumped system used to deliver water at a higher pressure
within a building.
   Building. An enclosed structure having a specific block and lot (or tax sub-
lot) and a separate entry from the street or an outdoor area.
   City. The City of New York.
   City water. Water supplied by the City of New York.
   City water main. A water main owned and maintained by the City of New York
under the jurisdiction of the Department.
   Combined service. A water service which supplies both domestic and fire
suppressions end uses and the fire protection requirements exceed the domestic
demand and determine the size of the service.
   Commissioner. The Commissioner of the New York City Department of
Environmental Protection.
   Completed meter permit. A meter permit returned to the Department that
indicates the meter size, type, serial number, remote identification number,
meter and remote receptacle location, and date of installation that has been
signed and sealed by the licensed plumber and lists the licensed plumber's
business address.
   Connection. A water service pipe which connects the customer or a
development to a City Water Main, Private Water Main, or Internal Water Main.
   Cross connection. An actual connection or a potential connection between any
part of a potable water system and any other environment that would allow
substances to enter the potable water system. Those substances could include
gases, liquids, or solids, such as chemicals, water products, steam, water from
other sources (potable or nonpotable), or any matter that may change the color
or add odor to the water. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable
sections, swivel or changeover assemblies, or any other temporary or permanent
connecting arrangement through which backflow may occur are considered to be
cross connections.
   Curb valve. A shutoff valve on the service connection in the sidewalk area
outside the property, generally located eighteen (18) inches from the curb
line.
   Customer. Any person to whom City water is supplied.
   Day. Except as otherwise stated, day shall refer to calendar day.
   DDC. New York City Department of Design and Construction.
   Department or DEP. The New York City Department of Environmental Protection.
   Distribution piping. All piping downstream of the water meter setting.
   Degree of hazard. The assessment or evaluation of a facility's domestic
water system's cross-connections as they relate to the health hazard of the
consumers of water. A facility may be rated Hazardous, Aesthetically
Objectionable or Non-Hazardous.
   Department. The New York City Department of Environmental Protection.
   Disinfection. Chlorination in accordance with methods approved by the
Department.
   Domestic service with sprinkler heads. A domestic service sized for domestic
demands which has been approved by the Department of Buildings to supply a
limited number of fire sprinkler heads.
   Domestic use. Water consumed for purposes other than extinguishing fire.
   DOT. New York City Department of Transportation.
   Double check detector assembly. A device consisting of two (2) single
independently acting check valves, suitable connections for testing the water
tightness of each valve, and a by-pass meter that shows whether flow has
occurred from the water service connection into the premises, and a small
double check valve housed together as one assembly.
   Double check valve assembly. A backflow prevention consisting of two
internally loaded independently operating check valves, located between two
tightly closing resilient-seated shutoff valves with four properly placed
resilient-seated test cocks. This assembly shall only be used to protect
against a non-health hazard (i.e., a pollutant).
   Drip line. The outer circumference of a tree's branches and the farthest
point where water drips from the tree branches onto the ground.
   Electronic meter (electromagnetic meter). A meter that operates using
Faraday's Principle.
   Encoder-Register. A device from which electronic meter reading data can be
obtained from the meter semiautomatically and at a remote location.
   Fee. A charge determined by the New York City Water Board.
   Fire department. The New York City Fire Department.
   Fire service meter. A water meter certified by an AWWA standard for such
meters and approved by the Department for use on a service, subject to fire
service flows.
   Fire pump. A pump installed on a service connection to insure adequate flow
for purposes of fire protection system.
   Fire service. A service connection that supplies water exclusively to a fire
protection system (sprinkler, standpipe, combination of sprinkler and standpipe
or hydrant).
   Fixture units. A measure of the probable hydraulic demand on the water
supply by various types of plumbing fixtures.
   Flood level rim. The edge of the receptacle from which water overflows.
   Flushometer valve. A device which discharges a predetermined quantity of
water to fixtures (urinals / tankless toilets) for flushing purposes and is
actuated by direct water pressure.
   Gooseneck. An extra three (3) to five (5) feet of water service connection
installed to the right of the corporation stop (tap) when facing the
corporation stop (tap). (See Appendix Figure #2).
   G.P.M. (gpm). The rate of flow of water in a service connection, or through
a meter or a pump, measured in gallons per minute.
   Hazardous facility. A facility in which substances may be present that may
endanger the health of other customers if introduced into the public water
system. Examples include: laboratories, sewage treatment plants, chemical
plants, hospitals, and mortuaries.
   House tank (roof tank). An elevated water storage tank used to feed domestic
and/or fire systems, which is usually located on the roof.
   Hydrant. A standard New York City fire hydrant.
   I.D. The inside diameter of a pipe.
   Inspection. An investigation and review, by the City, of work performed by
others under a permit by the Department, and which is evidenced by a
certificate of inspection.
   Internal fire protection system. A fire pump system, a sprinkler system, a
standpipe system, combination sprinkler and standpipe system, or any fire
suppression system approved by the Department of Buildings.
   Internal water main. A water main constructed by a private entity in private
property and not in a mapped street, record street or a street for which an
opinion of dedication has been issued. Internal water mains are under the
jurisdiction of the Department from the City or private water main up to and
including the meter.
   Irrigation system. Connection used to supply water to vegetation.
   Jacketed pipe insulation. Pipe insulation with a covering design to retard
vapor infiltration into the insulation and for protection against physical
abrasion and damage.
   Licensed master plumber. A plumber licensed by the City agency having
jurisdiction over such licenses to perform plumbing work within New York City.
   Mapped street. A street that appears on the official map of New York City.
   Meter. An instrument for measuring amounts of water consumed.
   Meter register. The system component that converts the movement of the
meter's impeller, turbine, or disc into an electronic signal or display. This
component consists of a meter register and a signal (data) encoder assembly,
and is assembled as either a single unit, or as separate units to be mounted on
the meter.
   Meter set date. The date the meter is installed.
   Meter setter / resetter. A shop or factory-fabricated set of piping, valves
and an electrical continuity bar installed as a unit designed to hold a water
meter of two (2) inches or less in diameter.
   MTU. Meter Transmitter Unit. An electronics box wired to the water meter.
The MTU is part of the AMR system programmed to read the meter and transmit
radio frequency readings to a remote receiving unit.
   New York City Water Board. A corporate municipal instrumentality of the
State of New York established by Chapter 515 of the Laws of 1984 which is
authorized to establish and collect fees, rates and other service charges for
use of, or for services furnished by, the New York City water and sewer
systems.
   Non-turf plants. Plants other than a lawn.
   Nozzle. A spring loaded self-closing device used for controlling the flow of
water from a hose.
   Offset swing joint. An installation consisting of three (3) lengths of pipe
and four (4) elbows which are installed in lieu of a gooseneck. (See Appendix
Figure #2.)
   OSHA. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration of the United States
Department of Labor.
   OS&Y valve. The outside stem and yoke valve used on fire lines.
   Person. An individual, partnership, company, corporation, association,
organization, governmental agency, administration, department, any other group
of individuals, or an officer or an employee thereof.
   Pit meter. A water meter installed in an outside pit or vault.
   Private water main. A water main constructed by a private person in the bed
of a final mapped street or record street.
   Professional engineer. An engineer licensed by the New York State Education
Department to practice professional engineering in New York State.
   psi. The static pressure of water within a closed piping system, or the loss
of water pressure due to flow through a piping system, flow control devices or
flow measuring devices, measured in pounds per square inch.
   Record street. A street that appears on the Tax Map of the City but may not
be a mapped street.
   Reduced Pressure Zone (RPZ) Device. A backflow prevention device assembly
consisting of a mechanical, independently acting, hydraulically dependent
relief valve, located between two independently operating, internally loaded
check valves that are located between two tightly closing resilient-seated
shutoff valves with four properly placed resilient-seated test cocks. This
assembly shall be tested at least annually and is suitable for direct high
hazard cross-connections.
   Reduced pressure principle detector assembly (RPDA). A specially designed
assembly composed of a line-size approved reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention assembly with a bypass containing a specific water meter and an
approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly specifically
designed for such application. The meter shall register accurately for very low
flow rates of flows up to 2 gallons per minute and shall show registration for
all rates of flow. This assembly shall be used to protect against a health
hazard (i.e. containment) on fire protection services only.
   Registered architect. A person licensed by the New York State Education
Department to practice architecture in New York State.
   Relay. Replacement of an entire water service connection without replacement
of the corresponding corporation stop (tap) or wet connection.
   Remote read resolution. Refers to the smallest increment of water volume
provided in the meter reading transmitted to a remote location. For example, a
water meter may generate a reading in cubic feet, units of tens of cubic feet,
or units of hundreds of cubic feet.
   Remote receptacle. A system component at a location away from the meter that
receives the probe of a portable visual-display unit, or a portable meter
reading unit.
   Rodding. The installation of steel rods in order to secure and prevent
movement of joints, valves, caps, plugs, fittings and accessories.
   Sealed Building. A building with windows and doors which are locked and
covered or blocked by concrete block, bricks, sheet metal or other materials
intended to prevent access. Windows covered with wooden boards shall not
constitute a sealed building.
   Sidewalk valve. A valve on a domestic service pipe located in the sidewalk
area, at a distance of two (2) feet (street side) from the property line.
   Stuffing box. That part of a valve which contains packing or similar
material which prevents leakage when the valve is operated.
   Suction tank. A tank used to protect the City distribution system from a
large, sudden water demand.
   Swing joint connection. An acceptable method of connecting to either well
water or City water.
   Tap. A corporation stop approved by the Department which controls the flow
of water.
   Tax lot. A portion or parcel of land classified as such by the Department of
Finance.
   Tee connection. A three-way pipe fitting installed in a private water main
or internal water main in lieu of a tap or wet connection.
   Test tee. A downward pointing plain tip faucet or hose connection located
after the water meter but before the meter outlet valve that is used for
connecting an outlet hose for meter accuracy testing.
   Title vested street. A mapped street or record street whose ownership has
been accepted by the City of New York, or a street which has a Corporation
Counsel Opinion of Dedication.
   UL/FM. Underwriter's Laboratories/Fireman's Mutual.
   Vacant building. A building which is not inhabited, or is occupied
illegally.
   Valve. A non-rising stem gate valve or full port ball valve.
   Valve box. A standard New York City valve enclosure including the skirt,
head and cover.
   Waiver. The act of intentionally relinquishing a right or privilege.
   Water conserving device. With reference to air conditioning or refrigeration
systems, an evaporative condenser, water cooling tower, spray pond or
economizer.
   Water meter accuracy testing ("meter testing"). Refers to testing the
accuracy of a water meter in the field, on an indoor test bench, using methods
designed by the Department and in conformance with AWWA's Manual M6: "Water
Meters – Selection, Installation, Testing and Maintenance."
   Water meter setting. The water meter, inlet and outlet isolation valves,
test tee, and associated approved piping and fittings.
   Water outlet. An orifice through which water is supplied to a fixture, into
the atmosphere, to a boiler or heating system, or to any device which requires
water to operate.
   Water service connection. A water supply pipe which connects the customer or
a development to a City water main, private water main or internal water main.
Service connections connecting a single customer's premises to a City water
main or a private water main or internal water main are under the jurisdiction
of the Department from the City water main or private water main or internal
water main up to and including the meter outlet valve in metered properties, or
the first valve within the property in unmetered properties.
   Wet connection. The hardware required to install a connection larger than
two (2) inches without interruption of water service. A wet connection shall
consist of a sleeve and a corresponding valve approved by the Department.
(Amended City Record 7/26/2021, eff. 8/25/2021)
**** Appendix ****
TABLES FOR 15 RCNY
CHAPTER 20 
Table 1
Fixture Units – Table of Equivalents
Fixture Dwellings Commercial/Industrial Buildings 
Fixture                            Dwellings Commercial/Industrial Buildings 
Kitchen & Laundry
Kitchen Sink                       2          4
Laundry Tray                       3          3
(1 to 3 Sections)
Dishwasher                         1          4
(1/2 Inch Outlet)
Washing Machine                    2          See Commercial Washing
(Automatic)                                   Machine Fixture Units Below
Bathroom, Washroom & Shower 
Bathroom Group: (Toilet, Sink &
Tub/Shower)
(a) Tank                           6          11
(b) Flush Valve                    8          15
Toilet
(a) Tank                           3          5
(b) Flush Valve                    6          10
Wash Basin                         1          2
* Bath Tub                         2          4
* Shower                           2          4
Urinal                             3          6
Commercial Washing Machine & Other
Plumbing Outlets 
Cold Water Only - 5/8 Inch &       1          2
Smaller
Hot & Cold Water - 5/8 Inch &      2          4
Smaller
Cold Water only - 3/4 Inch         2          4
Hot & Cold Water - 3/4 Inch        4          8
Cold Water Only - 1 Inch           3          6
Hot & Cold Water - 1 Inch          6          12
 
* A bath tub and the shower over it are considered to be a single fixture.
Table 2
Conversion of Fixture Units to Rate of Flow
Fixture Units                           Rate of Flow
Premises with more than 20% flushometers Premises with less than 20% (gpm)
                                         flushometers 
Fixture Units                           Rate of Flow
Premises with more than 20% flushometers Premises with less than 20% (gpm)
                                         flushometers 
–                                      10                          8
–                                      15                          12
–                                      20                          15
5                                        30                          20
10                                       40                          25
15                                       60                          33
25                                       80                          39
35                                       108                         43
50                                       125                         49
65                                       150                         55
75                                       175                         60
90                                       200                         64
100                                      210                         66
110                                      225                         70
125                                      250                         74
150                                      270                         78
175                                      300                         83
200                                      340                         92
250                                      375                         100
300                                      410                         105
325                                      450                         115
358                                      475                         120
400                                      500                         130
450                                      550                         135
500                                      600                         140
550                                      630                         150
600                                      700                         155
650                                      720                         165
700                                      750                         170
750                                      800                         180
800                                      850                         185
850                                      875                         190
900                                      925                         195
950                                      950                         200
1,000                                    1,000                       205
1,500                                    1,500                       270
2,000                                    2,000                       330
2,500                                    2,500                       380
3,000                                    3,000                       440
3,500                                    3,500                       490
 
Table 3
Minimum Size of Service Pipes, Corporation Stops (Taps) and Wet Connections
Based on the Rate of Flow in Gallons
Length of
Service Pipe  10 20 25 30 40 50 55 60 80 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550 600
(ft.)
Service Tap/
Pipe    W.C.  Allowable Flow (gpm)
Size    Size
(in.)   (in.)
Length of
Service Pipe  10    20    25    30    40    50    55    60    80    100   150   200   250   300   350   400   450   500   550   600
(ft.)
Service Tap/
Pipe    W.C.  Allowable Flow (gpm)
Size    Size
(in.)   (in.)
1       3/4   21    15    13    12    10    9     9     8     7     6     4     4     3     3     3     2     2     2     2     2
1       1     21    15    13    12    10    9     9     8     7     6     4     4     3     3     3     2     2     2     2     2
1 1/4   1     37    25    23    21    17    16    15    14    13    12    10    8     7     6     6     5     5     5     4     4
1 1/2   1     55    41    37    34    28    25    24    23    20    18    14    12    11    10    9     8     8     7     7     7
1 1/2   1 1/2 55    41    37    34    28    25    24    23    20    18    14    12    11    10    9     8     8     7     7     7
2       1 1/2 100   84    75    70    59    52    50    48    41    37    28    24    21    19    18    16    15    15    14    13
2       2     100   84    75    70    59    52    50    48    41    37    28    24    21    19    18    16    15    15    14    13
2 1/2   2     150   150   135   125   105   93    90    86    73    65    46    39    35    31    29    27    25    23    22    21
3       3     220   220   210   200   165   145   140   135   120   105   81    70    61    56    51    48    45    42    40    38
4       3     300   300   300   290   250   220   210   200   170   155   130   119   110   104   98    94    90    86    82    78
4       4     390   390   390   390   350   320   305   290   250   220   165   142   126   114   105   98    92    86    82    78
6       4     600   600   600   600   600   550   525   500   430   380   285   245   215   195   185   177   170   165   162   158
6       6     880   880   880   880   880   880   840   810   700   620   490   420   370   335   310   290   270   254   245   235
8       6     1,550 1,550 1,550 1,550 1,550 1,550 1,550 1,550 1,400 1,300 1,010 865   765   670   640   595   555   525   500   475
10      8     2,450 2,450 2,450 2,450 2,450 2,450 2,450 2,450 2,450 2,300 1,840 1,575 1,395 1,260 1,160 1,080 1,015 955   905   865
12      10    3,500 3,500 3,500 3,500 3,500 3,500 3,500 3,500 3,500 3,500 2,950 2,530 2,245 2,030 1,870 1,740 1,635 1,535 1,460 1,400
 
Flows are based on a maximum pressure loss of two (2) psi in the service pipe
or a maximum velocity of ten (10) ft per second, whichever results in a lesser
rate of flow
Assumptions:
   (a)   Hazen-Williams Coefficient C = 100
   (b)   Loss through tap is negligible
   (c)   Loss through curb valve and house control is negligible
   (d)   Loss through meter is negligible
   (e)   Loss through backflow preventer is negligible
(Amended City Record 7/26/2021, eff. 8/25/2021)
Table 4
Excavations for Corporation Stops (Taps) and Wet Connections
Wet Connections                               Corporation Stops
Size        Dimension of Openings             Size  Dimension of Openings
Wet   Water A      B      C     D      E      Water F     G     H      I
Conn. Main                                    Main
3" &  6"    8'-2"  4'-0"  1'-0" 7'-2"  2'-0"  4"    4'-4" 3'-0" 2'-2"  1'-6"
4"
3" &  8"    8'-4"  4'-0"  1'-1" 7'-3"  2'-0"  6"    4'-6" 3'-0" 2'-3"  1'-6"
4"
3" &  12"   8'-8"  4'-6"  1'-3" 7'-5"  2'-3"  8"    4'-8" 3'-0" 2'-4"  1'-6"
4"
3" &  16"   9'-1"  4'-10" 1'-5" 7'-8"  2'-5"  12"   5'-0" 3'-0" 2'-6"  1'-6"
4"
3" &  20"   9'-5"  5'-2"  1'-7" 7'-10" 2'-7"  16"   5'-4" 3'-0" 2'-8"  1'-6"
4"
6"    8"    8'-7"  5'-0"  1'-1" 7'-6"  2'-6"  20"   5'-8" 3'-0" 2'-10" 1'-6"
6"    12"   9'-0"  5'-0"  1'-3" 7'-9"  2'-6"  24"   6'-0" 3'-0" 3'-0"  1'-6"
6"    16"   9'-4"  5'-0"  1'-5" 7'-11" 2'-6"  Where to corporation stops are
6"    20"   9'-8"  5'-2"  1'-7" 8'-1"  2'-7"  placed in the same opening, make
8"    12"   9'-2"  5'-0"  1'-3" 7'-11" 2'-6"  G 4'-0" for corporation stops up
8"    16"   9'-6"  5'-2"  1'-5" 8'-1"  2'-7"  to and including 1" in size, and
8"    20"   9'-10" 5'-6"  1'-7" 8'-3"  2'-9"  5'-0" for corporation stops 1 1/
12"   16"   9'-10" 5'-4"  1'-5" 8'-5"  2'-8"  2" and 2" in size.
12"   20"   10'-2" 5'-8"  1'-7" 8'-7"  2'-8"   
                                              Note: Refer to Figure #1 for
16"   20"   10'-8" 5'-8"  1'-7" 8'-11" 2'-10" Dimensions of Openings.
 
Table 5
Specification 32-P-3:93, Division of Municipal Supply Services
Red Brass Pipe
Nominal Size Outside Diameter Wall Thickness Nominal Weight
(Inches)     (Inches)         (Inches)       (Pounds Per Foot)
Nominal Size Outside Diameter Wall Thickness Nominal Weight
(Inches)     (Inches)         (Inches)       (Pounds Per Foot)
3/4          1.050            0.114          1.27
1            1.315            0.126          1.78
1 1/4        1.660            0.146          2.63
1 1/2        1.900            0.150          3.13
2            2.375            0.156          4.12
2 1/2        2.875            0.187          5.99
3            3.500            0.219          8.56
4            4.500            0.250          12.7
 
Table 6
Specification 32-T-1:94, Division of Municipal Supply Services
Seamless Copper Tubing
 
Nominal Size Outside Diameter Wall Thickness Nominal Weight
(Inches)     (Inches)         (Inches)       (Pounds Per Foot)
3/4          0.875            .065           0.641
1            1.125            .065           0.839
1 1/4        1.375            .065           1.04
1 1/2        1.625            .072           1.36
2            2.125            .083           2.06
 
Table 7
Specification ANSI/AWWA/C151/a21.51-91
Ductile Iron Pipe
Nominal Size Outside Diameter Wall Thickness       Nominal Weight
(Inches)     (Inches)         (Inches)       Class (Pounds Per Foot)
Nominal Size Outside Diameter Wall Thickness       Nominal Weight
(Inches)     (Inches)         (Inches)       Class (Pounds Per Foot)
3            3.96             0.28           52    9.9
4            4.80             0.29           52    12.6
6            6.90             0.43           56    26.7
8            9.05             0.45           56    37.2
10           11.10            0.47           56    48.0
12           13.20            0.49           56    59.9
14           15.30            0.51           56    72.5
16           17.40            0.52           56    84.4
20           21.30            0.54           56    109.3
 
Table 8
Meter Size Selection Table
Meter Size Meter Type Max. Peak Flow Rate (gpm)
Meter Size Meter Type       Max. Peak Flow Rate (gpm)
3/4"       Displacement     25
1"         Displacement     50
1 1/2"     Displacement     100
2"         Displacement     150
1 1/2"     Vertical Turbine 100
2"         Turbine          180
3"         Turbine          1,000
4"         Turbine          1,250
6"         Turbine          2,500
8"         Turbine          3,500
10"        Turbine          5,500
12"        Turbine          7,000
1"         Single-jet       20
1 1/2"     Single-jet       90
2"         Single-jet       130
3"         Single-jet       200
4"         Single-jet       350
6"         Single-jet       650
2"         Compound         120
3"         Compound         350
4"         Compound         600
6"         Compound         1,600
8"         Compound         2,500
10"        Compound         3,500
 
Figure 1. Excavation for Taps and Wet Connections.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-188.jpg]
Editor's note: the image displayed above is the highest quality available to
the publisher.
Figure 2. Methods for Connecting Service Pipe.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-190.jpg]
Figure 3. House Service Pipe Connection.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-192.jpg]
Figure 4. Service Pipe in Subway Air Vent.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-194.jpg]
Figure 5. Swing Joint Connection Between City Water and Well Water Supply.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-196.jpg]
Figure 6. Arrangement for Use of a Backflow Preventer when Using a Fire
Hydrant.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-198.jpg]
Figure 7. Typical Meter Setting for Displacement Meters. (N.T.S.)  
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-17200.jpg]
(Amended City Record 7/26/2021, eff. 8/25/2021)
Figure 8. 1" – 2" Domestic Service with Fire Protection Sprinklers for Single-
Jet or Electronic Meter  
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-17202.jpg]
(Amended City Record 7/26/2021, eff. 8/25/2021)
Figure 9. Typical for Turbine Single-Jet, or Electronic Meters. (N.T.S.)  
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-17204.jpg]
(Amended City Record 7/26/2021, eff. 8/25/2021)
Figure 10. Typical Meter Setting with By-Pass. Typical for Turbine, Single-Jet
or Electronic Meters. (N.T.S.)  
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-17206.jpg]
(Amended City Record 7/26/2021, eff. 8/25/2021)
Figure 11. Water Meter Enclosure for 3/4" - 2" Meters. (N.T.S.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-216.jpg]
Editor's note: the image displayed above is the highest quality available to
the publisher.
Figure 12. Installation of 3/4" - 2" Water Meter in Enclosure with Service Pipe
4 Ft. or Less Below Grade. (N.T.S.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-218.jpg]
Editor's note: the image displayed above is the highest quality available to
the publisher.
Figure 13. Installation of 3/4" & 2" Water Meter in Enclosure with Service Pipe
More than 4 Ft. Below Grade. (N.T.S.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-220.jpg]
Editor's note: the image displayed above is the highest quality available to
the publisher.
Figure 14. Detail: Brick Setting for Bottom Enclosure. (N.T.S.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-222.jpg]
Editor's note: the image displayed above is the highest quality available to
the publisher.
Figure 15. Section Concrete Foundation for Bottom of Enclosure in Sidewalk and
Driveway Areas. (N.T.S.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-224.jpg]
Editor's note: the image displayed above is the highest quality available to
the publisher.
Figure 16. Pit Under Inclined Area. (N.T.S.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-226.jpg]
Editor's note: the image displayed above is the highest quality available to
the publisher.
Figure 16A. Pit Under Inclined Area. (N.T.S.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-228.jpg]
Editor's note: the image displayed above is the highest quality available to
the publisher.
Figure 16B. Pit Setter Stabilizer Bar. (N.T.S.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-230.jpg]
Editor's note: the image displayed above is the highest quality available to
the publisher.
Figure 16C. Pit Setter Stabilizer Bar. (N.T.S.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-232.jpg]
Editor's note: the image displayed above is the highest quality available to
the publisher.
Figure 17. Typical Meter Vault.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-234.jpg]
Editor's note: the image displayed above is the highest quality available to
the publisher.
Figure 18. 2" or Larger Combined Service DCV Option. (N.T.S.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-236.jpg]
Editor's note: the image displayed above is the highest quality available to
the publisher.
Figure 19. Typical Condominium Metering. Refer to 15 RCNY §
20-05(1). (N.T.S.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-238.jpg]
Editor's note: the image displayed above is the highest quality available to
the publisher.
Figure 20. Meter in Existing Indoor Pit. (N.T.S.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-240.jpg]
Editor's note: the image displayed above is the highest quality available to
the publisher.
Figure 21. Wall Mounting Meter Setting. (N.T.S.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-242.jpg]
Editor's note: the image displayed above is the highest quality available to
the publisher.
Chapter 21: Water Shortage Emergency Rules
(Amended City Record 4/13/2022, eff. 5/13/2022)
**** Subchapter A: General Provisions ****
§ 21-01 Introduction.
   (a)   The provisions of this subchapter apply to all stages of a Water
Shortage Emergency in the City, unless otherwise specifically provided herein.
   (b)   The Commissioner may declare any one of three stages of a Water
Shortage Emergency, based on the anticipated severity of the shortage and the
need to reduce consumption, as described in these rules.
(Amended City Record 4/13/2022, eff. 5/13/2022)
§ 21-02 Definitions.
Acceptable irrigation controller. "Acceptable irrigation controller" means a
microprocessor-based controller for the valve(s) of an irrigation system that
can be programmed for the various time and date intervals set forth in 15 RCNY
§§
21-09,
21-10 and
21-11, and that incorporates a rain sensor, soil moisture sensor or evapo-
transpiration control.
Active source. "Active source" means any sprinkling device or system and any
device that delivers water under pressure.
City. "City" means the City of New York.
City water. "City water" means water supplied by or taken from the City water
supply system.
City water supply system. "City water supply system" means any public water
supply system owned or operated by the City.
Commissioner. "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of the Department or his or
her designee or successor in function, who may perform all functions of the
Commissioner authorized under the Chapter.
Department. "Department" means the New York City Department of Environmental
Protection or its successor in function.
Golf course fairway and rough. "Golf course fairway and rough" means all the
turf on a golf course other than the golf course tee box and green.
Golf course tee box and green. "Golf course tee box and green" means the area
from which golf balls are teed-up or placed for the first stroke on a hole, and
the area immediately surrounding the golf hole or the green where putts are
played. The golf course tee and green are not included in the golf course
fairway and rough for the purposes of these rules.
Health care facilities. "Health care facilities" means hospitals, hospices,
medical clinics, physician's offices, nursing homes or any other facility
caring for persons who are ill, aged or infirm, where, in the opinion of the
Commissioner, relief from the prohibition contained in 15 RCNY §
21-11(a)(9) is necessary to protect the health and well-being of such persons.
Non-turf plants. "Non-turf plants" means all plants, including trees, but
excluding turf.
Nursery. "Nursery" means the private or public grounds and premises on or in
which nursery stock is propagated, grown, or cultivated for the commercial
purpose of distributing or selling the same.
OATH. "OATH" means the Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings in its
capacity pursuant to § 1049-a of the Charter.
Person. "Person" means an individual, firm, partnership, company, corporation,
association, governmental agency, administration, or department, or other legal
entity, or an officer or employee thereof.
Turf. "Turf" means grasses used as ground cover or lawn.
Waste of City water. "Waste of City water" means (i) any leak or waste from any
water pipe, valve, faucet, conduit, equipment, facility, or device connected to
the City water supply system or which uses city water, or (ii) any failure to
reduce water consumption as required by this chapter.
Water Board. "Water Board" means the New York City Water Board.
Water-conserving irrigation system. "Water-conserving irrigation system" means
an irrigation system that delivers water at low pressure and low flow rate
directly to the roots of non-turf plants, such as "drip irrigation systems,"
"soaker hoses," or "Treegators."
Water Shortage Emergency. "Water Shortage Emergency" means a declaration by the
Commissioner that there is a reasonable probability of a shortage of City
water, or an expected shortage of City water, that would threaten public health
and safety absent the implementation of measures to reduce water consumption.
Well water. "Well water" means an individual source of potable water drawn from
a subsurface well.
(Amended City Record 4/13/2022, eff. 5/13/2022)
§ 21-03 Sanctions.
   (a)   Violations of the rules in this chapter or of the terms and conditions
of any variances granted pursuant to 15 RCNY §
21-04 are punishable by fines and penalties established by §§ 24-337 and 24-346
of the Administrative Code, and may be returnable before OATH.
   (b)   Where a leak and waste notice has been served in accordance with § 24-
337 of the Administrative Code and the condition to which such notice relates
has not been corrected within the time set for compliance, the Commissioner
may, after notice and opportunity for a hearing before the Commissioner in
accordance with the hearing procedures set forth in 15 RCNY §
32-02, impose a fine of up to fifty dollars per day, in addition to any
penalties that may be imposed by OATH.
   (c)   Where a leak and waste notice has been served in accordance with § 24-
337 of the Administrative Code and the condition to which such notice relates
has not been corrected within the time set for compliance, the Commissioner
may, after notice and opportunity for a hearing before the Commissioner in
accordance with the hearing procedures set forth in 15 RCNY §
32-02, install a flow restrictor or terminate water service to the premises.
   (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the Commissioner's
power to shut off water supply without notice, or with such notice as the
Commissioner may deem practicable, where a leak exists; or where emergency
action is otherwise deemed essential. If the Commissioner shuts off water in
accordance with this subdivision, the Commissioner shall provide notice and an
opportunity to be heard after the shut off is performed. Such notice and
hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in 15
RCNY §
32-02.
(Amended City Record 4/13/2022, eff. 5/13/2022)
§ 21-04 Variances.
   (a)   The Commissioner may in his or her discretion, upon written
application, grant a variance from the requirements of the rules in this
chapter.
   (b)   Any person applying for a variance must file a notarized application
for a variance to the Commissioner. The person must demonstrate, at a minimum,
to the satisfaction of the Commissioner, that:
      (1)   compliance with such rules would result in an undue hardship;
      (2)   there are no reasonable alternatives;
      (3)   the person has taken and will continue to take all reasonable
measures to conserve water, and will provide a complete description of such
measures that have been implemented to achieve reductions and the anticipated
water savings; and
      (4)   such variance is not inconsistent with the purpose of such rules.
   (c)   The Commissioner may grant a variance relieving a person from
compliance with any of the requirements of the rules in this chapter. In
connection with any variance that may be granted, the Commissioner may impose
terms and conditions as deemed appropriate. Requests for variances must be
processed in a timely fashion, and determinations must not be unreasonably
withheld or delayed. The filing or pendency of a variance application does not
relieve any person from complying with any of the requirements of this chapter,
including any rules cited in the variance application, and does not grant
immunity to any person from any civil or criminal prosecution or sanction under
the rules.
   (d)   Variance application forms may be obtained at 59-17 Junction
Boulevard, Flushing, NY 11373, Attention: Office of the General Counsel, or by
calling 311.
   (e)   Appeals. 
      (1)   A person may appeal the denial of a variance, or the imposition of
an arbitrary and substantial condition in the grant of a variance, by the
Commissioner by filing a notarized petition in writing with the Commissioner
and with OATH within thirty (30) days of the date the determination was mailed.
The petition must state the name, address and email address of the petitioner
and must include a short and plain statement of the matters to be adjudicated,
identifying the specific provision of these rules from which the variance is
sought, the proposed location of the activity, and the date of the variance
determination by the Commissioner. A copy of the determination being appealed
must be attached to the petition. In addition, a completed OATH intake sheet
must be included with the petition. The Department will provide blank intake
sheets upon request.
      (2)   A person may appeal only the issues of whether the Commissioner
abused his or her discretion in denying a request for a variance or in imposing
an arbitrary and substantial condition in a grant of a variance.
      (3)   Upon review of any appeal filed pursuant to this section, the
Commissioner may, in his or her discretion, grant a variance relieving a person
from compliance with any of the rules in this chapter. In connection with any
variance that may be granted, the Commissioner may impose such terms and
conditions as deemed appropriate. Appeals must be processed in a timely
fashion, and determinations must not be unreasonably withheld or delayed.
      (4)   The filing of an appeal does not relieve a person from complying
with any of the requirements of the rules in this chapter, including any rules
cited in the variance application, and does not grant immunity to any person
from any civil or criminal prosecution or sanction under the rules.
(Amended City Record 4/13/2022, eff. 5/13/2022)
§ 21-05 Water Shortage Rate Plan.
At any time after the actual declaration of a Water Shortage Emergency, the
Commissioner may recommend and request that the Water Board consider the
adoption of a Water Shortage Emergency contingency rate plan. Such rate plan
shall have as its goal the creation of enhanced incentives for water
conservation by increasing the cost of city water by such amounts, and for such
duration, as the Commissioner may recommend and which the Water Board in its
sole discretion shall consider appropriate.
(Amended City Record 4/13/2022, eff. 5/13/2022)
§ 21-06 "Save Water" Signage.
   (a)   Introduction. Immediately upon the declaration of any stage of a Water
Shortage Emergency by the Commissioner, "Save Water" signs, as described below,
must be prominently posted in every building or premises connected to the City
water supply system or in which City water is used, in the locations specified
below. Every person owning, using, leasing, managing, operating or controlling
any such building or premises must ensure that such signs are properly posted.
The provisions set forth in this section do not apply to one-, two- or three-
family dwellings.
   (b)   Sign size and content. Such signs required pursuant to this section
must be at least six inches in height by nine inches in width. The required
text on the signs must be printed in letters at least three-quarters inch (3/
4") in height. The signs may include any artwork or additional language related
to water conservation that is desired by the person posting the sign, and must
include the following required text:
SAVE WATER
Report Leaks and Water Waste
Call 311
   (c)   Sign locations. Such signs must be prominently posted in the following
locations:
      (1)   Multiple dwellings (four units or more). At each entrance, near
mailboxes, in each elevator and on each floor with more than one dwelling.
      (2)   Hotels. At each entrance, near each check-in desk and cashier, near
each entrance to each restaurant or other public eating place, in each
elevator, in the public hallway on every floor and in each bathroom (except
signs in private bathrooms in individual hotel rooms may be reduced to three
inches in height by five inches in width).
      (3)   Hospitals. At each entrance, in each elevator, on every floor by an
elevator, in each bathroom and shower room, in each laboratory, and in each
restaurant or cafeteria.
      (4)   Office buildings. At each entrance, in each elevator, on every
floor by an elevator, in each bathroom and in each dining room or cafeteria or
other places where food is sold.
      (5)   Restaurants. In each bathroom and at each table (except signs at
tables may be reduced to three inches in height by five inches in width).
      (6)   All other nonresidential buildings, including all commercial and
industrial buildings, schools, universities and community centers. At each
entrance, in each elevator, on every floor by an elevator, in each bathroom and
shower room, above each sink or group of sinks, in each eating area and in the
work area of every process or operation using any water.
(Amended City Record 4/13/2022, eff. 5/13/2022)
§ 21-07 "Water-Conserving Irrigation System" Signage.
Immediately upon the declaration of any stage of a Water Shortage Emergency by
the Commissioner, water-conserving irrigation system signs, as described below,
must be prominently posted in every building or premises connected to the City
water supply system or in which City water is used in water-conserving
irrigation systems for non-turf plants. Every person owning, using, leasing,
managing, operating or controlling any such building or premises must ensure
that such signs are properly posted. A sign at least six inches in height by
nine inches in width must be prominently posted at the watering location
indicating that a water-conserving irrigation system is in use. The sign shall
include the following wording and may include any artwork or additional
language related to water conservation that is desired by the person posting
the sign and must include the following required text, which must be in letters
at least three-quarters inch (3/4") in height:
SAVE WATER
WATER-CONSERVING IRRIGATION SYSTEM IN USE
REPORT LEAKS AND WATER WASTE
CALL 311
The sign must include the time periods in which such water-conserving
irrigation systems are permitted to be in use pursuant to 15 RCNY §§
21-09,
21-10 and
21-11.
(Amended City Record 4/13/2022, eff. 5/13/2022)
§ 21-08 Well Water Use Prohibition Exception Conditions.
No person shall cause, permit or allow the use of well water for any purpose
for which the use of City water is prohibited by the rules in this chapter,
unless:
   (a)   the well is covered by a valid permit from the New York City
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene;
   (b)   there are no cross-connections, and either all swing-joint connections
have been replaced by permanent rigid piping or the connection to the City
water supply system has been sealed; and
   (c)   immediately upon the declaration of any stage of a Water Shortage
Emergency, signs are prominently displayed, at least eight and a half inches in
height by eleven inches in width and with lettering at least one inch in
height, with the following wording including the permit number:
WATER SHORTAGE EMERGENCY
PRIVATE WELL WATER IN USE
DOHMH PERMIT NO. _____
The permission to use well water granted by this section may be revoked by the
Commissioner for any violation of the foregoing conditions, or of these rules,
or of any applicable laws, rules or regulations.
(Amended City Record 4/13/2022, eff. 5/13/2022)
**** Subchapter B: Stage I ****
§ 21-09 Prohibitions and Reductions.
   (a)   Prohibitions. Upon declaration by the Commissioner of a Stage I Water
Shortage Emergency, no person shall cause, permit or allow:
      (1)   The continuing of any waste of City water on or in any premises
owned, used, leased, managed, operated or controlled by such person;
      (2)   The use of City water to wash any vehicle (including any aircraft,
watercraft or land vehicle whether on- or off-road), provided that this
provision shall not be construed to prohibit the reasonable use of City water
for washing such vehicles where mandated by law or for health or safety
purposes;
      (3)   The use of City water to spray, wash or wet any hard or paved
surfaces, including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, driveways, outdoor
areaways (including any recreational areas, whether at ground level or on a
structure), parking areas or outdoor steps; provided, however, that this
provision shall not be construed to prohibit the washing of such surfaces,
particularly the exterior surface of a building, where such washing is required
as part of repairs mandated by the Administrative Code or to protect the health
and safety of the public, as determined by the Commissioner, provided such use
is consistent with any restrictions set forth in § 24-332 of the Administrative
Code of the City of New York and 15 RCNY §
20-08(a)(8);
      (4)   The use of City water for any ornamental or aesthetic purpose,
including, but not limited to, use in fountains, waterfalls, reflecting pools,
lakes and ponds, unless the pond or lake is a habitat for animals living in
such body of water prior to a Water Shortage Emergency, and provided further
that where City water is not used (e.g., private well water), a sign at least
six inches in height by nine inches in width must be prominently posted at the
location indicating that the water being used in such fountain, waterfall,
reflecting pool, lake or pond is not City water;
      (5)   The use of City water by means of a hose or other active source to
water any turf or any non-turf plants, except that, subject to any restrictions
set forth in 15 RCNY §
20-08(a)(6)(ii) and (iii):
         (i)   City water may be used to water any turf from 10:00 a.m. to 12:
00 p.m. and from 10:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m., on the following schedule, based on
the final digit or letter of the address number:
            (a)   On Mondays, if the address number ends in 0, 1 or a fraction;
            (b)   On Tuesdays, if the address number ends in 2 or 3;
            (c)   On Wednesdays, if the address number ends in 4 or 5;
            (d)   On Thursdays, if the address number ends in 6 or 7; or
            (e)   On Fridays, if the address number ends in 8, 9, or a letter;
         (ii)   newly seeded or newly sodded turf (excluding golf course
fairways and roughs) or newly planted non-turf plants may be irrigated with
City water, in addition to the scheduled times in 15 RCNY §
21-09(a)(5)(i), on the day of planting and for the two days following planting;
         (iii)   if hand-held hoses equipped with nozzle tips or in-line flow
regulators or water-conserving irrigation systems that effectively limit water
output to a maximum flow rate of five gallons per minute at eighty pounds per
square inch are utilized, City water may be used to water non-turf plants
(except in nurseries) from 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. and from 10:00 p.m. to 12:
00 a.m., on the following schedule, based on the final digit or letter of the
address number:
            (a)   On Mondays, if the address number ends in 0, 1 or a fraction;
            (b)   On Tuesdays, if the address number ends in 2 or 3;
            (c)   On Wednesdays, if the address number ends in 4 or 5;
            (d)   On Thursdays, if the address number ends in 6 or 7; or
            (e)   On Fridays, if the address number ends in 8, 9, or a letter;
and
         (iv)   if a hand-held container or a water-conserving irrigation
system with an acceptable irrigation controller is utilized, City water may be
used to water non-turf plants (except in nurseries) for one or both of the two
two-hour periods on the appropriate day as set forth in 15 RCNY §
21-09(a)(5)(iii), provided that, for water-conserving irrigation systems, these
time periods are indicated on the signage mandated by 15 RCNY §
21-07;
      (6)   The opening or use of any fire hydrant, or of the City water
therefrom, for any purpose other than fire protection, except in accordance
with the terms and conditions set forth in a permit obtained from the
Department pursuant to 15 RCNY §
20-08(b);
      (7)   The serving of water from the City water supply system to any
patron of a restaurant, club, hotel, cafe, cafeteria or other public place
where food is served or offered for sale, unless specifically requested by such
patron; or
      (8)   The use of City water to fill or maintain the water level in any
swimming pool, except that pools operated with recirculating equipment may be
filled with City water once during each calendar year and may thereafter use
the minimum amount of City water necessary to maintain the water level at a
level no greater than that necessary to ensure continued operation of such
recirculating equipment.
   (b)   Reductions. Upon declaration by the Commissioner of a Stage I Water
Shortage Emergency:
      (1)   Notwithstanding any provisions of 15 RCNY §
21-09(a), nurseries may continue to use City water to water non-turf plants but
must reduce their water use by at least 5% per month, as compared to the
average meter reading data for the same month in the year immediately preceding
the declaration of the Water Shortage Emergency;
      (2)   Notwithstanding any provisions of 15 RCNY §
21-09(a), golf course tee boxes and greens, playgrounds, and athletic play
fields may be irrigated using City water, provided that (i) all irrigation is
done using hand-held hoses equipped with nozzle tips or in-line flow
regulators, or water-conserving irrigation systems, and (ii) water use is
reduced by at least 15% per month, as compared to the average meter reading
data for the same month in the year immediately preceding the declaration of
the Water Shortage Emergency; and
      (3)   Persons operating bottling plants, paper recycling facilities, or
hotels in the City, any of which use an average of at least 100,000 gallons of
City water per day, as calculated on an annual basis, must reduce water use at
each such plant, facility, or hotel by at least 5% per month, as compared to
the average meter reading data for the same month in the year immediately
preceding the declaration of the Water Shortage Emergency; provided, however,
that such person may instead reduce total water use by at least 5% per month,
if such person demonstrates in writing to the Department that such reduction
equals or exceeds the sum of reducing water use at each such plant, facility,
or hotel by at least 5% per month.
(Amended City Record 4/13/2022, eff. 5/13/2022)
**** Subchapter C: Stage II ****
§ 21-10 Prohibitions and Reductions.
   (a)   Prohibitions. Upon declaration by the Commissioner of a Stage II Water
Shortage Emergency, no person shall cause, permit or allow:
      (1)   The continuing of any waste of City water on or in any premises
owned, used, leased, managed, operated or controlled by such person;
      (2)   The use of City water to wash any vehicle (including any aircraft,
watercraft or land vehicle whether on- or off-road), provided that this
provision shall not be construed to prohibit the reasonable use of City water
for washing such vehicles where mandated by law or for health or safety
purposes;
      (3)   The use of City water to spray, wash or wet any hard or paved
surfaces, including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, driveways, outdoor
areaways (including any recreational areas, whether at ground level or on a
structure), parking areas or outdoor steps; provided, however, that this
provision shall not be construed to prohibit the washing of such surfaces,
particularly the exterior surface of a building, where such washing is required
as part of repairs mandated by the Administrative Code or to protect the health
and safety of the public, as determined by the Commissioner, provided such use
is consistent with any restrictions set forth in § 24-332 of the Administrative
Code of the City of New York and 15 RCNY §
20-08(a)(8);
      (4)   The use of City water from any source for any ornamental or
aesthetic purpose, including, but not limited to, use in fountains, waterfalls,
reflecting pools, lakes and ponds, unless the pond or lake is a habitat for
animals living in such body of water prior to the Water Shortage Emergency, and
provided further that where City water is not used (e.g., private well water),
a sign at least six inches in height by nine inches in width must be
prominently posted at the location indicating that the water being used in such
fountain, waterfall, reflecting pool, lake or pond is not City water;
      (5)   The use of City water by means of a hose or other active source to
water any turf or any other non-turf plants, except that, subject to any
restrictions set forth in 15 RCNY §
20-08(a)(6)(ii) and (iii):
         (i)   newly seeded or newly sodded turf (excluding golf course
fairways and roughs) or newly planted non-turf plants may be irrigated with
City water on the day of planting and for the first day following planting;
         (ii)   if hand-held hoses equipped with nozzle tips or in-line flow
regulators or water-conserving irrigation systems that effectively limit water
output to a maximum flow rate of five gallons per minute at eighty pounds per
square inch are utilized, City water may be used to water non-turf plants
(except in nurseries) only in accordance with the schedule set forth in 15 RCNY
§
21-09(a)(5)(iii); and
         (iii)   if a hand-held container or a water-conserving irrigation
system with an acceptable irrigation controller is utilized, City water may be
used to water non-turf plants intended as food for human consumption for one or
both of the two two-hour periods on the appropriate day as set forth in 15 RCNY
§
21-09(a)(5)(iii), provided that, for water-conserving irrigation systems, these
time periods are indicated on the signage mandated by 15 RCNY §
21-07;
      (6)   The opening or use of any fire hydrant, or of the City water
therefrom, for any purpose other than fire protection, except in accordance
with the terms and conditions set forth in a permit obtained from the
Department pursuant to 15 RCNY §
20-08(b);
      (7)   The serving of water from the City water supply system to any
patron of a restaurant, club, hotel, cafe, cafeteria or other public place
where food is served or offered for sale, unless specifically requested by such
patron; or
      (8)   The use of City water to fill or maintain the water level in any
swimming pool, except that City water may be used to fill municipally-operated
swimming pools and other swimming pools open to the general public that are
operated with recirculating equipment and are filled once during each calendar
year, and thereafter may be used as necessary to maintain the water level in
such pools open to the general public at a level no greater than that necessary
to ensure continued operation of such recirculating equipment.
   (b)   Reductions. Upon declaration by the Commissioner of a Stage II Water
Shortage Emergency:
      (1)   Notwithstanding any provisions of 15 RCNY §
21-10(a), nurseries may continue to use City water to water non-turf plants but
must reduce their water use by at least 10% per month, as compared to the
average meter reading data for the same month in the year immediately preceding
the declaration of the Water Shortage Emergency;
      (2)   Notwithstanding any provisions of 15 RCNY §
21-10(a), golf course tee boxes and greens, playgrounds, and athletic play
fields may be irrigated using City water, provided that (i) all irrigation is
done using hand-held hoses equipped with nozzle tips or in-line flow
regulators, or water-conserving irrigation systems, and (ii) water use is
reduced by at least 30% per month, as compared to the average meter reading
data for the same month in the year immediately preceding the declaration of
the Water Shortage Emergency; and
      (3)   Persons operating bottling plants, paper recycling facilities, or
hotels in the City, any of which use an average of at least 100,000 gallons of
City water per day, as calculated on an annual basis, must reduce water use at
each such plant, facility, or hotel by at least 10% per month, as compared to
the average meter reading data for the same month in the year immediately
preceding the declaration of the Water Shortage Emergency; provided, however,
that such person may instead reduce total water use by at least 10% per month,
if such person demonstrates in writing to the Department that such reduction
equals or exceeds the sum of reducing water use at each such plant, facility,
or hotel by at least 10% per month.
(Amended City Record 4/13/2022, eff. 5/13/2022)
**** Subchapter D: Stage III ****
§ 21-11 Prohibitions and Reductions.
   (a)   Prohibitions. Upon declaration by the Commissioner of a Stage III
Water Shortage Emergency, no person shall cause, permit or allow:
      (1)   The continuing of any waste of City water on or in any premises
owned, used, leased, managed, operated or controlled by such person;
      (2)   The use of City water to wash any vehicle (including any aircraft,
watercraft or land vehicle whether on- or off-road), provided that this
provision shall not be construed to prohibit the reasonable use of City water
for washing such vehicles where mandated by law or for health or safety
purposes;
      (3)   The use of City water to spray, wash or wet any hard or paved
surfaces, including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, driveways, outdoor
areaways (including any recreational areas, whether at ground level or on a
structure), parking areas or outdoor steps; provided, however, that this
provision shall not be construed to prohibit the washing of such surfaces,
particularly the exterior surface of a building, where such washing is required
as part of repairs mandated by the Administrative Code or to protect the health
and safety of the public, as determined by the Commissioner, provided such use
is consistent with any restrictions set forth in § 24-332 of the Administrative
Code of the City of New York and 15 RCNY §
20-08(a)(8);
      (4)   The use of City water from any source for any ornamental or
aesthetic purpose, including, but not limited to, use in fountains, waterfalls,
reflecting pools, lakes and ponds; provided that where City water is not used
(e.g., private well water), a sign at least six inches in height by nine inches
in width must be prominently posted at the location indicating that the water
being used in such fountain, waterfall, reflecting pool, lake or pond is not
City water;
      (5)   The use of City water by means of a hose or other active source to
water any turf or any non-turf plants, except that, subject to any restrictions
set forth in 15 RCNY §
20-08(a)(6)(ii) and (iii):
         (i)   newly seeded or newly sodded turf (excluding golf course
fairways and roughs) or newly planted non-turf plants may be irrigated with
City water on the day of planting;
         (ii)   if hand-held hoses equipped with nozzle tips or in-line flow
regulators or water-conserving irrigation systems that effectively limit water
output to a maximum flow rate of five gallons per minute at eighty pounds per
square inch are utilized, City water may be used to water non-turf plants
(except in nurseries) only in accordance with the schedule set forth in 15 RCNY
§
21-09(a)(5)(iii); and
         (iii)   if a hand-held container using recycled water from a non-
prohibited use or a water-conserving irrigation system using recycled water
from a non-prohibited use with an acceptable irrigation controller is utilized,
City water may be used to water non-turf plants intended as food for human
consumption for one or both of the two two-hour periods on the appropriate day
of the month as set forth in 15 RCNY §
21-09(a)(5)(iii), provided that, for water-conserving irrigation systems, these
time periods are indicated on the signage mandated by 15 RCNY §
21-07;
      (6)   The opening or use of any fire hydrant, or of the City water
therefrom, for any purpose other than fire protection, except in accordance
with the terms and conditions set forth in a permit obtained from the
Department pursuant to 15 RCNY §
20-08(b);
      (7)   The serving of water from the City water supply system to any
patron of a restaurant, club, hotel, cafe, cafeteria or other public place
where food is served or offered for sale, unless specifically requested by such
patron;
      (8)   The use of City water to fill or maintain the water level in any
swimming pool, except that City water may be used to fill municipally-operated
swimming pools and other swimming pools open to the general public that are
operated with recirculating equipment and are filled once during each calendar
year, and thereafter may be used as necessary to maintain the water level in
such pools open to the general public at a level no greater than that necessary
to ensure continued operation of such recirculating equipment; or
      (9)   The use of any air conditioning system utilizing water from the
City water supply system to cool a room below 79 degrees Fahrenheit, except
that:
         (i)   this subparagraph shall not apply to health care facilities; and
         (ii)   when essential for the continuous operation of electronic data
processing equipment, the temperature in a room or floor occupied predominantly
by such equipment may be maintained lower than 79 degrees Fahrenheit but at the
highest temperature compatible with such continuous operation, provided that
the burden of proof shall be upon the respondent in any administrative
proceeding to show that the temperature maintained was the highest temperature
compatible with continuous operation of such equipment, and respondent's proof
must include documentation of the manufacturer's temperature control
specification for such equipment.
   (b)   Reductions. Upon declaration by the Commissioner of a Stage III Water
Shortage Emergency:
      (1)   Notwithstanding any provisions of 15 RCNY §
21-11(a), nurseries may continue to use City water to water non-turf plants but
must reduce their water use by at least 15% per month, as compared to the
average meter reading data for the same month in the year immediately preceding
the declaration of the Water Shortage Emergency;
      (2)   Notwithstanding any provisions of 15 RCNY §
21-11(a), golf course tee boxes and greens, playgrounds, and athletic play
fields may be irrigated with City water, provided that (i) all irrigation is
done using hand-held hoses equipped with nozzle tips or in-line flow
regulators, or water-conserving irrigation systems, and (ii) water use is
reduced by at least 50% per month, as compared to the average meter reading
data for the same month in the year immediately preceding the declaration of
the Water Shortage Emergency; and
      (3)   Persons operating bottling plants, paper recycling facilities, or
hotels in the City, any of which use an average of at least 100,000 gallons of
City water per day, as calculated on an annual basis, must reduce water use at
each such plant, facility, or hotel by at least 15% per month, as compared to
the average meter reading data for the same month in the year immediately
preceding the declaration of the Water Shortage Emergency; provided, however,
that such person may instead reduce total water use by at least 15% per month,
if such person demonstrates in writing to the Department that such reduction
equals or exceeds the sum of reducing water use at each such plant, facility,
or hotel by at least 15% per month.
(Amended City Record 4/13/2022, eff. 5/13/2022)
Chapter 22: Withdrawal of Water from the New York City Water Supply System
§ 22-01 Documents Required.
   (a)   Written application to the New York City Department of Environmental
Protection by the authorized official of the Water District or Municipality for
permission to connect to and obtain water from the New York City water supply
system.
   (b)   Two certified copies of the resolution designating and authorizing an
official to make an application to and to execute an agreement with the New
York City Department of Environmental Protection on behalf of the Water
District or Municipality (Draft resolution attached – see 15 RCNY §
22-01(j)).
   (c)   Two certified copies of the resolution adopted by the Town Board
establishing the Water District.
   (d)   Two certified copies of the approval by the New York State Department
of Health of plans and specifications of the water supply facilities of the
proposed Water District or of the proposed interconnection with an existing
Water District or Municipality.
   (e)   Two certified copies of the permit issued by the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation approving the proposed plans of the
Water District where the Water District proposes to obtain City water through
an interconnection with a Municipality or existing Water District which already
draws from New York City's water supply system.
   (f)   Two certified copies of the official authorization by the Comptroller
of the State of New York for the establishment of the Water District in the
event that the Water District proposes to construct water supply facilities to
service its District.
   (g)   A certified statement, in duplicate, of the population residing within
the limits of the Water District or Municipality as shown by the last preceding
census of the United States or a later State or official municipal census.
   (h)   Six copies of a current and updated map showing the boundaries of the
Water District or Municipality and the boundaries of the area that is to
receive water from the New York City water supply system.
   (i)   Six copies of plans, specifications and supporting reports and data
prepared by a professional engineer, licensed in New York State, covering:
      (1)   The details of the proposed connection to the New York City System
or of an interconnection to a source of the New York City water supply system;
      (2)   The maximum, minimum, and average drafts of water expected to be
taken through the proposed connection or interconnection;
      (3)   The details of the proposed metering equipment and appurtenances;
      (4)   A current and updated distribution system map of the District or
Municipality indicating sources of supply, interconnections (size, flow
direction and metering arrangement), pumping stations, storage points, and
gradients;
      (5)   Any proposed installation, construction, or placement or any
piping, structure, equipment, appurtenances, or other material that will be
within the lands of the City of New York, or that may affect the property or
the water supply of the City of New York in any way whatsoever, or that may
involve the measurement of water taken from the New York City water supply
system.
      (6)   The lands of the City of New York that are expected to be used by
the Water District or Municipality.
      (7)   Computations showing basis of design of piping, structures, and
other equipment and materials pertinent to the proposed connection.
   (j)   Two certified copies of the following resolutions adopted by the Town
Board:
      DRAFT RESOLUTION BY THE TOWN BOARD
      Resolved: That the Supervisor of the Town of ____________ shall be, and
is hereby, authorized to execute the Agreement, on behalf of the
________________________ by and among the ________________ and the City of New
York pertaining to the withdrawal of City water from the New York City water
supply system. Resolved: That the Water District agrees to comply with the
provisions of Subchapter 3-A of Chapter 3 of Title 5 of the Administrative Code
of the City of New York which relates to obtaining and receiving a supply of
City water from the water supply system of the City of New York.
Chapter 23: Construction of Private Sewers or Private Drains
§ 23-01 Applicability, Definitions, Prohibitions, Variances, and Incorporation
by Reference of Appendices.
   (a)   Applicability. This Rule applies to all Drainage proposals, all
Private sewer or Private drain plans, all Private sewer or Private drain
Construction permit applications, and the construction of all Private sewers or
Private drains in the City of New York and shall not apply to Internal private
drains.
   (b)   Definitions. For the purpose of this Rule, the following definitions
apply:
      (1)   "Allowable flow" means, for drainage design purposes only, a
predetermined quantity of Flow that can be released into an existing outlet
sewer system.
      (2)   "Alteration map" means a map showing proposed changes to the City
map.
      (3)   "Applicant" means the owner of a proposed development or his or her
legally designated representative.
      (4)   "Applicant's offering plan" or "applicant's offering prospectus"
means the set of legal documents setting forth the rights, privileges, and
duties of purchasers of shares in the applicant's proposed development.
      (5)   "Block" means a tract of land bounded by consecutive intersecting
streets.
      (6)   "City" means the City of New York.
      (7)   "City drainage plan" means a plan for the proper sewerage and
drainage of the City of New York or any part thereof prepared and adopted in
accordance with § 24-503 of the Administrative Code of the City of New York.
      (8)   "City map" means the city map referred to in Sections 198 and 199
of the Charter.
      (9)   "Condominium association" means the legal entity comprising the
present and future homeowners of the proposed condominium development.
      (10)   "Construction permit" or "permit to construct" means a written
authorization issued by the department to construct a private sewer or private
drain.
      (11)   "Contributory drainage area" means a drainage area bounded by the
ridge lines or furthest boundaries reaching a point of discharge.
      (12)   "Department" means the Department of Environmental Protection.
      (13)   "Detention basin" means a structure designed to store an
accumulation of stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate into an
existing outlet sewer system of limited capacity.
      (14)   "Drainage proposal" means a plan showing a proposed sewerage
system to serve a proposed development and contributory drainage area that does
not conform with the city drainage plan.
      (15)   "Dwelling unit" means one or more rooms in a building that are
arranged, designed, used or intended for use by one family.
      (16)   "Finally mapped street" means a street as shown on the city map.
      (17)   "Flow" means a continuous movement of stormwater or wastewater.
      (18)   "Homeowners' association" means the legal entity comprising the
present and future homeowners of the proposed development.
      (19)   "Internal private drain" means all drainage systems within the
boundaries of a proposed development, including the internal private roads of
such development.
      (20)   "Internal private roads" mean private internal right of ways that
are within the boundaries of a proposed development and are not part of finally
mapped streets or record streets.
      (21)   "Legally designated representative" means a professional engineer
or a registered architect licensed by the State of New York who represents the
owner in connection with a proposal, plan, or application under this rule.
      (22)   "Legal outlet" means an outlet sewer system designed and built
according to a city drainage plan or approved private sewer or private drain
plan and which is the allowable outlet to accommodate the sanitary, stormwater,
or combined flow from the proposed development.
      (23)   "Lot" means a tax lot as shown on the tax map of the city.
      (24)   "Mapping action" means a proceeding to change the city map
pursuant to the New York City Charter.
      (25)   "Opinion of dedication" means an opinion by the corporation
counsel that a street is an open and continuously traveled street dedicated for
public use.
      (26)   "Owner" means any individual, firm, corporation, company,
association, society, institution or any other legal entity that owns the
property, appurtenances, and Sewer easements comprising the proposed
development.
      (27)   "Private" means owned or controlled by any entity other than the
department.
      (28)   "Private drain" means a private sanitary, stormwater, or combined
drain that is constructed in a finally mapped street, record street, or sewer
easement and discharges into an existing legal outlet, but shall not include
Internal private drains.
      (29)   "Private sanitary force main" means a privately owned, operated,
and maintained drain designed to receive the wastewater discharged from a
private pumping station and convey it under pressure to a point of discharge.
      (30)   "Private pumping station" means a privately owned, operated, and
maintained wastewater collection facility required for the pumping of sanitary
or stormwater runoff or combined sewage from the proposed development.
      (31)   "Private sewage treatment plant" means a privately owned,
operated, and maintained facility on a private property that is used for the
physical, chemical, or biological treatment of the wastewater from a proposed
development and contributory drainage area.
      (32)   "Private sewer" means a private sanitary, stormwater, or combined
sewer that is designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of
the city drainage plan and this rule which is located in a finally mapped
street, record street, or sewer easement and discharges into an existing
allowable legal outlet, but shall not include internal private drains.
      (33)   "Private sewer plan" or "private drain plan" means a construction
plan for the installation of private sewers or private drains and appurtenances
thereto.
      (34)   "Proposed development" means all the property, improvements, sewer
easements, and appurtenances thereto that will be served by the private sewer
or private drain that is the subject of an application for approval of a
drainage proposal, a private sewer or private drain plan, or a private sewer or
private drain construction permit.
      (35)   "Record street" means a street that appears on the tax map of the
city but which may not be a finally mapped street.
      (36)   "Rule" means all the standards and requirements of the department
governing the design and construction of private sewers or private drains as
contained herein.
      (37)   "Runoff" means overland stormwater flow that is not absorbed into
the ground.
      (38)   "Sewer easement" means the limited right to use that part of a
private property that is designated for the construction and maintenance of a
drainage facility such as a city sewer, a private sewer, a private drain, a
watercourse, a watercourse diversion, or related structures, but not including
internal private drains.
      (39)   "Special conditions" mean and include, but are not limited to, the
construction or use of a private sewage treatment plant, a private on-site
pumping station, a private on-site detention basin, a private watercourse
diversion by an open channel or closed piping, or a proposed development
requiring a mapping action.
      (40)   "Tax map" means the tax map of the city as defined and referred to
in § 11-203 of the Administrative Code of the City of New York.
      (41)   "Tentative lot" means a proposed tax lot as shown on the "Request
to Real Property Assessment, Department of Surveying, Division for Tentative
Lot Numbers."
      (42)   "Watercourse" means a natural or artificial channel or visible
path or active trench which carries stormwater runoff from a contributory
drainage area.
      (43)   "Watercourse diversion" means the re-routing of an existing
watercourse located within the proposed development by either open channel or
closed piping.
   (c)   Prohibitions.
      (1)   No Owner may commence construction of a private sewer or a private
drain without having first obtained a written construction permit issued by the
department.
      (2)   No construction permit may be issued until the department has
received, reviewed, and approved the owner's drainage proposal, the private
sewer or private drain plan, and the construction permit application and has
determined that the same are complete and in full compliance with all standards
and requirements of this rule including, but not limited to, all engineering,
legal, and insurance standards and requirements.
      (3)   No drainage proposal, private sewer or private drain plan, or
construction permit application may be approved by the department unless the
professional seal and signature of the professional engineer or registered
architect who is the Legally designated representative of the owner appears on
each sheet of such proposal, plan and application form.
      (4)   No legal instrument required by this rule including, but not
limited to, affidavits, consents, declarations, agreements, real estate
instruments, sureties, bonds, indemnities, and security deposits may be
amended, modified, or canceled by the owner or his or her agents without the
express prior written consent of the department.
   (d)   Variances.
      (1)   Upon written request by the owner of a proposed development, the
department may grant a variance from one or more standards or requirements of
this rule only upon adequate proof substantiating that compliance with the
standard or requirement will impose an exceptional hardship as defined by
subparagraph (2)(ii) and (2)(iii) of this subdivision. There shall be no
variances from the legal, bonding, insurance, or security requirements of this
rule.
      (2)   Every request for a variance shall:
         (i)   identify the specific provision of this rule for which a
variance is sought;
         (ii)   demonstrate that compliance with the identified provision
would, on the basis of conditions unique to the owner's particular situation in
contrast to the rest of the industry, impose an exceptional economic or
technological hardship or create an unsafe condition; and
         (iii)   demonstrate that the proposed variance will not result in any
significant adverse impact on safety, public health, or the environment.
      (3)   In granting any variance, the department may impose such additional
terms and conditions that the department determines are necessary to ensure
that the variance will not have any adverse impact on safety, public health, or
the environment.
   (e)   Incorporation by reference of appendices. All appendices to this Rule
are hereby incorporated by this reference and shall have the same legal force
and effect as the Rule itself.
§ 23-02 Requirements for the Submission of Drainage Proposals for the
Construction of Private Drains and Additional Requirements for Drainage
Proposals and Private Drain Plans.
   (a)   Drainage proposals; when required. Owners proposing to construct a
private drain to serve a proposed development shall submit a drainage proposal
to the department.
   (b)   General requirements for the submission of drainage proposals. All
drainage proposals shall be prepared by or under the supervision of a
professional engineer or registered architect licensed by the State of New York
and shall be accompanied by the following information and documentation:
      (1)   the source, quantity, method of conveyance, and outlet for all
stormwater runoff;
      (2)   the source, quantity, method of conveyance, and outlet for all
sanitary flow;
      (3)   a description of the proposed development to be served by the
proposed private drain including a description of the type of all buildings to
be constructed or maintained on the proposed development;
      (4)   a description of the route(s) of the proposed private drains;
      (5)   all engineering computations performed in accordance with this rule
and the department's most recent drainage design criteria;
      (6)   a letter from the office of the borough president of the county in
which the proposed development is located verifying the legal status of all
streets involved in the proposed development;
      (7)   a survey of the proposed development and the location and route(s)
of the private drain(s) prepared or updated no more than one year prior to the
date of submission of the drainage proposal by a professional land surveyor
licensed by the State of New York and prepared in accordance with the
requirements of
Appendix A-6;
      (8)   as-built drawings for the existing outlet for the proposed private
sewers or private drains. If as-built drawings are not available, then a sewer
route survey showing the sewer or drain size, type, material, and invert/rim
elevations at the manholes shall be submitted;
      (9)   boring logs prepared in compliance with
Appendix A-8;
      (10)   a copy of the latest tax map of the proposed development as
certified by the city surveyor;
      (11)   a copy of the portion of the city map and, if applicable, the
alteration map, showing all streets shown on the drainage proposal;
      (12)   a copy of the builder's pavement plan as filed with the city;
      (13)   a copy of all applicable permits and approvals required by other
federal, state, or local laws and regulations including the city's Uniform Land
Use Review Procedure (ULURP);
      (14)   all applicable legal documentation required by this section and 15
RCNY §
23-03(c);
      (15)   paper prints prepared in accordance with the requirements of
Appendix A-2; and
      (16)   the Department's review fee for drainage proposals in accordance
with 15 RCNY §
23-08;
   (c)   Additional requirements for the submission of drainage proposals and
private drain plans involving special conditions. In addition to the
requirements of subdivision (b) of this section, owners submitting drainage
proposals and private drain plans incorporating any of the following special
conditions shall be required to file the additional information and
documentation as specified below. Such documentation shall conform to the
applicable requirements of 15 RCNY §
23-03.
      (1)   Use of proposed private sewage treatment plants or proposed private
pumping stations in residential districts serving 50 or more dwelling units.
Drainage proposals and private drain plans in residential districts where
proposed private sanitary drains will discharge into a proposed private sewage
treatment plant or a proposed private pumping station which is not owned and
operated by the department and serves 50 or more dwelling units shall include
the following additional information and documentation:
         (i)   proof of approval by the Department of City Planning;
         (ii)   proof of conceptual approval by the Department of Buildings
with appropriate conditions and safeguards as prescribed by the Department of
City Planning;
         (iii)   approval from the New York City Department of Health
specifying the following for each private sewage treatment plant or private
pumping station:
            (A)   the total number of dwelling units approved;
            (B)   the number of dwelling units committed with the drainage
proposal;
            (C)   the number of dwelling units committed to other developments;
and
            (D)   the remaining number of uncommitted dwelling units;
         (iv)   a copy of the initial franchise application as filed with the
city for the installation and maintenance of a Private sanitary force main
within a finally mapped street where the city has title or an opinion of
dedication; and
         (v)   a properly recorded restrictive declaration executed by the
owner creating a homeowners' or condominium association to own, maintain, and
operate the private sewage treatment plant or private pumping station.
         (vi)   a properly recorded declaration of maintenance obligating the
owner and all successors-in-interest to maintain the private sewage treatment
plant or private pumping station and all appurtenances thereto;
         (vii)   security in an amount determined by the department in
accordance with 15 RCNY §
23-04 shall be deposited with the comptroller's office guaranteeing the
continuous and proper maintenance of the private sewage treatment plant or
private pumping station for as long as such sewage treatment plant or pumping
station remains in use; and
         (viii)   the owner's liability insurance in an amount determined by
the department in accordance with 15 RCNY §
23-04 certified by the owner's liability insurance company.
      (2)   Use of existing private sewage treatment plants or existing private
pumping stations. Drainage proposals and private drain plans incorporating the
use of an existing private sewage treatment plant or an existing private
pumping station which is not owned and operated by the department shall include
the following additional information and documentation:
         (i)   a properly recorded consent executed by the owner of the
existing private sewage treatment plant or private pumping station granting the
owner the right to connect to the existing private sewage treatment plant or
private pumping station;
         (ii)   approval from Department of Health specifying the following for
each private sewage treatment plant or private pumping station:
            (A)   the total number of dwelling units;
            (B)   the number of committed dwelling units previously connected;
            (C)   the number of committed dwelling units not yet connected;
            (D)   the number of dwelling units committed with the drainage
proposal; and
            (E)   the remaining number of uncommitted dwelling units.
      (3)   Use of private on-site detention basins. Drainage proposals and
private drain plans incorporating the use of private on-site detention basins
to accommodate both on-site and off-site stormwater runoff shall include the
following additional information and documentation:
         (i)   the delineation of the private on-site detention basin on a
separate tax Lot with appropriate provisions that the department determines are
necessary for adequate access to the basin and to the piping entering and
exiting the basin for maintenance purposes;
         (ii)   all hydraulic computations related to the design of the private
on-site detention basin conforming to the department's most recent private on-
site detention basin design criteria;
         (iii)   a properly recorded declaration of maintenance obligating the
owner and all successors-in-interest to maintain the private on-site detention
basin and all appurtenances thereto;
         (iv)   security in an amount determined by the department in
accordance with 15 RCNY §
23-04 shall be deposited with the comptroller's office guaranteeing the
continuous and proper maintenance of the private on-site detention basin for as
long as such detention basin remains in use; and
         (v)   the owner's liability insurance in an amount determined by the
department in accordance with 15 RCNY §
23-04 certified by the owner's liability insurance company.
      (4)   Watercourse diversions. Drainage proposals and private drain plans
incorporating watercourse diversions which function as the outlet for the
stormwater runoff from the upstream contributory drainage area shall include
the following additional information and documentation:
         (i)   a properly recorded declaration of sewer easement establishing
and delineating a sewer easement in favor of the department;
         (ii)   a properly recorded declaration of maintenance obligating the
owner and all successors-in-interest to maintain the watercourse diversion and
all appurtenances thereto;
         (iii)   a security deposit in an amount determined by the department
in accordance with 15 RCNY §
23-04 shall be deposited with the comptroller's office guaranteeing the
continuous and proper maintenance of the proposed watercourse diversion for as
long as such watercourse diversion remains in use; and
         (iv)   all hydraulic computations relative to the design of the
watercourse diversion or piping.
      (5)   City map changes. Drainage proposals and private sewer or private
drain plans incorporating a change or proposed change to the city map shall
include the following additional information and documentation:
         (i)   an alteration map as prepared in conjunction with the
application to the Department of City Planning for a mapping action; and
         (ii)   an amendment to the city drainage plan which shall reflect the
new street pattern created by the mapping action.
§ 23-03 Legal Requirements for Private Sewers or Private Drains.
   (a)   General requirements for all legal instruments. All legal instruments
required by this rule including, but not limited to, affidavits, consents,
declarations, agreements, real estate instruments, sureties, bonds,
indemnities, and security deposits shall be submitted on the appropriate forms
supplied by the department, shall contain original signatures, and shall be
properly recorded in the office of the clerk of the county in which the
proposed development is located to the extent that recording is required.
   (b)   General requirements for title reports and title insurance policies.
All title reports and title insurance policies required by this rule shall be
prepared and written by a title insurance company licensed to do business in
the State of New York. All title insurance policies shall name the city as the
insured and shall contain a technical description of the metes and bounds of
the proposed development and the bed of street areas for which the city has no
title or opinion of dedication for public use from the corporation counsel.
   (c)   Additional legal documentation requirements for drainage proposals or
private sewer plans relating to the status of streets. In addition to the
requirements of 15 RCNY §
23-02, owners submitting drainage proposals or private sewer plans relating to
the status of streets shall file the additional information and legal
documentation as specified below.
      (1)   Owners proposing to construct a private sewer or private drain in a
city-owned street shall also submit a letter from the office of the appropriate
borough president verifying that title to the street in which a private sewer
or private drain is to be constructed has vested in the city.
      (2)   Owners proposing to construct a private sewer or private drain in a
finally mapped street owned by the owner shall also submit the following:
         (i)   a title report verifying the owner's ownership of the subject
street(s);
         (ii)   a title insurance policy in an amount determined by the
department in accordance with 15 RCNY §
23-04 insuring the city of the owner's right to construct the proposed private
sewer or private drain as delineated on the drainage proposal or private sewer
or private drain plan; and
         (iii)   a properly recorded declaration of public use-irrevocable
street opening irrevocably opening the street(s) for public use.
      (3)   Owners proposing to construct a private sewer or private drain in
finally mapped or record street(s) owned by others shall also submit the
following:
         (i)   a title report verifying the ownership of the subject streets;
         (ii)   a title insurance policy in an amount determined by the
department in accordance with 15 RCNY §
23-04 insuring the city of the owner's right to construct the proposed private
sewer or private drain as delineated on the drainage proposal or private sewer
or private drain plan;
         (iii)   either:
            (A)   a properly recorded sewer easement agreement establishing and
delineating a sewer easement in favor of the owner; or
            (B)   a properly recorded declaration of public use-irrevocable
street opening irrevocably opening the street(s) for public use;
         (iv)   a properly recorded declaration of maintenance obligating the
owner and all successors-in-interest to maintain the private sewer or private
drain if the street is not to be continuously opened for public use; and
         (v)   a security deposit in an amount determined by the department in
accordance with 15 RCNY §
23-04 if the street is not to be continuously opened for public use.
      (4)   Owners proposing to construct a private sewer or private drain in
finally mapped or record street(s) of unknown ownership shall also submit the
following:
         (i)   a title report verifying that the finally mapped or subject
streets are of unknown ownership;
         (ii)   a title insurance policy in an amount determined by the
department in accordance with 15 RCNY §
23-04 insuring the city of the owner's right to construct the proposed private
sewer or private drain as delineated on the drainage proposal or private sewer
or private drain plan;
         (iii)   a properly recorded declaration of maintenance obligating the
owner and all successors-in-interest to maintain the private sewer or private
drain if the street is not to be continuously opened for public use; and
         (iv)   a security deposit in an amount determined by the department in
accordance with 15 RCNY §
23-04 if the street is not to be continuously opened for public use.
      (5)   Owners proposing to construct a private sewer or private drain part
of which will traverse the owner's property shall also submit the following:
         (i)   a title report verifying the ownership of the subject property;
         (ii)   a title insurance policy in an amount determined by the
department in accordance with 15 RCNY §
23-04 insuring the city of the owner's right to construct the proposed private
sewer or private drain as delineated on the drainage proposal or private sewer
or private drain plan;
         (iii)   a properly recorded declaration of sewer easement establishing
and delineating a sewer easement in favor of the department;
         (iv)   a properly recorded declaration of maintenance obligating the
owner and all successors-in-interest to maintain the private sewer or private
drain and all appurtenances thereto; and
         (v)   a security deposit in an amount determined by the department in
accordance with 15 RCNY §
23-04 guaranteeing the continuous and proper maintenance of the proposed
private sewer or private drain for as long as such private sewer or private
drain remains in use.
      (6)   Owners proposing to construct a private sewer or private drain part
of which will traverse property of another shall also submit the following:
         (i)   a title report verifying the ownership of the subject property
and/or street(s);
         (ii)   a title insurance policy in an amount determined by the
department in accordance with 15 RCNY §
23-04 insuring the city of the owner's right to construct the proposed private
sewer or private drain as delineated on the drainage proposal or private sewer
or private drain plan;
         (iii)   a properly recorded sewer easement agreement granting the
owner the right to construct the proposed private sewer or private drain;
         (iv)   a properly recorded declaration of maintenance obligating the
owner and successors-in-interest to maintain the private sewer or private drain
and all appurtenances thereto; and
         (v)   a security deposit in an amount determined by the department in
accordance with 15 RCNY §
23-04 guaranteeing the continuous and proper maintenance of the proposed
private sewer or private drain for as long as such private sewer or private
drain remains in use.
      (7)   Owners proposing to construct a private sewer or private drain in a
Record street which is not a finally mapped street shall submit all documents
required by paragraphs (3) or (4) of this section and a certified copy of a
variance issued by the Board of Standards and Appeals for proposed construction
on lots not fronting a finally mapped street or a determination from the
Department of Buildings that no such variance is required.
§ 23-04 Insurance, Bonding, Security, and Indemnity Requirements for Private
Sewers or Private Drains.
   (a)   General requirements.
      (1)   Duty to continuously maintain required insurance. No person may
voluntarily cancel, terminate, modify, or allow to expire or lapse any
insurance required by this rule without the prior express written consent of
the department and presentation of proof that comparable continuous coverage,
as determined by the department, has been secured from another insurer meeting
the requirements of this rule. The owner shall present certificates of
insurance evidencing continuation of insurance coverage as required by this
rule no less than 30 days in advance of the date of cancellation, termination,
or expiration of the existing insurance.
      (2)   Proof of insurance. Proof of insurance as required by this rule
shall be made by presentation of a certificate of insurance issued directly by
the insurer to the appropriate department borough records office specifying the
named insured, the effective dates of each policy, the limits of each policy,
the coverage afforded by each policy, and the name and address of the broker
and agency for each policy.
   (b)   Insurance and indemnity requirements for private sewer or private
drain construction.
      (1)   Indemnity. The following indemnity shall apply without exception or
modification as a precondition to the department's approval of any private
sewer or private drain construction permit or the relocation of an existing
sewer. All indemnities required by this section shall provide exactly as
follows: "If the persons or property of the city or of others sustain loss,
damage or injury resulting from the intentional or negligent acts or omissions
of the owner or his or her employees, subcontractors, or agents in the
performance of construction of the private sewer or private drain, or from his
or their failure to comply with the provisions of local laws or of the permit,
then the owner shall indemnify, defend, and hold the city harmless from any and
all claims and judgements for damages, fees, costs, and expenses to which the
city may be subjected or which it may suffer or incur by reason thereof".
      (2)   General liability insurance. As a precondition to the department's
approval of an application for a private sewer or private drain construction
permit or the relocation of an existing sewer, the owner shall obtain and
maintain general liability insurance from a company authorized to write
commercial general liability insurance in the State of New York. The required
general liability insurance shall:
         (i)   have the following coverage provisions:
            (A)   premises and operations;
            (B)   products/completed operations;
            (C)   independent contractors;
            (D)   collapse, explosion and underground hazards; and
            (E)   deletion of railroad property damage exclusions, where
applicable;
         (ii)   be maintained by the Owner, his or her heirs, successors,
assigns, and transferees until title to the private sewer or private drain has
been vested in the city. For the relocation of existing sewers, the insurance
shall be maintained as required herein for a period of one year from the date
of final inspection and approval by the department;
         (iii)   be equivalent to the most recent version of the Insurance
Services Offices' comprehensive general liability form GC-00-01 or equivalent,
and shall provide not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence in bodily injury and
property damage combined, $1,000,000 products completed operations and not less
than $2,000,000 general aggregate per policy year. Excavations in central
business districts shall be subject to a required limit of $3,000,000 per
occurrence, $3,000,000 products/completed operations, and $6,000,000 general
aggregate. The department shall be named as the insured on form CG-20-13 or
equivalent;
         (iv)   expire no sooner than one year after the date of the private
sewer or private drain construction permit application and shall name as
insured the owner as identified on the private sewer or private drain
construction permit application or approval and the title evidenced in
connection herewith; and
         (v)   be endorsed to provide not less than sixty days advance notice
by the insurance company or its agents to the department of any cancellation,
termination, expiration, or modification of the policy. The endorsement shall
give the name, title, and proper mailing address of the person in the
appropriate department borough records office responsible for oversight of
insurance and indemnity requirements.
      (3)   Insurance of subcontractors. The owner shall require that all
subcontractors performing work pursuant to a private sewer or private drain
construction permit obtain and maintain general liability insurance as required
by paragraph (b)(2) of this section and naming the department as the insured.
Proof of subcontractor insurance coverage shall be made as required by
paragraph (a)(2) of this section.
   (c)   Insurance and indemnity requirements for drainage proposals
incorporating special conditions.
      (1)   Required indemnity. The following indemnity shall apply without
exception or modification as a precondition to the department's approval of any
drainage proposal incorporating such special conditions as the use of a private
on-site detention basin, private pumping station, or private sewage treatment
plant. All indemnities required by this subdivision shall provide exactly as
follows: "If the persons or property of the city or of others sustain loss,
damage or injury resulting from the intentional or negligent acts or omissions
of the owner or his or her employees, subcontractors, or agents by the
operation, maintenance, or use of a private on-site detention basin, private
sewage treatment plant, or a private pumping station, or their failure to
comply with the provisions of local law or of the permit, then the owner shall
indemnify, defend, and hold the city harmless from any and all claims and
judgements for damages, fees, costs, and expenses to which the city may be
subjected or which it may suffer or incur by reason thereof".
      (2)   Insurance. As a precondition to the department's approval of
drainage proposals and private drain plans incorporating the use of a private
on-site detention basin, a private pumping station, or a private sewage
treatment plant, the owner shall obtain and maintain a liability insurance
policy in an amount determined by the department in accordance with this
section insuring the city against any damages that may be sustained by virtue
of the operation, maintenance, use or failure thereof of the private on-site
detention basin, a private pumping station, or a private sewage treatment
plant.
   (d)   Duty to maintain and security for the maintenance of private sewers or
private drains.
      (1)   When required. The owner of a private sewer or private drain
constructed in an unopened record or a finally mapped street to which the city
does not have title, an opinion of dedication, or in a sewer easement within
the boundaries of the proposed development where access to the public is
regulated by the owner thereof, shall maintain the private sewer or private
drain and appurtenances thereto in good working order at all times for as long
as such maintenance obligation remains in effect. The owner shall further post
a security deposit in a form acceptable to the comptroller in an amount
determined by the department in accordance with this rule for the purpose of
guaranteeing the proper and continuous maintenance of the private sewer or
private drain and appurtenances thereto.
      (2)   Duration of security. The security shall remain on deposit with the
comptroller until such time as the city acquires title to the streets or sewer
easements wherein the private sewer or private drain and appurtenances thereto
are located or until such time as the private sewer or private drain is no
longer needed due to construction of city drainage plan sewers by the
department according to the department's capital sewer construction program
schedule.
   (e)   Determination of the dollar amount of title insurance, security
deposits, and performance or maintenance bonds. The department shall determine
the required dollar amount of title insurance, security deposits, and
performance or maintenance bonds required by this rule as follows:
      (1)   the dollar amount of the title insurance policy shall be determined
on the basis of the following information and documentation submitted by the
applicant:
         (i)   a current tax map showing all the tax blocks and Lots involved
in the proposed development;
         (ii)   the area and assessed valuations of each lot, land only,
fronting the proposed private sewers or private drains;
         (iii)   the schematic layout of the proposed pipes in the streets or
sewer easements indicating the length of the pipes; and
         (iv)   the dimensions and total area of the streets and/or sewer
easements to be covered by the title insurance policy.
      (2)   The dollar amount of security deposits required by this rule shall
be equal to the linear footage of the private sewer or private drain multiplied
by seven, provided, however, that in no event shall the total amount of the
required security deposit be less than five thousand dollars. The department
may increase the required amount of security deposit in situations involving
special conditions as outlined in 15 RCNY §
23-02(c). All maintenance securities shall be deposited with the comptroller's
office and shall be in a form acceptable to the comptroller.
      (3)   The dollar amount of performance and maintenance bonds shall be an
amount that is equal to the cost of construction, as determined by the
department, of the proposed private sewers or private drains.
   (f)   Accident reporting. The owner, applicant, supervising professional
engineer or registered architect, or any other person who knows or has reason
to know of any accident occurring in connection with any operations related to
the construction of a private sewer or private drain and appurtenances thereto,
or the relocation of an existing sewer shall make immediate written notice to
the department. Such report shall be made whether or not a claim has been or
may be made by or against any party to the accident or occurrence causing
property damage or bodily injury.
§ 23-05 Standards for Drainage Proposal Approval, Revision, and Revocation.
   (a)   Standard for approval of drainage proposals. The department shall
approve drainage proposals or drainage proposal revisions only after the
department has determined that such drainage proposals or drainage proposal
revisions are complete and are in full compliance with all standards,
requirements, and provisions of this rule and the department's most recent
design criteria.
   (b)   Duration of approval. The department's approval of a drainage proposal
or a drainage proposal revision shall be valid for a period of three years from
the date of the department's written approval. The department may, upon written
request made by an applicant prior to the expiration date of an approved
drainage proposal, extend, without charge, the approval for a one-time sixty
day period. An applicant shall be required to submit a new drainage proposal
for review and approval if the approved drainage proposal expires before the
applicant has obtained the department's approval of his or her private sewer or
private drain plan.
   (c)   Status letter. An applicant may request the department to issue a
letter to Department of Buildings regarding the status of the proposed private
drain provided that the applicant has an approved drainage proposal and has
posted all insurance, indemnities, performance and maintenance bonds, and
security deposits required by this rule.
   (d)   Revisions. An approved drainage proposal may only be revised subject
to the department's approval. The following non-exclusive list of changes to an
approved drainage proposal render the approved drainage proposal null and void
and require the submission of a drainage proposal revision with the applicable
review fee:
      (1)   a change to the type or kind of the proposed development;
      (2)   a change to the point of sanitary or storm water discharge from the
site;
      (3)   the addition or deletion of property in the proposed development
resulting in a corresponding change to the proposed private drain;
      (4)   a change in the alignment of the proposed piping which does or may
result in a change in the hydraulic design of the proposed private drain; or
      (5)   a change in the location of a proposed private on-site detention
basin facility.
   (e)   Revocation of drainage proposal approval. The department shall revoke
its approval of a drainage proposal at any time if it determines that:
      (1)   any of the information or documentation submitted in support of the
drainage proposal is false, inaccurate, or misleading;
      (2)   the approved drainage proposal fails to include adequate provisions
for existing conditions that come to the attention of the department after it
has approved a drainage proposal; or
      (3)   the applicant has made any of the changes listed in paragraph (d)
of this section without prior written approval of the department.
§ 23-06 Standards and Requirements for the Submission and Approval of Private
Sewer or Private Drain Plans.
   (a)   Private sewer or private drain plans; when required.
      (1)   Private sewers. Owners proposing to construct a private sewer in
compliance with the city drainage plan shall submit a private sewer plan to the
department for review and approval.
      (2)   Private drains. Owners proposing to construct a private drain shall
submit a private drain plan only after the department has reviewed and approved
the owner's drainage proposal. Such private drain plans shall be prepared in
accordance with the approved drainage proposal.
   (b)   General requirements for the submission of private sewer or private
drain plans. All private sewer or private drain plans shall be prepared by or
under the supervision of a professional engineer or registered architect and
shall be accompanied by the following information and documentation:
      (1)   a copy of the approved drainage proposal or city drainage plan for
the proposed development;
      (2)   a survey prepared or updated by a New York State licensed
professional land surveyor within one year of the date of submission of the
private sewer or private drain plans to the department showing the proposed
development and the route(s) of the proposed private sewers or private drains;
      (3)   a letter from the office of the Borough President of the county in
which the proposed development is located verifying the legal status of all
streets involved in the proposed development;
      (4)   boring logs prepared in compliance with
Appendix A-8;
      (5)   an approved builder's pavement plan;
      (6)   a copy of the latest Tax map of the proposed development as
certified by the city surveyor;
      (7)   a copy of the portion of the adopted Final map and, if applicable,
pending alteration map showing all streets shown on the private sewer or
private drain plans;
      (8)   utility company reply letters received no more than ninety days
prior to the date of submission of the private sewer or private drain plan;
      (9)   an engineer's cost estimate prepared in accordance with
Appendix A-7;
      (10)   a bill of materials describing all items to be utilized in the
construction of the proposed private sewers or private drains;
      (11)   as-built drawings for the existing outlet for the proposed private
sewers or private drains. If as-built drawings are not available, then a sewer
route survey showing the sewer or drain size, type, material, and invert/rim
elevations at the manholes shall be submitted;
      (12)   design calculations for all proposed structures which do not
conform to department's most recent sewer design standards;
      (13)   copies of all permits or approvals required by federal, state, and
other local laws and regulations;
      (14)   proof of compliance with all legal documentation required by 15
RCNY §
23-03(c) all insurance and security requirements of 15 RCNY §
23-04;
      (15)   a sworn affidavit executed by the owner of the proposed
development stating that he or she has submitted all the required legal
documents and affidavits required for final approval of the proposed private
sewer or private drain and attesting to the truth and validity of such legal
documents and affidavits;
      (16)   paper prints prepared in accordance with
Appendix A-3; and
      (17)   the department's review fee for private sewer or private drains in
accordance with 15 RCNY §
23-08;
   (c)   Standard for approval of private sewer or private drain plans. The
department shall approve a private sewer or private drain plans only after that
the department has determined that such plans are complete and have been
designed and will be constructed in full compliance with all standards,
requirements, and provisions of this rule and the department's most recent
design criteria.
   (d)   Duration of approval. The department's approval of a private sewer or
private drain plan shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of the
approval of the plan. The department may, upon written request made by an
applicant prior to the expiration date of an approved private sewer or private
drain plan, extend, without charge, the approval for a one-time sixty day
period. After expiration, the owner shall submit a new private sewer or private
drain plan for review. All pertinent documents and permits shall be updated and
a revision and approval signature box shall be added to the new private sewer
or private drain plan.
§ 23-07 Standards and Requirements for the Submission and Approval of Private
Sewer or Private Drain Construction Permit Applications and Professional
Engineer or Registered Architect Construction Supervision.
   (a)   Private sewer or private drain construction permit applications; when
required. Owners with approved private sewer or private drain plans shall
submit a private sewer or private drain construction permit application and all
the information and documentation required by subdivision (d) of this section
at the time of the preconstruction meeting required by subdivision (c) of this
section.
   (b)   Standards and requirements for department's approval of professional
engineers and registered architects supervising the construction of private
sewers or private drains.
      (1)   Prohibition. No owner proposing to construct a private sewer or
private drain may hire a professional engineer or registered architect to
supervise the actual construction of a private sewer or private drain without
the prior written approval of the department. Once a professional engineer or
registered architect is approved by the department, there shall be no change to
the owner's approved professional engineer or registered architect or his or
her representative without the prior written approval of the department.
      (2)   Requirements for approval. The owner shall submit the name,
address, resume, and a list of relevant construction supervision work
experience of the professional engineer or registered architect selected to
supervise the construction of the private sewer or private drain. If the
professional engineer or registered architect will not be personally
supervising the construction, then the professional engineer or registered
architect shall also submit the resume and list of relevant construction
supervision work experience of the person(s) in his or her employ who will be
supervising the construction.
      (3)   Standard for approval of professional engineers, registered
architects, and their employees. The department shall approve an owner's
proposed professional engineer or registered architect to supervise the actual
construction of a private sewer or private drain construction project and any
related work, drawing, or plans after the department has determined that the
professional engineer or registered architect has either:
         (i)   previously directly supervised and successfully completed at
least two private sewer or private drain construction projects, or two capital
sewer construction projects, or
         (ii)   has worked, with or without a professional license, in a
responsible capacity under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or
registered architect in connection with all stages of two such projects to
their successful completion. The department reserves the right to reject the
owner's professional engineer or registered architect if the department has
documented that the professional engineer or registered architect failed to
fully comply with the department's requirements or orders on any previous
private sewer or private drain construction project, or on any capital sewer
construction project. The department's approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld.
      (4)   Filing of supervision agreement. After the department's approval of
the owner's professional engineer or registered architect, the owner shall file
a copy of the supervision agreement between the owner and his or her
professional engineer or registered architect with the department.
   (c)   Pre-construction meeting. A pre-construction meeting between the
department, the owner's professional engineer or registered architect, and the
owner's contractor shall be held prior to the issuance of any private sewer or
private drain construction permit. The professional engineer or registered
architect shall prepare minutes of the meeting and submit the minutes to the
department for review and approval. The department shall provide field books to
be used by the professional engineer or registered architect.
   (d)   General requirements for the submission of private sewer or private
drain construction permit applications. All private sewer or private drain
construction permit applications shall be prepared by or under the supervision
of the approved professional engineer or registered architect and shall be
accompanied by the following information and documentation:
      (1)   an approved and valid private sewer or private drain plan;
      (2)   a completed private sewer or private drain construction permit
application on a form supplied by the department signed by the applicant and
the department;
      (3)   a street opening permit issued by the city;
      (4)   a signed and notarized copy of the construction contract between
the owner and his or her private sewer or private drain contractor including
the contractor's bid;
      (5)   an insurance policy complying with the requirements of 15 RCNY §§
23-03 and
23-04 provided by the owner or his or her contractor and submitted directly by
the owner or his or her contractor or their insurance broker to the
department's borough records office;
      (6)   performance and maintenance bonds posted by the owner or the
owner's contractor in the amount specified on the owner's approved private
sewer or private drain plan;
      (7)   the signed and notarized agreement between the owner and his or her
approved professional engineer or registered architect supervising the
construction of private sewer or private drain;
      (8)   the signed and notarized agreement between owner and his or her
contractor;
      (9)   traffic stipulations issued by the city;
      (10)   vendor's list;
      (11)   pavement restoration requirements issued by the city; and
      (12)   the private sewer or private drain construction permit application
fee.
   (e)   Standard for approval of private sewer or private drain construction
permit applications. The department shall approve a private sewer or private
drain construction permit application only after the department has determined
that such application is complete and is in full compliance with all standards,
requirements, and provisions of this rule and the department's most recent
design criteria.
   (f)   Duration of approval. A private sewer or private drain construction
permit shall be valid for a period of ninety days from the date of issuance. If
construction is not commenced within ninety days from the date of permit
issuance, then the permit shall be null and void and the applicant shall be
required to submit a new private sewer or private drain construction permit
application in accordance with the requirements of this rule before commencing
construction of any private sewer or private drain.
   (g)   Place of issuance. The department's borough records office shall issue
private sewer or private drain construction permits.
   (h)   Commencement of construction and assignment of the approved
professional engineers, registered architects, or their approved employees at
the construction site.
      (1)   Commencement of construction. The private sewer or private drain
construction permit shall specify a construction start date and time that is
mutually acceptable to the department and the approved professional engineer or
registered architect.
      (2)   Assignment of the approved professional engineers, registered
architects, or their approved employees at the construction site. The approved
professional engineer or registered architect shall maintain full time on-site
construction inspection and supervision services at the construction site from
the time construction commences to the time of final completion. The approved
professional engineer, registered architect, or their approved employees shall
telephone the department daily between 8:30 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. to report his or
her presence at the construction site and to report on the scheduled work for
the day.
      (3)   Duty to inform the department of construction problems or field
changes. The approved professional engineer or registered architect shall
promptly report to the department any construction or job related problems or
any field changes that arise or are anticipated.
   (i)   Post-construction record submissions. After completion of the
construction of a private sewer or private drain and prior to final acceptance
of such private sewer or private drain by the department, the approved
professional engineer or registered architect shall submit to the department
two notarized lists of actual costs incurred in the private sewer or private
drain construction along with a copy of all bills, invoices, and receipts from
all contractors, subcontractors, vendors, manufacturers, and any other entities
which provided goods or services.
   (j)   Required field records. The approved professional engineer or
registered architect or their approved employee shall maintain the following
field records on forms supplied by the department:
      (1)   daily construction record book;
      (2)   professional engineer or registered architect's record drawings;
      (3)   water service location sketch;
      (4)   existing pavements' sketch;
      (5)   property damage and accident reports;
      (6)   line and grade layout and field changes;
      (7)   summary of laboratory reports;
      (8)   concrete cylinder summary sheet;
      (9)   layout and final measurement book;
      (10)   line and grade stake out;
      (11)   field changes;
      (12)   final inspection, measurements, and TV inspection and video
taping;
      (13)   final restoration of pavements;
      (14)   concrete strength analysis;
      (15)   tracings-as-built record;
      (16)   supervision of site connections;
      (17)   partial approval for site connections; and
      (18)   completion and acceptance certification.
§ 23-08 Application and Filing Fees.
   (a)   General requirements. All applications for the review and approval of
drainage proposals, private sewer or private drain plans, private sewer or
private drain construction permits, and the supervision of construction and
material testing shall be accompanied, at the time of submission, with the
appropriate filing fee as established by section two of the New York City Water
Board's Water and Sewer Rate Schedule as amended from time to time. A copy of
the latest fee schedule may be obtained from the department by request.
   (b)   Payment of new application fee upon expiration of proposals or plans.
Payment of a new application fee shall be required for the renewal of an
expired drainage proposal or private sewer or private drain plan.
   (c)   Payment of new application fee upon department's determination of need
for substantial revisions to drainage proposals, private sewer or private drain
plans, or construction permits. After the department has completed it's initial
review, any drainage proposal, private sewer or private drain plan which the
department determines requires extensive revisions for such reasons including,
but not limited to, a major change in the alignment of the proposed private
sewer or private drain, major changes in points or methods of discharge into
the outlet system, major changes in the type or kind of the proposed
development, and deficiencies that make drainage proposals, private sewer plan
or private drain plan unsafe or infeasible, shall be subject to an additional
fee in an amount equal to one half of the amount of the review fee for the
revised submission.
Appendix A-1:
Standards for the Design of Private Sewers or Private Drains
   (a)   Standards for the design of private sewers or private drains. All
private sewers or private drains shall be designed in accordance with the
standards and requirements of this rule and the department's most recent
drainage design criteria. All design flow computations shall be made in
accordance with the most recent zoning designations established by the city.
   (b)   Sewer size. The minimum Private sewer or Private drain sizes shall be
10" diameter for sanitary sewers or drains, 12" diameter for storm sewers or
drains, and 15" diameter for combined sewers or drains. The following diameters
shall be used for sewers up to 18": 10", 12", 15", 18". After 18", private
sewer or private drain diameters shall increase in 6" increments to a maximum
of 72".
   (c)   Manning's Coefficient. The Manning Coefficient 'n' for extra strength
vitrified clay pipes, or precast reinforced concrete pipes, precast concrete
box sewers, and ductile iron pipes, shall be n = 0.013. For poured-in-place box
sections, the Manning's Coefficient shall be n = 0.015.
   (d)   Depth of proposed private sewers or private drains. The minimum depth
of cover to the outer top of private sewers or private drains shall be 4.0 feet
for storm sewers or drains, 10.0 feet for sanitary and combined sewers or
drains, and 5.0 feet for force mains. In situations where the depth of cover to
the outer top must be reduced, an absolute minimum of 3.5 feet for storm sewers
or drains and 8.5 feet for sanitary and combined sewers or drains shall be
maintained at all times. The maximum depth to the invert of the pipe shall not
be greater than 18.0 feet.
   (e)   Clearance. The minimum net vertical clearance between the invert of
storm sewers or drains and the inner top of sanitary sewers or drains shall be
2 feet. At street intersections where there are no site connections, the
minimum net clearance between the outside of storm sewers or drains and the
outside of sanitary sewers or drains shall be 6 inches.
   (f)   Slopes and velocities. Wherever possible, the slope of the private
sewer or private drain should be approximately parallel to the ground surface.
The slope of private sewers or private drains shall be computed, based upon
mapped street lengths, to the nearest 0.01% generally and to the nearest 0.001%
on very flat slopes. The minimum velocity for pipes flowing full shall be 3.0
feet per second (fps) for storm sewers or drains and combined sewers or drains.
The minimum velocity for sanitary sewers or drains flowing full shall be 3.0
fps until a design flow of 0.7 cubic feet per second (cfs) is attained. After
this quantity of flow has been reached, sanitary sewers or drains shall be
designed according to the standard criteria for pipes flowing full with a
minimum velocity of 2.5 fps. Maximum velocity for pipes flowing full shall be
15 fps. In no case shall the slope exceed 10%. In the case of very steep
slopes, drop manholes shall be provided so that the maximum velocity is within
the allowable limits. The depth of drop in drop manholes shall be measured from
the invert of the higher sewer or drain to the spring line of the lower sewer
or drain. Specially constructed drop pipe manholes shall be used in situations
where the drop is 4.0 feet or greater. Velocities shall be computed to the
nearest 0.01 fps for velocities under 10 fps and to the nearest 0.1 fps for
velocities greater than 10 fps.
   (g)   Design capacity and depth of flow. The Manning's formula shall be used
to compute the capacity of proposed Private sewers or Private drains. The
maximum design depth of flow in the sewer or drain shall be full for all
circular and elliptical sewers or drains and 95% full for flat-top monolithic
sections with a minimum freeboard of 3".
   (h)   Sewer elevation at junctions. Wherever possible, inside top elevations
of private sewers or private drains should be matched at all junctions and
manholes. For free discharge storm sewer or drain outlets, the inner top of the
outlet sewer or drain shall be above the mean high water elevation. For free
discharge sanitary sewers or drains, the inner top of the sanitary sewer or
drain shall be no lower than the inner top of the intercepting sewer into which
it outlets. Information pertaining to the mean high water elevation can be
obtained from the records of the nearest tidal station. All parkways, highways,
expressways, and the similar roadways within the area encompassed by the
drainage plan shall be considered in the design. The drainage system within
such areas and the sewer system into which it outlets shall be designed in
accordance with the department's latest design criteria. Manhole losses shall
not be considered in the design of private sewers or private drains. These
losses are accounted for in the matching of inner tops and by designing the
pipe flowing full. All private sewers or private drains shall be designed for
open channel gravity flow.
Appendix A-2:
Requirements for the Preparation and Submission of Drainage Proposal Plans
All drainage proposal plans submitted to the department for review shall be
filed in quadruplicate and shall contain the following information:
   (a)   a description of the limits of the proposal including street names and
borough locations;
   (b)   a description of the type of proposed private sewer or private drain;
   (c)   the name and address of the owner and, if different than the owner,
the developer of the proposed development. If the owner or developer is not a
natural person, then the drainage proposal shall indicate the name of the
responsible officer of the corporation or other legal entity;
   (d)   the name and address of the filing professional engineer or registered
architect;
   (e)   a description of the type of proposed development. If a homeowners' or
condominium association is planned for the proposed development, then a draft
copy of the owner's offering plan or an affidavit in lieu the draft prospectus
shall be submitted;
   (f)   a description of the limits of proposed development. All properties
must be labeled either:
      (1)   owner's property under this application;
      (2)   owner's property not under this application; or
      (3)   property owned by others;
   (g)   existing block and lot numbers of all properties shown on the drainage
proposal. In cases where block and lot modifications are proposed, the
tentative block and tentative lot numbers shall be shown;
   (h)   identification of street status indicating the limits, record width,
final map width, and statement of ownership or unknown ownership;
   (i)   legal grade elevations as shown on a copy of the latest adopted final
map or pending alteration map for streets shown on the drainage proposal;
   (j)   a plan view that shows the street areas, widening lines, record lines,
paved and unpaved areas, curb lines, street dimensions, existing or proposed
street surface elevations, legal grade elevations, existing and proposed
buildings and structures with tie-down distances to property lines (if
available), existing and proposed catch basins and their connections, existing
and proposed private sewers or private drains;
   (k)   a plan and profile showing all the existing and proposed sewers or
drains fixed by dimensions to street and sewer easement lines; the invert and
rim elevations of manholes; the sizes, types, manhole stationing and gradients
of all sewers or drains which receive flow from the contributory drainage
areas; the reference datum and vertical and horizontal scales. The rim to
invert distances at the manholes must be shown on the profile view. All
utilities, ditches, and watercourses are to be shown, labeled and dimensioned
on both the plan and profile views;
   (l)   in cases where more than one private sewer or private drain is
proposed for a street, a separate profile shall be provided with one private
sewer or private drain indicated by solid lines and the others by dashed lines
on each sheet;
   (m)   a schematic showing the outline of basement floors with elevations for
both proposed and existing dwelling units, if available;
   (n)   the sewer datum note for the borough where the proposed private sewers
or private drains are to be installed;
   (o)   the gradient of roadway ramps shall be shown in profile when cut or
fill is involved at the end of a proposed private sewer or Private drain;
   (p)   cross-sectional views of any existing open watercourse with dimensions
and side slopes at critical locations along with longitudinal profile with
gradients, elevations, stationing, and liner material shall be shown. All
computations pertaining to the flow quantity from the contributory drainage
areas and the hydraulic characteristics of the watercourse shall be submitted;
   (q)   for proposed watercourse diversions not using a closed pipe system, a
cross-sectional view of the relocated watercourse with dimensions and slopes,
along with a longitudinal profile with gradients, elevations, stationing and
liner material shall be shown. All hydraulic design computations shall be
submitted;
   (r)   computations to substantiate the side slope stability of proposed open
earth channels or cuts shall be submitted. In the event headwalls and/or
retaining structures are required, the same shall be shown on the plan;
   (s)   identification of all existing water mains, gas mains, and other
utility substructures as to size and location;
   (t)   all hydraulic computations necessary to review the proposed private
sewers or private drains that receive flow from the contributory drainage
areas.
   (u)   all existing sanitary, stormwater, and combined sewer outlets and
computations demonstrating their adequacy to accept the proposed flow in
addition to the existing flows;
   (v)   the tentative locations of all proposed site connections;
   (w)   indication as to whether the sanitary flow from the proposed
development is tributary to city or to a private sewage treatment plant or
private pumping station;
   (x)   a key or location plan showing the proposed development, all
surrounding streets, existing and proposed sanitary, stormwater, or combined
drainage facilities and stormwater surface Flow patterns, both existing and
proposed;
   (y)   scale and north arrow; and
   (z)   a certification by the professional engineer or registered architect
filing the drainage proposal attesting to the truth and accuracy of the
information contained in the drainage proposal, further attesting that he or
she prepared or supervised the preparation of the drainage proposal, and
further attesting that no employee of the city assisted in its preparation. The
certification shall be signed and sealed by the filing professional engineer or
registered architect.
Appendix A-3:
Requirements for the Preparation of Private Sewer or Private Drain Plans
All private sewer or private drain plans submitted to the department shall be
prepared in accordance with the following requirements and include the
following information:
   (1)   a plan view drawn to a minimum horizontal scale of one inch equals
thirty feet (1" = 30'), or one inch equals forty feet (1" = 40') for unimproved
streets, and a profile view drawn to a vertical scale of one inch equals three
feet (1" = 3');
   (2)   a key or location plan showing the proposed development, all
surrounding streets, existing and proposed sewers or drains, and surface
stormwater flow patterns;
   (3)   the names, record widths, final map widths, dimensions and existing,
proposed, and legal grade elevations of all streets surrounding the proposed
development in plan and profile views;
   (4)   the owner's properties to be developed and all other properties
abutting the streets wherein the proposed private sewers or private drains are
to be built;
   (5)   Block, lot, and building numbers of all properties shown on the plan.
The tentative block and/or tentative lot numbers shall be shown in cases where
block and lot modifications are proposed;
   (6)   the locations, sizes, and types of all existing and proposed private
sewers or private drains in plan and profile views;
   (7)   the locations, sizes, and types of all underground utility lines in
relation to the proposed private sewers or private drains in plan and profile
views;
   (8)   hydrants, street lights, overhead utility lines and any other
structures or appurtenances;
   (9)   the offset distances of all existing utilities and proposed private
sewers or private drains from street lines;
   (10)   the locations and sizes of all existing trees;
   (11)   the types, widths and limits of the existing and proposed pavements,
sidewalks, curbs, and driveways;
   (12)   the locations, sizes, and cross sections of existing stream beds,
culverts, and the like in plan and profile views;
   (13)   the boundaries and buffer zones for all wetlands, designated open
spaces, and wildlife sanctuaries;
   (14)   the locations of all existing and proposed manholes in plan and
profile views;
   (15)   manhole stationing along the proposed private sewer or private drain
in profile view (0+00 to be at downstream end);
   (16)   the gradients of roadway ramps, details of proposed appurtenances,
other than standard, including headwalls and the like;
   (17)   north arrow and scale;
   (18)   an approved builder's pavement plan shall be separately submitted
with the private sewer or private drain plan
   (19)   the standard notes of
Appendix A-4 and the specific notes of
Appendix A-5;
   (20)   a description of the construction limits and the borough;
   (21)   a signature box for signed approvals by the department;
   (22)   a description of the legal status of all streets involved;
   (23)   a traffic note, utility note, highway note, contractor's note, soil
note, approval of materials and manufacturers note, sheeting note, stormwater
drainage notes; statement as to performance bond, maintenance bond, borings,
project review letters from utility companies with the dates of review, and a
dewatering permit as required;
   (24)   a certification executed by the filing professional engineer or
registered architect that the survey, field and office work required in the
preparation of the plan and as shown on the plan was done by the filing
professional engineer or registered architect or an employee acting under his
or her direct supervision;
   (25)   an affidavit executed by the owner of the proposed development that
he has submitted all the required legal documents and affidavits pertaining to
the final approval of the private sewer or private drain plan;
   (26)   the date, signature, and seal of the filing professional engineer or
registered architect who prepared or supervised the preparation of the private
sewer or private drain plan shall appear on each sheet of the plan;
   (27)   the name and address of the owner;
   (28)   the final map number, city drainage plan number, and status of all
streets; (29) a statement showing the date of completion of the survey for the
project and the name of the licensed surveyor. Surveys shall be dated and must
have been prepared or updated within one year from the date of submission of
the private sewer or private drain plan;
   (30)   the number of the approved drainage proposal with its approval and
expiration dates;
   (31)   the number and date of approval of the builder's pavement plan;
   (32)   the name of the wastewater pollution control plant to which the
private sewer or private drain is contributory if sanitary or combined sewers
or drains are proposed;
   (33)   the name of the pumping station if a proposed private sewer or
private drain is contributory to a pumping station;
   (34)   all required permits from federal, state, and other city agencies;
   (35)   borough sewer datum;
   (36)   a note that the plan is valid for one year from the date of the last
required departmental signature;
   (37)   special notes specific to the particular project; and
   (38)   all the documentation used in preparing the private sewer or private
drain plan shall be listed and described on the plan.
Appendix A-4:
Requirements for Standard Notes on Private Sewer or Private Drain Plans
All private sewer or private drain plans submitted to the department shall be
prepared in accordance with the following requirements and include the
following standard notes:
   (a)   all sewer work shown on this plan shall be in conformance with the
latest standards and specifications of the New York City department of
Environmental Protection ("department");
   (b)   no deviation from an approved plan is allowed during construction
without prior written approval of the department;
   (c)   the department reserves the right to require any change and or
additional work necessitated by a change as may be directed by the New York
City department of Transportation;
   (d)   no final inspection, measurements or acceptance will be made until
finished grade above sewer conforms with that shown on the approved plans;
   (e)   all sewer cut sheets must be filed with the department.
   (f)   subsurface information shown hereon is as furnished by various utility
companies and other city departments. The exact location of existing sewers are
unknown, but is plotted from the best available information. However, accuracy
of this information is not guaranteed by the filing professional engineer or
registered architect. The contractor shall determine the exact location in the
field prior to construction;
   (g)   site connection spurs on ESVP shall be installed for every Tax lot
with a maximum of 40 feet on both sides of pipe for undeveloped properties as
noted on the plan or as directed by the professional engineer or registered
architect. For built-up properties, spurs shall be provided for every house.
Spurs for connections on ductile iron pipes may be made by approved fittings or
by drilling;
   (h)   all casting and hardware removed from the existing manholes and catch
basins whenever found to be in good condition, upon examination by the
professional engineer or registered architect, shall remain the property of the
city and shall be delivered by the contractor to a designated city owned yard;
   (i)   contractor shall provide temporary means (pipes, pumps, etc.) to drain
any storm water which may develop within the project limits for the duration of
construction;
   (j)   all existing sewers and sewer house connections shall be continuously
maintained during construction of private sewers or private drains or
associated water main work. If any sewer or site connection is to be
disconnected for construction purposes, flow shall be maintained by fluming or
other suitable means as approved by the professional engineer or registered
architect and in such a manner that no back-ups occur. Existing sewers, house
connections or other sewer appurtenances which are to remain, and which might
be disturbed for construction purposes, shall be restored to their present
condition after completion of the work; and
   (k)   construction permits and certificate of inspection for proposed catch
basins and/or seepage basins system as shown on the approved builders pavement
plan shall be issued by the department.
Appendix A-5:
Requirements for Specific Notes on Private Sewer or Private Drain Plans
All private sewer or private drain plans submitted to the department shall be
prepared in accordance with the following requirements and include the
following specific notes:
   (a)   Contractor's note. The contractor, at the time of taking out the
permit for the construction of this private sewer or private drain shall
furnish to the borough records office of the department
________________________, NY ________________ (Borough) (ZIP code)
a copy of an agreement between the owner and the contractor and a list of
contract prices for the items in the bill of materials on the approved private
sewer or private drain plan;
   (b)   Performance bond. The owner shall file with the department's borough
records office ____________________________________________,
__________________________, records office (Address) (Borough)
__________________ a performance bond in the amount of $________________ to
(ZIP Code) secure the faithful performance of this contract. Before submitting
any field changes for this project, a letter from the bonding company
indicating that they have no objections to this field change shall be presented
to the department. The private sewer or private drain contractor may, upon
written request to the Department, submit the performance bond, in lieu of the
owner. [Note: The amount of performance bond will be the amount of the
engineer's cost estimate.];
   (c)   Maintenance bond. Before a permit is issued for the work as shown on
the plan, a maintenance bond covering a two (2) year period from the date of
completion and final acceptance of the work performed in the amount of
$______________ shall be filed by the owner. The private sewer or private drain
contractor may, upon written request to the department, submit the maintenance
bond in lieu of the owner. [Note: The amount of maintenance bond shall be 10%
of performance bond amount.]
   (d)   Insurance note. The owner or contractor, prior to the start of
construction, shall obtain an insurance policy insuring the City of New York
against liability for injury to property or persons, including death. Such
policy shall remain in effect until the completion of the project with a
minimum period of three (3) years;
   (e)   Traffic note. The contractor shall notify the office of Engineering
Control, Mayor's Traffic Construction Coordinating Committee (MTCCC), 51
Chambers Street, New York, NY 10017, (10 days prior to the issuance of a
Construction permit);
   (f)   Pavement restoration note. To follow specific pavement restoration
provisions as stipulated by the New York City Department of Transportation
(NYCDOT). Refer to NYCDOT letter dated ________________. Note: The contractor
shall restore the pavement in accordance with the NYCDOT stipulations.
   (g)   Utility note.
      (1)   All utility companies must be notified at least 72 hours prior to
commencement of construction to comply with Rule 53 of Industrial Code of the
State of New York, Department of Labor for "Construction, Excavation and
Demolition Operations at or near Underground Facilities" (Cited as 12 NYCRR
53); and
      (2)   for private developments, the support, relocation, reconstruction
or rehabilitation of existing utilities due to the construction of this
contract is to be done at the expense of the owner of the proposed private
sewer or private drain;
   (h)   Approval of materials and manufacturers' note. The name of city
approved subcontractors, vendors, manufacturers, suppliers, and dealers who are
to furnish materials, fixtures, equipment, appliances or other fittings shall
be submitted by the contractor as early as possible to the Department at 59-17
junction Boulevard, Corona, New York, 11368 for approval.
   (i)   Soil note. When ordered by the professional engineer or registered
architect, the trench shall be excavated to its full depth for at least 50 feet
in advance of the private sewer or private drain construction. When in the
opinion of the professional engineer or registered architect, the subsoil is
deemed to be inadequate, the contractor shall drive piles as ordered.
Unsuitable soils encountered at the subgrade less than five (5) feet thick, if
encountered at the subgrade shall be removed to an acceptable stratum and
replaced with broken stone as directed by the professional engineer or
registered architect. In such case, the sheeting placed shall be left in place
below the spring line of the pipe only.
   (j)   Sheeting note.
      (1)   In performing the sheeting of the private sewer or private drain
trench for excavation, the contractor shall comply with the provisions of the
New York State Labor Law and particularly with Rule Number 23 (as amended) of
the Industrial Code as promulgated by the Board of Standards and Appeals,
Department of Labor, State of New York and in accordance with Rules and
Regulations listed in Federal Register/volume 54, number 209/Tuesday, October
31, 1989, Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration,
29 C.F.R. Part 1926, [Docket number S-204] RIN 1218 AA 36. Where the spacing of
stringers and cross bracing specified in Rule Number 23 are such that the
contractor can not adequately and in a practical manner carry on his
operations, he shall submit to the professional engineer or registered
architect for approval alternate designs for sheeting or shoring with all
bracings as may be necessary to comply with the intent of Rule Number 23;
      (2)   Sheeting and forms shall be removed in accordance with the latest
department's standards and specifications unless otherwise noted on the
drawings or instructed by the professional engineer or registered architect;
   (k)   Storm drainage note.
      (1)   Provisions for the safe disposal of storm water shall be determined
by the New York City Department of Buildings (NYCDOB), Department of
Transportation (NYCDOT), and the Department of Environmental Protection
(NYCDEP);
      (2)   Owner-builder shall comply with the provisions of the land-contour
law so that construction operations will not create nor perpetuate any
hazardous condition. In addition, he or she shall provide the necessary means
to control the erosive velocity of overland flow and the conveyance of sediment
to the sewer or street area;
   (l)   Dewatering note. If the contractor is required to install a temporary
dewatering system to lower the groundwater level within the Boroughs of
Brooklyn or Queens, it will be necessary that he or she obtain a New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) Long Island Well Permit.
Appendix A-6:
Requirements for the Preparation of the Survey of the Proposed Development and
the Location and Route of the Private Sewers or Private Drains
All drainage proposals and private sewer or private drain plans submitted to
the department shall be accompanied by two sets of the survey of the proposed
development and the location and route of the proposed private sewers or
private drains in conformance with the requirements of 15 RCNY §
23-02(6), and shall contain the following information at a minimum: The survey
shall show the existing elevations at each fifty (50) foot stationing and at
all grade changes for all existing streets (center lines, curb lines, property
lines), legal grade elevations, existing sewers, drains, ditches, watercourse
(s), catch basins, manholes, utilities, culverts, all boundaries and buffer
zones for all wetlands, designated open space areas, wildlife sanctuaries as
established by the federal, state, or local agencies having regulatory
jurisdiction thereof, and grades within the site of the Proposed development.
The survey shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a professional land surveyor
licensed by the State of New York.
Appendix A-7:
Requirements for the Preparation of the Professional Engineer or Registered
Architect's Cost Estimate
All private sewer or private drain plans submitted to the department shall be
accompanied by three sets of the professional engineer or registered
architect's cost estimate for the proposed work covered by the private sewer or
private drain plan. The estimate shall be prepared based on the unit costs for
various contract items as listed in the latest unit price list maintained by
the department. Cost of contingencies and mobilization shall be added to arrive
at the total cost. The estimate shall be signed and sealed by the filing
professional engineer or registered architect.
Appendix A-8:
Requirements for the Preparation of the Boring Logs and Boring Reports
 All boring logs and boring reports submitted to the department in connection
with drainage proposals and private sewer or private drain plans shall be
prepared in accordance with the following requirements.
   (1)   Borings shall be taken in accordance with the latest provisions and
requirements of the New York City Building Code. Borings shall be taken at 150
foot intervals in Queens, Brooklyn, and Staten Island, and at 50 foot intervals
in the Bronx and Manhattan within the street limits where the private sewer or
private drain is proposed. The average depth of borings, including depth at
which dry samples and rock cores will be taken, will be approximately fifteen
(15) feet below the proposed subgrade;
   (2)   in soil, casings 2 1/2" or larger shall be sunk. In cases of rock,
diamond drills shall be used, drilling to be done with 1 3/8" cores;
   (3)   the casing shall always be driven with the same weight of hammer
having the same height of fall. The weight of the sampler drop hammer shall be
three hundred (300) pounds and the height of free fall shall be eighteen (18)
inches. The number of blows required to drive the casing each foot into the
soil shall be recorded on the driller's log for each boring. All drop hammers
shall have their true weight marked and certified by the contractor;
   (4)   rock cuts shall be at least 1 3/8" in diameter. The rock core borings
shall be carried to a depth of ten (10) feet below top of rock, or as otherwise
directed by the professional engineer or registered architect;
   (5)   dry samples shall be obtained with a split spoon sampler having a two
(2) inch outside diameter (O.D.) and a 1 3/8" inside diameter (I.D.) and a
clear inside length at least twenty two (22) inches;
   (6)   dry samples shall be taken by the contractor of the materials
penetrated at five (5) foot intervals, unless otherwise ordered, and also at
every change of material or soil stratification as established from sampling,
observation of the wash material and driving resistance during progress of the
boring explorations;
   (7)   the sampler shall always be driven with the same weight of hammer
having the same height of fall. The weight of the sampler drop hammer shall be
one hundred and forty (140) pounds and the height of free fall shall be thirty
(30) inches. The number of blows required to drive the sampler each consecutive
six (6) inches for a total penetration of eighteen (18) inches into the soil
shall be recorded on the driller's log for each boring. All drop hammers shall
have their true weight clearly marked and certified by the contractor;
   (8)   the ground water levels will be determined by well point at a location
where a boring is taken at a maximum spacing of 500 feet. The well point will
be read during a 24 hour period;
   (9)   the contractor shall take undisturbed soil samples, in an approved
manner or as ordered by the professional engineer or registered architect. Each
sample shall be obtained with a thin, open type, brass "shelby" tube sampler,
three (3) inch O.D. and thirty (30) inches long or as otherwise approved by the
professional engineer or registered architect;
   (10)   continuous samples shall be taken when ordered by the engineer. The
method of taking samples shall be subject to approval by the professional
engineer or registered architect and shall be such as to permit laboratory
tests to determine accurately the compactness, hardness, water content or other
properties of each strata from which a sample is taken;
   (11)   the professional engineer or registered architect shall show soil
classification data on the boring logs;
   (12)   general notes shall appear on the boring sheet as follows;
      (i)   borings in accordance with the latest City Building Code;
      (ii)   weight of hammer on ________ casing __________ lbs. with ____
drop;
      (iii)   weight of hammer on ____ spoon ____ lbs. with ________ drop;
      (iv)   boring elevations are approximate;
      (v)   spoon blows per 6" ________;
      (vi)   spoon blows per foot ________;
      (vii)   all field and laboratory work supervised by ________________,
P.E./R.A.; these borings were made and carried to the depth indicated and to
the best of my knowledge, the description and classifications are a true
presentation of the soils found at the depths and elevations shown;
      (viii)   elevations shown refer to the Borough of ________________, sewer
datum which is ________ ft. above mean sea level as established by the U.S.
Coast and Geodetic survey at Sand Hook, NJ;
   (13)   the seal and signature of the professional engineer or registered
architect who supervised the borings;
   (14)   a box showing the name and address of the company taking borings,
client, job location, professional engineer or registered architect, and date
borings were taken; and
   (15)   the boring location plan shall show the location of each boring along
with the profile of each boring.
Chapter 24: [Contamination of Tax Lot by Hazardous Materials or Hazardous
Waste; Placement and Removal of an (E) Designation on Tax Lot in Connection
with Zoning Map Amendment]
§ 24-01 Authority.
This chapter is promulgated pursuant to Sections 15(e), 1403 and 1404 of the
Charter and in accordance with § 11-15 of the Zoning Resolution of the City of
New York.
§ 24-02 Applicability.
This chapter shall apply in connection with any review or determination
pursuant to City Environmental Quality Review (CEQR) of any Zoning Amendment or
Zoning Action subject to review and approval pursuant to Sections 197-c and
197-d of the Charter where one or more tax lots in the area subject to the
Zoning Amendment or Zoning Action have been identified by the Lead Agency as
likely to be developed as a direct consequence of the action.
(Amended City Record 5/13/2024, eff. 6/12/2024)
§ 24-03 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter, 15 RCNY §§
24-01 et seq., unless the text specifically indicates otherwise:
   Alternate Means of Ventilation. "Alternate Means of Ventilation" means a
device that introduces fresh air into a building and thereby allows operable
windows to be closed at all times.
   CEQR. "CEQR" means the City Environmental Quality Review,
Chapter 5 of Title 62 of the Rules of the City of New York.
   CEQR Determination. "CEQR Determination" means any of the following, issued
by the Lead Agency pursuant to CEQR: a determination that a proposed action is
Type II, as defined under the State Environmental Quality Review Act (NYCRR
Part 617); a negative declaration or conditional negative declaration for an
Environmental Assessment Statement; or a final Environmental Impact Statement
with respect to which findings are made, including any technical memoranda with
respect to such final Environmental Impact Statement.
   CEQR Technical Manual. "CEQR Technical Manual" means the current City
Environmental Quality Review Technical Manual as issued by OEC together with
any updates, supplements and revisions thereto.
   CHASP. "CHASP" means a site-specific construction health and safety plan
developed for remediation and construction phases of a project that is designed
to protect on-site workers from exposure to known site contaminants.
   City. "City" means the City of New York.
   Contamination. "Contamination," "Contaminated," or "to Contaminate" means
the effect(s) on a tax lot(s) from hazardous materials, hazardous substances,
hazardous wastes and/or petroleum.
   Day. "Day" means a business day.
   dBA. "dBA" means a measure of sound as experienced by the human ear.
   DCP. "DCP" means the New York City Department of City Planning.
   DEC. "DEC" means the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation.
   Decibel. "Decibel" or "dB" means the practical unit of measurement for sound
pressure level. The number of decibels of a measured sound is equal to 20 times
the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the sound pressure to the pressure
of a reference sound.
   Department or DEP. "Department" or "DEP" means the New York City Department
of Environmental Protection.
   Development. "Development", or "Develop" means:
      1.   with respect to hazardous materials, the development of a new
structure, an enlargement, extension or change of use with respect to an
existing structure involving a residential or community facility use, and/or
any work on a tax lot(s) that involves soil disturbance, including, but not
limited to grading or excavation related to the construction or alteration of a
new or existing structure(s) on a tax lot(s), and
      2.   with respect to air quality and noise, development of a new
structure, or a change of use, enlargement, extension or alteration of an
existing structure(s) on a tax lot(s).
   Development Site. "Development Site" means a tax lot(s) located within the
area of a proposed Zoning Amendment or Zoning Action and which is proposed to
be developed by the applicant for such Zoning Amendment or Zoning Action or
which the Lead Agency has identified pursuant to CEQR as likely to be developed
as a direct consequence of the Zoning Amendment or Zoning Action.
   DOB. "DOB" means the New York City Department of Buildings.
   (E) Designation. "(E) Designation" means the designation of an "E" pursuant
to § 11-15 of the Zoning Resolution.
   Environmental Assessment Statement. "Environmental Assessment Statement"
means a report that describes a proposed development, its location, and a first
level analysis of environmental impact areas, the purpose of which is to
determine a project's potential effects on the environment.
   Environmental Impact Statement. "Environmental Impact Statement" means a
report that provides a complete analysis of all appropriate environmental
impact areas and provides a means for agencies, project sponsors, and the
public to consider a project's significant adverse environmental impacts,
alternatives, and mitigations.
   Environmental Restrictive Declaration. "Environmental Restrictive
Declaration" means a document recorded against a tax lot(s) in the county
office of land records and executed by all Parties-in-Interest to such tax lot
(s), setting forth restrictions and enforcement provisions with respect to
implementation of environmental requirements regarding hazardous materials, air
quality and/or noise arising from the environmental review of zoning actions.
   EPA. "EPA" means the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
   Equivalent Sound Level. "Equivalent Sound Level" or "Leq" means a
quantification of noise level as a single value for a given period of time.
   Full Build Year. "Full Build Year" means the year of completion for the
proposed action as indicated in the EAS or EIS.
   Hazardous Material. "Hazardous Material" means any material, substance,
chemical, element, compound, mixture, solution, product, solid, gas, liquid,
waste, byproduct, pollutant, or contaminant which when released into the
environment may present a substantial danger to the public health or welfare or
the environment, including, but not limited to those classified or regulated as
"hazardous" or "toxic" pursuant to the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA), 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601 (1995) et seq., the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 (1995) et seq.,
the Clean Water Act (CWA), 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 (1986) et seq., the Clean Air Act
(CAA) 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 (1995) et seq., Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA), 15
U.S.C. §§ 2601 (1998) et seq., Transportation of Hazardous Materials Act, 49
U.S.C. §§ 5101 (1997) et seq., the Hazardous Substances Emergency Response
Regulations, 15 RCNY
Chapter 11, and/or the List of Hazardous Substances, 6 NYCRR Part 597.
   Hazardous Waste. "Hazardous Waste" means any waste, solid waste or
combination of waste and solid waste listed or regulated as a hazardous waste
or characteristic hazardous waste pursuant to RCRA, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 (1995),
et seq. and/or Identification and Listing of Hazardous Wastes, 6 NYCRR Part
371, et seq.
   HVAC. "HVAC" means Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning System.
   Installation Report. "Installation Report" means the report that the
applicant submits to OER to demonstrate that the Window/Wall Attenuation,
Alternate Means of Ventilation, fuel type and stack location approved in the
notice to proceed and installed at the site satisfy the Noise and/or Air
Quality (E) Designation.
   Lead Agency. "Lead Agency" means the agency responsible under CEQR for the
conduct of environmental review in connection with a Zoning Amendment or Zoning
Action.
   Ldn. "Ldn" means the equivalent sound level for a 24-hour period with an
additional 10 dB imposed on the equivalent sound levels for night time hours
between 10 p.m. and 7 a.m.
   Leq(1). "Leq(1)" means the equivalent continuous sound level that over a 1-
hour period of time has the same total energy as the actual fluctuating sound
level over a 1-hour period.
   L10(1). "L10(1)" means the stated sound level that is exceeded 10 percent of
the time during a 1 hour period, derived from Lx(t), where "x" is the
percentage of time that the sound level has been exceeded and "t" is the total
period of time that the sound has been recorded.
   Noise Descriptor. "Noise Descriptor" means a continuous sound level measured
during a noise monitoring test according to an approved Noise Monitoring
Protocol. Leq(1), L10(1) and Ldn are Noise Descriptors.
   Noise Monitoring Protocol. "Noise Monitoring Protocol" means a document
prepared by an acoustical specialist describing the conditions, locations, and
Noise Descriptors to be used in assessing existing noise levels during a
continuous 24-hour period.
   OEC. "OEC" means the New York City Mayor's Office of Environmental
Coordination.
   OER. "OER" or "Office" means the New York City Mayor's Office of
Environmental Remediation.
   Owner. "Owner" means the person, including their successors or assigns, who
is the recorded title holder of a tax lot(s).
   Parties-in-Interest. "Parties-in-Interest" means any person with an
enforceable property interest in a tax lot(s).
   Person. "Person" means any individual, trust, firm, corporation, joint stock
company, association, partnership, consortium, joint venture, commercial entity
or governmental entity.
   Petroleum. "Petroleum" means oil or petroleum of any kind and in any form,
including, but not limited to oil, petroleum, fuel oil, oil sludge, oil refuse,
oil mixed with other waste, crude oil, gasoline and kerosene.
   Project Site. "Project Site" means a tax lot(s) that is under the control or
ownership of the applicant for the satisfaction and removal of an (E)
Designation from the lot(s) and is subject to the proposed Development by such
applicant.
   Qualified Environmental Professional (QEP). "Qualified environmental
professional" (QEP) means a person who possesses sufficient specific education,
training, and experience necessary to exercise professional judgment to develop
opinions and conclusions regarding the presence of releases or threatened
releases to the surface or subsurface of a property or off-site areas,
sufficient to meet the objectives and performance factors for the areas of
practice identified by this chapter. Such a person must:
      1.   Hold a current professional engineer's or a professional geologist's
license or registration issued by any state, or hold a baccalaureate degree or
higher in engineering or geology and have the equivalent of three years of
full-time relevant experience in site investigation and remediation of the type
detailed in this chapter; or
      2.   Be a site remediation professional licensed or certified by the
federal government, any state or a recognized accrediting agency, to perform
investigation or remediation tasks consistent with office guidance, and have
the equivalent of three years of full-time relevant experience.
   Tax Lot. "Tax Lot" means a tax lot identified by parcel number on the
official tax maps of the City of New York.
   Window/Wall Attenuation. "Window/Wall Attenuation" means the sound reduction
mandated by the Noise (E) Designation, expressed in dBA and based upon the
American Society of Testing and Materials (E-1332.90) Outdoor Indoor
Transmission Class (OITC) values of individual components of a building's
facade.
   Zoning Action. "Zoning Action" means an action, such as a special permit,
authorization, certification, or variance, pursuant to the provisions of the
Zoning Resolution.
   Zoning Amendment. "Zoning Amendment" means a proposed amendment to the text
or maps of the Zoning Resolution, subject to review and approval pursuant to
Sections 197-c, 197-d and 200 of the Charter.
   Zoning Resolution. "Zoning Resolution" means the Zoning Resolution of the
City of New York, effective December 15, 1961, as amended from time to time.
(Amended City Record 2/2/2022, eff. 3/4/2022)
§ 24-04 Preliminary Screening.
   a.   The Lead Agency may prepare or may cause to be prepared a preliminary
screening assessment consisting of visual or historical documentation of any of
the following past or current uses at a Development Site, and/or other tax lot
(s) that might have affected or be affecting a Development Site.
      (1)   Incinerators;
      (2)   Underground and/or above ground storage tanks;
      (3)   Active solid waste landfills;
      (4)   Permitted hazardous waste management facilities;
      (5)   Inactive hazardous waste facilities;
      (6)   Suspected hazardous waste sites;
      (7)   Hazardous substance spill locations;
      (8)   Areas known to contain fill material;
      (9)   Petroleum spill locations;
      (10)   Any past use identified in Appendix A to the CEQR Technical
Manual.
   b.   Based on the visual or historical documentation prepared under
subdivision (a) with respect to lots not under the ownership or control of the
person seeking the Zoning Amendment or Zoning Action, the Lead Agency may
determine that an (E) Designation should be placed on the tax lot(s) identified
under subdivision (a) in connection with the approval of the Zoning Amendment
or Zoning Action. In making such determination, the Lead Agency may consult
with the Department, and the Lead Agency will inform the Department and OER of
such determination.
   c.   A Phase I Environmental Site Assessment pursuant to 15 RCNY §
24-05 shall not be required prior to placement of an (E) Designation on a lot
pursuant to this Section unless the lot is under the ownership or control of
the applicant for the Zoning Amendment or Zoning Action.
§ 24-05 Phase I Environmental Site Assessment.
   a.   For any Development Site that is under the control or ownership of the
applicant and that, following review of visual or historical documentation
pursuant to 15 RCNY §
24-04, warrants a hazardous materials assessment, the Lead Agency shall
conduct, or shall cause to be conducted, a Phase I Environmental Site
Assessment (Phase I ESA) consistent with the current American Society of
Testing and Materials (ASTM) Phase I ESA standard.
   b.   The Phase I ESA may be limited to:
      (1)   Historical land use review;
      (2)   Regulatory agency list review; and
      (3)   Site and surrounding area reconnaissance visit.
   c.   A report entitled "Phase I ESA Report" and any supplements thereto,
summarizing the Phase I ESA shall be prepared by or for the Lead Agency and a
copy of such report shall be provided to the Department. The Phase I ESA Report
shall include any information discovered in the Phase I ESA. The Department may
provide the Lead Agency with any additional information it deems relevant
together with any comments regarding the contents of the Phase I ESA and any
supplements thereto within twenty (20) days of receipt of the Phase I ESA
Report.
   d.   The Lead Agency may respond to the Department's comments and any
additional information either by placing or causing DCP to place an (E) on the
relevant tax lot(s) or by issuing a Final Phase I ESA Report that addresses any
such comments and/or additional information. The Lead Agency shall inform the
Department and OER of such determination.
   e.   If a Phase II Environmental Site Assessment or a remedial plan is
expected to be conducted during the environmental review, the Lead Agency must
coordinate with the Department to ensure that the testing and/or remedial plans
are acceptable and protective of public health.
§ 24-06 Notification.
   a.   Discovery of a petroleum spill or the discharge of other contaminants
on a tax lot(s) for which reporting requirements have been established by
federal, state or local law, regulation, or rule must be reported by the
applicant in accordance with such law, regulation, or rule.
   b.   Discovery of evidence of "reportable quantities" of hazardous materials
or hazardous wastes by the Department and/or the applicant on a tax lot(s) that
pose a potential or actual significant threat to public health or the
environment under federal, state, or local law, regulation, or rule, must be
reported by the applicant in accordance with such law, regulation, or rule.
(Renumbered from former § 24-10, City Record 2/2/2022, eff. 3/4/2022)
§ 24-07 Lead Agency Records/Agency Consultation.
   a.   The Lead Agency shall maintain a single file containing copies of all
Phase I ESA Reports issued pursuant to 15 RCNY §
24-05, together with the relevant Environmental Assessment Statement,
Environmental Impact Statement, or other CEQR determinations made in connection
therewith.
   b.   The Department, DCP, and OEC shall meet and confer on a periodic basis
concerning the implementation of this rule.
(Renumbered from former § 24-11, City Record 2/2/2022, eff. 3/4/2022)
§ 24-08 Air Quality and Noise (E) Designations.
   Placement of Air Quality and Noise (E) Designations. The Lead Agency may
place Air Quality (E) Designations and Noise (E) Designations on real property
as a result of an environmental review of a Zoning Amendment or Zoning Action.
      (1)   An Air Quality (E) Designation is placed on Development Sites that
are not publicly owned, that have the potential to be developed as a
consequence of the Zoning Amendment or Zoning Action, and that have been
identified by the environmental review as having the potential to contribute to
or experience a significant adverse air quality impact related to HVAC systems
emissions or industrial or other source emissions.
      (2)   A Noise (E) Designation may be placed on tax lots that are not
publicly owned, that have the potential to be developed as a consequence of the
Zoning Amendment or Zoning Action, and that have been identified by the
environmental review as having the potential to experience significant adverse
noise impacts.
(Amended and renumbered from former § 24-12, City Record 2/2/2022, eff. 3/4/
2022)
§ 24-09 Fees and OER Review and Approval Procedure. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 2/2/2022, eff. 3/4/2022)
**** Appendix A:
List of Facilities, Activities or Conditions Requiring Assessment ****
   1.   A facility, on or adjacent to a tax lot, which generates (including
small quantity generators), stores, treats or disposes of hazardous waste, as
defined by RCRA and regulated by EPA and/or DEC.
   2.   A facility, on or adjacent to a tax lot, which manufactures, produces,
prepares, compounds, processes, uses, repackages or disposes of hazardous
chemicals, as defined under New York City's Community Right-to-Know Law, N.Y.C.
Administrative Code Title 24, Chapter 7 (1992).
   3.   A facility, on or adjacent to a tax lot, which is included on the
following list:
      •   Adhesives and sealants manufacture
      •   Advertising displays manufacture
      •   Agricultural machinery manufacture (including repairs)
      •   Aluminum manufacture or aluminum products manufacture
      •   Aircraft manufacture (including parts)
      •   Airports Appliance (electrical) manufacture
      •   Art goods manufacturer
      •   Asphalt or asphalt products manufacture
      •   Athletic equipment manufacture
      •   Automobile and other laundries
      •   Automobile manufacture
      •   Automobile rental establishments
      •   Automobile wrecking establishments
      •   Automobile service stations
      •   Battery manufacture
      •   Bicycle manufacture
      •   Blacksmith shops
      •   Boat repair
      •   Boat fuel sales
      •   Boat storage
      •   Business machine manufacture
      •   Camera manufacture
      •   Canvas or canvas products manufacture
      •   Carpet cleaning establishments
      •   Carpet manufacture
      •   Cement manufacture
      •   Ceramic products manufacture
      •   Charcoal manufacture
      •   Chemical compounding or packaging
      •   Chemical manufacture
      •   Cleaning or cleaning and dyeing establishments
      •   Clock manufacture
      •   Clothing manufacture
      •   Coal products manufacture
      •   Coal sales or storage
      •   Coke products manufacture
      •   Coil coating
      •   College, university, trade school laboratories
      •   Construction machinery manufacture
      •   Copper forming or copper products manufacture
      •   Cosmetics or toiletries manufacture
      •   Dental instruments manufacture
      •   Dental laboratories
      •   Disinfectant manufacture
      •   Drafting instruments manufacture
      •   Dry cleaning establishments
      •   Dumps
      •   Electric power or steam generating plants
      •   Electric power substations
      •   Electric and electronic components manufacture
      •   Electric appliance manufacture
      •   Electric supplies manufacture
      •   Electroplating or stereotyping
      •   Engraving or photo-engraving
      •   Exterminators
      •   Explosives manufacture
      •   Felt products manufacture
      •   Felt products bulk processing, washing or curing
      •   Fertilizer manufacture
      •   Filling stations
      •   Film manufacture
      •   Fire stations
      •   Foundries ferrous or non-ferrous
      •   Fuel sales
      •   Fungicides manufacture
      •   Fur tanning, curing, finishing or dyeing
      •   Furniture manufacture
      •   Garbage incineration, storage or reduction
      •   Gas manufacture, storage
      •   Gasoline service stations
      •   Generating plants, electric or steam
      •   Glass manufacture
      •   Glue manufacture
      •   Golf courses
      •   Graphite or graphite products manufacture
      •   Gum and wood chemicals manufacture or processing
      •   Hair products manufacture
      •   Hardware manufacture
      •   Heliports
      •   Incineration or garbage reduction
      •   Ink or ink ribbon manufacture
      •   Insecticides manufacture
      •   Inorganic chemicals manufacture
      •   Iron and steel manufacture
      •   Jewelry manufacture
      •   Junk yards
      •   Laboratories, medical, dental, research, experimental
      •   Leather tanning, curing, finishing or dyeing
      •   Linoleum manufacture
      •   Luggage manufacture
      •   Lumber processing
      •   Machine shops including tool, die, or pattern making
      •   Machine tools manufacture
      •   Machinery manufacture or repair
      •   Mechanical products manufacture
      •   Medical appliance manufacture
      •   Medical instruments manufacture
      •   Medical laboratories
      •   Metals manufacture including alloys or foil
      •   Metal casting or foundry products
      •   Metal finishing, plating, grinding, polishing, cleaning, rust-
proofing, heat treatment
      •   Metal ores reduction or refining
      •   Metal product treatment or processing
      •   Metal reduction, refining, smelting or alloying
      •   Metal treatment or processing
      •   Mining machinery manufacture
      •   Mirror silvering shops
      •   Motorcycle manufacturer
      •   Motor freight stations
      •   Musical instrument manufacture
      •   Newspaper publishing
      •   Non-ferrous metals manufacture
      •   Office equipment or machinery repair shops
      •   Oil, public utility stations for metering or regulating oil sales
      •   Oil storage
      •   Optical equipment manufacture
      •   Organic chemicals manufacture
      •   Orthopedic appliance manufacture
      •   Ore mining
      •   Paint and ink manufacture
      •   Paper and pulp mills Paper products manufacture
      •   Pesticides manufacture
      •   Petroleum or petroleum products refining
      •   Petroleum or petroleum products storage and handling
      •   Pharmaceutical products manufacture or preparation
      •   Photographic equipment and supplies manufacture
      •   Plastics and synthetic products manufacture and processing
      •   Plastics raw manufacture
      •   Plumbing equipment manufacture
      •   Porcelain enameling
      •   Precision instruments manufacture
      •   Printing and publishing
      •   Pumping stations, sewage
      •   Radioactive waste disposal services
      •   Railroad equipment manufacture
      •   Railroad rights-of-ways, substations
      •   Railroad freight terminals, yards or appurtenances
      •   Refrigerating plants
      •   Rubber processing or manufacture
      •   Rubber products manufacture
      •   Sewage disposal plants, pumping stations
      •   Ship or boat building repair yards
      •   Shipping waterfront
      •   Shoes manufacture
      •   Sign painting shops
      •   Silver-plating shops
      •   Silverware manufacture, plate or sterling
      •   Slag piles
      •   Soap and detergent manufacture
      •   Soldering shops
      •   Solvent extraction
      •   Steam electric power plants
      •   Steel products manufacture
      •   Tar products manufacture
      •   Textiles bleaching, products manufacture or dyeing
      •   Textile mills
      •   Thermometer manufacture or assembly
      •   Tile manufacture
      •   Timber products manufacture
      •   Tool or hardware manufacture
      •   Toys manufacture
      •   Trailer manufacture
      •   Transit substations
      •   Truck manufacture
      •   Trucking terminal or motor freight stations
      •   Turpentine manufacture
      •   Varnish manufacture
      •   Vehicles manufacture
      •   Venetian blind manufacture
      •   Welding shops
      •   Wood distillation
Chapter 25: Rules Concerning the Use of Emissions Control Technology on Sight-
Seeing Buses
**** Subchapter A: General Provisions ****
§ 25-01 Definitions.
Best available retrofit technology (BART). "Best available retrofit technology"
(BART) shall mean a technology, verified by the United States environmental
protection agency or the California air resources board, for reducing the
emission of pollutants that achieves reductions in particulate matter emissions
at the highest classification level for diesel emission control strategies, as
set forth in 15 RCNY §
25-04, that is applicable to the particular engine and application. Such
technology shall also, at a reasonable cost, achieve the greatest reduction in
emissions of nitrogen oxides at such particulate matter reduction level and
shall in no event result in a net increase in the emissions of either
particulate matter or nitrogen oxides.
Commissioner. "Commissioner" shall mean the Commissioner of the New York City
Department of Environmental Protection or her designee.
Person. "Person" shall mean any natural person, partnership, firm, company,
association, joint stock association, corporation or other legal entity.
Reasonable cost. "Reasonable cost" shall mean that such technology does not
cost greater than thirty percent more than other technology applicable to the
particular engine and application that falls within the same classification
level for diesel emission control strategies, as set forth in 15 RCNY §
25-04, when considering the cost of the strategies, themselves, and the cost of
installation.
Sight-seeing bus. "Sight-seeing bus" shall mean a motor vehicle designed to
comfortably seat and carry eight or more passengers operating for hire from a
fixed point in the city of New York to a place or places of interest or
amusements, and shall also include a vehicle, designed as aforesaid which by
oral or written contract is let and hired or otherwise engaged for its
exclusive use for a specific or special trip or excursion from a starting point
within the city of New York.
**** Subchapter B: Use of Best Available Retrofit Technology ****
§ 25-02 Best Available Retrofit Technology Determination.
Pursuant to § 24-163.6 of the Code, any diesel fuel-powered sight-seeing bus
licensed by the department of consumer affairs and equipped with an engine that
is over three years old shall utilize the Best Available Retrofit Technology,
as defined in 15 RCNY §
25-01. In making their selections, owners or operators of such buses are
directed to consult the EPA and CARB verified lists at http://www.epa.gov/otaq/
retrofit/retroverifiedlist.htm and http://www.arb.ca.gov/diesel/verdev/
background.htm.
§ 25-03 Motor Vehicles That Are Not Subject to BART.
Any diesel fuel-powered sight-seeing bus that is equipped with an engine
certified to the applicable 2007 United States Environmental Protection Agency
standard for particulate matter as set forth in section 86.007-11 of title 40
of the Code of Federal Regulations or to any subsequent United States
environmental protection agency standard for such pollutant that is at least as
stringent, shall not be required to utilize the BART as defined in 15 RCNY §
25-01.
§ 25-04 Classification Levels.
Level IV Any Diesel Particulate Filter (DPF) or other technology verified for a
specific application from either the CARB or EPA verified lists that reduces
diesel particulate matter emissions by 85 percent or greater, or reduces engine
emissions to less than or equal to 0.01 grams diesel particulate matter per
brake horsepower-hour.
Level III Any DPF or Diesel Oxidation Catalyst (DOC) or Catalyzed Wire Mesh
Filter (CWMF) or other technology or combination of technologies verified for a
specific application from either the CARB or EPA verified lists that reduces
diesel particulate matter emissions by between 50 and 84 percent.
Level II Any DOC or other technology verified for a specific application from
either the CARB or EPA verified lists that reduces diesel particulate matter
emissions by between 25 and 49 percent.
Level I Any DOC or emulsified diesel fuel or other technology verified for a
specific application from either the CARB or EPA verified lists that reduces
diesel particulate matter emissions by between 20 and 24 percent.
§ 25-05 Selection Process.
   (a)   For each type of diesel fuel-powered sight-seeing bus subject to the
BART requirement, the owner or operator of such sight-seeing bus must identify,
in list form, all types of pollution control technology devices verified for
such sight-seeing bus at classification Level IV.
   (b)   All types of pollution control technology devices identified by the
owner or operator of such sight-seeing bus as classification Level IV devices
that are not technologically feasible for use with respect to the particular
vehicle, engine or application are to be eliminated from such list. To
eliminate all types of pollution control technology devices identified by the
owner or operator of such sight-seeing bus at classification Level IV, or a
specific type of pollution control technology, or a particular pollution
control technology device, the owner or operator must demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Commissioner that operational constraints or physical,
chemical or engineering principles preclude the successful and effective use of
the bus when used with such types of technology devices, or type of technology,
or particular pollution control technology device.
   (c)   If, after the elimination process, no pollution control technology
devices remain in classification Level IV from which the owner or operator can
select a BART, the same identification and elimination process must be done for
classification Level III. If, after the elimination process, no pollution
control technology devices remain in classification Level III from which the
owner or operator can select a BART, the same identification and elimination
process must be done for classification Level II. If, after the elimination
process, no pollution control technology devices remain in classification Level
II from which the owner or operator can select a BART, the same identification
and elimination process must be done for classification Level I.
   (d)   Once a level is selected as provided for in subdivisions (a), (b), and
(c) of this section, an economic impact analysis is to be performed on the
remaining technologies where the technology reduces both particulate matter and
nitrogen oxide. The owner or operator shall select the technology that
achieves, at a reasonable cost, the greatest reduction in nitrogen oxide
emissions. If there is no such technology that achieves, at a reasonable cost,
a reduction in nitrogen oxide emissions, the technology that achieves the
greatest particulate matter reduction must be selected.
§ 25-06 Best Available Retrofit Technology Selection Applicability.
No owner or operator of a sight-seeing bus subject to this chapter shall be
required to replace a selected BART or other authorized technology within three
years of having first utilized such technology. Furthermore, no owner or
operator of such bus shall be required to replace Level IV technology until it
has reached the end of its useful life.
**** Subchapter C: Waiver Procedure ****
§ 25-07 Application for Waiver and Approval of a Written Finding of
Unavailability.
   (a)   An application for a waiver for the use of the required BART shall
contain the following information:
      (1)   Identification of the required BART;
      (2)   An explanation as to why the applicable BART is unavailable. Such
explanation must include all documentation generated in the BART selection
process described in 15 RCNY §
25-05;
      (3)   Identification of a technology for reducing the emission of
pollutants, if any, that is available and appropriate for such vehicle, which
may include a technology that does not appear on the EPA or CARB verified
lists, and that, if available and appropriate, will be used instead of the
BART.
      (4)   The name and contact number of the applicant.
   (b)   The application shall be submitted to:
      Director of the Division of Air and Noise Programs, Enforcement and
Policy
      Bureau of Environmental Compliance
      New York City Department of Environmental Protection
      59-17 Junction Blvd.
      Flushing, NY 11373
      or by email to bartwaivers@dep.nyc.gov
   (c)   The Department shall submit such application to the Department of
Consumer Affairs with a request for a Written Finding of Unavailability from
the Commissioner of Consumer Affairs.
   (d)   The Department of Consumer Affairs will make a written finding
regarding such request within thirty days of receipt of the Department of
Environmental Protection's request for a Written Finding of Unavailability.
   (e)   The Department's decision whether to grant the waiver for the use of
BART shall be subject to a Written Finding of Unavailability by the Department
of Consumer Affairs.
   (f)   Waivers are effective for three years. Any application for renewal
shall be submitted no later than thirty days prior to the expiration date of
the waiver.
(Amended City Record 3/15/2017, eff. 4/14/2017)
Chapter 26: Rules Concerning the Use of Ultra Low Sulfur Diesel Fuel and
Emissions Control Technology on Vehicles That Transport Children to and from
School
**** Subchapter A: General Provisions ****
§ 26-01 Definitions.
Best available retrofit technology. "Best available retrofit technology" shall
mean a technology, verified by the United States environmental protection
agency or the California air resources board, for reducing the emission of
pollutants that achieves reductions in particulate matter emissions at the
highest classification level for diesel emission control strategies, as set
forth in 15 RCNY §
26-04, that is applicable to the particular engine and application. Such
technology shall also, at a reasonable cost, achieve the greatest reduction in
emissions of nitrogen oxides at such particulate matter reduction level and
shall in no event result in a net increase in the emissions of either
particulate matter or nitrogen oxides.
Commissioner. "Commissioner" shall mean the Commissioner of the New York City
Department of Environmental Protection or his or her designee.
Department of education. "Department of education" shall mean the New York city
department of education, formerly known as the New York city board of
education, and any successor agency or entity thereto, the expenses of which
are paid in whole or in part from the city treasury.
 Person. "Person" shall mean any natural person, partnership, firm, company,
association, joint stock association, corporation or other legal entity.
Reasonable cost. "Reasonable cost" shall mean that such technology does not
cost greater than thirty percent more than other technology applicable to the
particular engine and application that falls within the same classification
level for diesel emission control strategies, as set forth in 15 RCNY §
26-04, when considering the cost of the strategies, themselves, and the cost of
installation.
School bus. "School bus" means any vehicle operated pursuant to a school bus
contract, designed to transport ten or more children at one time, of the
designation "Type C bus" or "Type D bus" as set forth in 17 NYCRR §§ 720.1(Z)
and (AA), and used to transport children to or from any school located in the
city of New York, and excluding any vehicle utilized primarily to transport
children with special educational needs who do not travel to and from school in
vehicles used to transport general education students.
School bus contract. "School bus contract" shall mean any agreement between any
person and the department of education to transport children on a school bus.
Ultra low sulfur diesel fuel. "Ultra low sulfur diesel fuel" shall mean diesel
fuel that has a sulfur content of no more than fifteen parts per million.
**** Subchapter B: Use of Best Available Retrofit Technology and Ultra Low
Sulfur Diesel Fuel ****
§ 26-02 Best Available Retrofit Technology Determination.
Pursuant to § 24-163.7 of the Code, any diesel fuel-powered school bus used to
transport children to and from school located in the City of New York shall
utilize the Best Available Retrofit Technology ("BART"), as defined in 15 RCNY
§
26-01. In making their selections, persons fulfilling school bus contracts are
directed to consult the EPA and CARB verified lists at http://www.epa.gov/otaq/
retrofit/retroverifiedlist.htm and http://www.arb.ca.gov/diesel/verdev/
background.htm. The persons fulfilling school bus contracts shall select BART
for their diesel fuel-powered school buses in accordance with 15 RCNY §
26-05. Such persons shall notify the Department of their selections, and the
Department shall make a determination as to whether the BART selected may be
utilized for the vehicle, engine and application for which it was selected. The
Department shall notify these persons of its determination.
§ 26-03 School Buses That Are Not Subject to BART.
   (a)   Any diesel fuel-powered school bus that is equipped with an engine
certified to the applicable 2007 United States Environmental Protection Agency
standard for particulate matter as set forth in § 86.007-11 of title 40 of the
Code of Federal Regulations or to any subsequent United States environmental
protection agency standard for such pollutant that is at least as stringent,
shall not be required to utilize the BART as defined in 15 RCNY §
26-01.
   (b)   Any best available retrofit technology, or substantially similar
technology, purchased or installed in whole or in part with funds provided by
the state of New York or the federal government pursuant to a specific diesel
emissions reduction program in effect upon the date of enactment of this
section, shall constitute the best available retrofit technology for a period
of not less than three years from the date on which such equipment was
installed.
§ 26-04 Classification Levels.
Level IV A Closed Crankcase Filtration System in combination with any Diesel
Particulate Filter (DPF) or other technology verified for a specific
application from either the CARB or EPA verified lists that reduces particulate
matter emissions by 85 percent or greater, or reduces engine emissions to less
than or equal to 0.01 grams diesel particulate matter per brake horsepower-
hour.
Level III A Closed Crankcase Filtration System in combination with any DPF or
Flow Through Filter or combination of technologies verified for a specific
application from either the CARB or EPA verified lists that reduces diesel
particulate matter emissions by between 50 and 84 percent.
Level II A Closed Crankcase Filtration System in combination with any DOC or
Flow Through Filter or other technology verified for a specific application
from either the CARB or EPA verified lists that reduces diesel particulate
matter emissions by between 25 and 49 percent.
Level I A Closed Crankcase Filtration System in combination with any DOC or
emulsified diesel fuel or Flow Through Filter or other technology verified for
a specific application from either the CARB or EPA verified lists that reduces
diesel particulate matter emissions by between 20 and 24 percent.
§ 26-05 Selection Process.
   (a)   For each type of school bus subject to the BART requirement, the
person fulfilling a school bus contract must identify, in list form, all types
of pollution control technology devices verified for such type of school bus at
classification Level IV.
   (b)   All types of pollution control technology devices identified by such
person as classification Level IV devices that are not technologically feasible
for use with respect to the particular vehicle, engine or application are to be
eliminated from such list. The engine model year should be considered for BART
selection among different DPFs as an active filter is necessary for pre-1994
engine model years. To eliminate all types of pollution control technology
devices identified by such person at classification Level IV, or a specific
type of pollution control technology, or a particular pollution control
technology device, such person must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Commissioner that operational constraints or physical, chemical or engineering
principles preclude the successful and effective use of the school bus when
used with such types of technology devices, or type of technology, or
particular pollution control technology device.
   (c)   If, after the elimination process, no pollution control technology
devices remain in classification Level IV from which such person can select a
BART, the same identification and elimination process must be done for
classification Level III. If, after the elimination process, no pollution
control technology devices remain in classification Level III from which such
person can select a BART, the same identification and elimination process must
be done for classification Level II. If, after the elimination process, no
pollution control technology devices remain in classification Level II from
which such person can select a BART, the same identification and elimination
process must be done for classification Level I.
   (d)   Once a level is selected as provided for in subdivisions (a), (b), and
(c) of this section, an economic impact analysis is to be performed on the
remaining technologies where the technology reduces both PM and nitrogen oxide
(NOx). Such person shall select the technology achieving, at a reasonable cost,
the greatest reduction in NOx emissions. If the NOx emission does not meet the
reasonable cost test, the technology that achieves the greatest PM reduction
from the other remaining technologies must be selected.
§ 26-06 Best Available Retrofit Technology Selection Applicability.
No person fulfilling a school bus contract shall be required to replace a
selected BART within three years of having first utilized such technology.
Furthermore, no person fulfilling a school bus contract shall be required to
replace Level IV technology until it has reached the end of its useful life.
§ 26-07 Use of Ultra Low Sulfur Diesel Fuel.
All diesel fuel-powered school buses used to transport children to or from any
school located in the City of New York must be powered by ultra low sulfur
diesel fuel unless the Commissioner has issued a waiver pursuant to subdivision
(g) of § 24-163.7 of the Code.
**** Subchapter C: Waiver Procedures ****
§ 26-08 Waiver for the Use of BART Based on Written Finding of Unavailability
by Department of Education.
   (a)   If the BART required for a school bus in unavailable, a person
fulfilling a school bus contract may apply for a waiver for the use of BART.
Such application must be based on a Written Finding of Unavailability by the
Department of Education indicating that the BART for the subject school bus is
unavailable for purchase. Such application shall also contain the following:
      (1)   The name of the person fulfilling the school bus contract who is
applying for approval of the Written Finding of Unavailability;
      (2)   The name and identification number of the subject contract, if
applicable;
      (3)   Identification of the school bus that is the subject of the Written
Finding of Unavailability;
      (4)   Identification of the required BART;
      (5)   An explanation as to why the required BART is unavailable. Such
explanation must include all documentation generated in the BART selection
process described in this chapter;
      (6)   Identification of a technology for reducing the emission of
pollutants, if any, that is available and appropriate for such vehicle, which
may include a technology that does not appear on the EPA or CARB verified
lists, and that, if available and appropriate, will be used instead of the
BART.
      (7)   The name and contact number of the applicant.
   (b)   Applications should be sent to:
      Director of the Division of Air and Noise Programs, Enforcement and
Policy
      Bureau of Environmental Compliance
      New York City Department of Environmental Protection
      59-17 Junction Blvd.
      Flushing, NY 11373
      or by email to bartwaivers@dep.nyc.gov
   (c)   The Commissioner will make a determination whether to approve the
Written Finding of Unavailability no later than thirty days after receipt of
the application.
   (d)   Waivers are effective for three years. Any application for renewal
shall be submitted no later than thirty days prior to the expiration date of
the waiver.
   (e)   Contractors shall maintain records that include the installation date
of the BART as well as the engine model year and engine manufacturer.
(Amended City Record 3/15/2017, eff. 4/14/2017)
Chapter 27: Rules Concerning the Use of Ultra Low Sulfur Diesel Fuel and
Emissions Control Technology On Solid Waste Vehicles
**** Subchapter A: General Provisions ****
§ 27-01 Definitions.
Best available retrofit technology. "Best available retrofit technology" means
a technology, verified by the United States environmental protection agency or
the California air resources board, for reducing the emission of pollutants
that achieves reductions in particulate matter emissions at the highest
classification level for diesel emission control strategies, as set forth in 15
RCNY §
27-04, that is applicable to the particular engine and application. Such
technology shall also, at a reasonable cost, achieve the greatest reduction in
emissions of nitrogen oxides at such particulate matter reduction level and
shall in no event result in a net increase in the emissions of either
particulate matter or nitrogen oxides.
City agency. "City agency" means a city, county, borough, administration,
department, division, bureau, board or commission, or a corporation,
institution or agency of government, the expenses of which are paid in whole or
in part from the city treasury.
Commissioner. "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of the New York City
Department of Environmental Protection or her designee.
Contractor. "Contractor" means any person or entity that enters into a solid
waste contract or recyclable materials contract with a city agency, or any
person or entity that enters into an agreement with such person or entity, to
perform work or provide labor or services related to such solid waste contract
or recyclable materials contract.
Motor vehicle. "Motor vehicle" means a vehicle operated or driven upon a public
highway which is propelled by any power other than muscular power, except
electrically-driven mobility assistance devices operated or driven by a person
with a disability.
Nonroad engine. "Nonroad engine" means an internal combustion engine (including
the fuel system) that is not used in a motor vehicle or a vehicle used solely
for competition, or that is not subject to standards promulgated under section
7411 or section 7521 of title 42 of the United States Code, except that this
term shall apply to internal combustion engines used to power generators,
compressors or similar equipment used in the fulfillment of any solid waste
contract or recyclable materials contract.
Nonroad vehicle. "Nonroad vehicle" means a vehicle that is powered by a nonroad
engine, fifty horsepower and greater, and that is not a motor vehicle or a
vehicle used solely for competition, which shall include, but not be limited
to, front loaders, excavators, backhoes, cranes, compressors, generators,
bulldozers and similar equipment.
Operate primarily within the city of New York. "Operate primarily within the
city of New York" means that greater than fifty percent of the time spent or
miles traveled by a motor vehicle or nonroad vehicle during the performance of
a solid waste contract or recyclable materials contract occurs within the city
of New York.
Person. "Person" means any natural person, co-partnership, firm, company,
association, joint stock association, corporation or other like organization.
Reasonable cost. "Reasonable cost" shall mean that such technology does not
cost greater than thirty percent more than other technology applicable to the
particular engine and application that falls within the same classification
level for diesel emission control strategies, as set forth in 15 RCNY §
27-04, when considering the cost of the strategies, themselves, and the cost of
installation.
Recyclable materials. "Recyclable materials" means solid waste that may be
separated, collected, processed, marketed and returned to the economy in the
form of raw materials or products, including but not limited to types of metal,
glass, paper, plastic, food waste, tires and yard waste.
Recyclable materials contract. "Recyclable materials contract" means a contract
with a city agency, the primary purpose of which is to provide for the
handling, transport or disposal of recyclable materials.
Solid waste. "Solid waste" means all materials or substances discarded or
rejected as being spent, useless, or worthless, including but not limited to
garbage, refuse, industrial and commercial waste, sludges from air or water
pollution control facilities or water supply treatment facilities, rubbish,
ashes, contained gaseous material, incinerator residue, demolition and
construction debris and offal, but not including sewage and other highly
diluted water-carried materials or substances and those in gaseous forms.
Solid waste contract. "Solid waste contract" means a contract with a city
agency, the primary purpose of which is to provide for the handling, transport
or disposal of solid waste.
Ultra low sulfur diesel fuel. "Ultra low sulfur diesel fuel" shall mean diesel
fuel that has a sulfur content of no more than fifteen parts per million.
**** Subchapter B: Use of Best Available Retrofit Technology and Ultra Low
Sulfur Diesel Fuel ****
§ 27-02 Best Available Retrofit Technology Requirement.
Pursuant to section 24-163.5 of the Code, any solid waste contract or
recyclable materials contract shall specify that all diesel fuel-powered motor
vehicles and diesel fuel-powered nonroad vehicles used in the performance of
such contract that operate primarily within the City of New York shall use the
Best Available Retrofit Technology ("BART"). All contractors in the performance
of such contract shall utilize the "BART", as defined in 15 RCNY §
27-01. In making their selections, contractors are directed to consult the EPA
and CARB verified lists at http://www.epa.gov/otaq/retrofit/
retroverifiedlist.htm and http://www.arb.ca.gov/diesel/verdev/background.htm.
§ 27-03 Motor Vehicles and Nonroad Vehicles That Are Not Subject to BART.
Any diesel fuel-powered motor vehicle that is equipped with an engine certified
to the applicable 2007 United States Environmental Protection Agency standard
for particulate matter as set forth in section 86.007-11 of title 40 of the
Code of Federal Regulations or to any subsequent United States environmental
protection agency standard for such pollutant that is at least as stringent,
shall not be required to utilize the BART as defined in 15 RCNY §
27-01. Any diesel fuel-powered nonroad vehicle that is equipped with an engine
certified to the applicable United States environmental protection agency
standard for particulate matter for such vehicle as set forth in the Control of
Emissions of Air Pollution from Nonroad Diesel Engines and Fuel; Final Rule as
set forth in the federal register at 69 Fed. Reg. 38,958 et seq., or to any
subsequent United States environmental protection agency standard for such
pollutant that is at least as stringent shall not be subject to the BART as
defined in 15 RCNY §
27-01.
§ 27-04 Classification Levels.
Level 4 A Closed Crankcase Filtration System in combination with any Diesel
Particulate Filter (DPF) or other technology verified for a specific
application from either the CARB or EPA verified lists that reduces particulate
matter emissions by 85 percent or greater, or reduces engine emissions to less
than or equal to 0.01 grams diesel particulate matter per brake horsepower-
hour.
Level 3 A Closed Crankcase Filtration System in combination with any DPF or
Flow Through Filter or combination of technologies verified for a specific
application from either the CARB or EPA verified lists that reduces diesel
particulate matter emissions by between 50 and 84 percent.
Level 2 A Closed Crankcase Filtration System in combination with any DOC or
Flow Through Filter or other technology verified for a specific application
from either the CARB or EPA verified lists that reduces diesel particulate
matter emissions by between 25 and 49 percent.
Level 1 A Closed Crankcase Filtration System in combination with any DOC or
emulsified diesel fuel or Flow Through Filter or other technology verified for
a specific application from either the CARB or EPA verified lists that reduces
diesel particulate matter emissions by between 20 and 24 percent.
§ 27-05 Selection Process.
   (a)   For each solid waste or recyclable materials contract that specifies
that all diesel fuel-powered motor vehicles and diesel fuel-powered nonroad
vehicles used in the performance of such contract that operate primarily within
the city of New York shall utilize BART, the contractor operating such vehicle
must identify, in list form, all types of pollution control technology devices
verified for such vehicle at classification Level 4.
   (b)   All types of pollution control technology devices identified by the
contractor as classification Level 4 devices that are not technologically
feasible for use with respect to the particular vehicle, engine or application
are to be eliminated from such list. To eliminate all types of pollution
control technology devices identified by the contractor at classification Level
4, or a specific type of pollution control technology, or a particular
pollution control technology device, the contractor must demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Commissioner that operational constraints or physical,
chemical or engineering principles preclude the successful and effective use of
the vehicle when used with such types of technology devices, or type of
technology, or particular pollution control technology device.
   (c)   If, after the elimination process, no pollution control technology
devices remain in classification Level 4 from which the contractor can select a
BART, the same identification and elimination process must be done for
classification Level 3. If, after the elimination process, no pollution control
technology devices remain in classification Level 3 from which the contractor
can select a BART, the same identification and elimination process must be done
for classification Level 2. If, after the elimination process, no pollution
control technology devices remain in classification Level 2 from which the
contractor can select a BART, the same identification and elimination process
must be done for classification Level 1.
   (d)   Once a level is selected as provided for in subdivisions (a), (b), and
(c) of this section, an economic impact analysis is to be performed on the
remaining technologies where the technology reduces both PM and nitrogen oxide
(NOx). The contractor shall select the technology achieving, at a reasonable
cost, the greatest reduction in NOx emissions. If the NOx emission does not
meet the reasonable cost test, the technology that achieves the greatest PM
reduction from the other remaining technologies must be selected.
§ 27-06 Best Available Retrofit Technology Selection Applicability.
No contractor shall be required to replace a selected BART within three years
of having first utilized such technology. Furthermore, no contractor shall be
required to replace Level 4 technology until it has reached the end of its
useful life.
§ 27-07 Use of Ultra Low Sulfur Diesel Fuel.
All solid waste or recyclable materials contracts shall specify that diesel
fuel-powered motor vehicles and diesel fuel-powered nonroad vehicles used in
the performance of such contracts that operate primarily in the City of New
York shall be powered by ultra low sulfur diesel fuel ("ULSDF").
**** Subchapter C: Waiver Procedures ****
§ 27-08 Application for Approval of a Written Finding of Unavailability for
ULSDF.
   (a)   Once the solid waste contract or recyclable materials contract has
been entered into, the Commissioner may issue a waiver for the use of ULSDF
where the city agency that has entered into the contract makes a written
finding that a sufficient quantity of ULSDF is unavailable. Any application for
approval of a Written Finding of Unavailability for the ULSDF must contain the
following information:
      (1)   The name of the contractor applying for approval of the Written
Finding of Unavailability;
      (2)   The name and identification number of the subject contract;
      (3)   Identification of the specific diesel-fuel powered vehicle or
diesel fuel-powered nonroad vehicle that is the subject of the Written Finding
of Unavailability;
      (4)   An explanation as to why the ULSDF is unavailable.
   (b)   Applications should be sent to:
      Director of the Division of Air and Noise Programs, Enforcement and
Policy
      Bureau of Environmental Compliance
      New York City Department of Environmental Protection
      59-17 Junction Blvd.
      Flushing, NY 11373
   (c)   The Department will make a determination whether to approve the
Written Finding of Unavailability no later than thirty days after receipt of
the Written Finding.
   (d)   Waivers shall expire two months after issuance, unless the agency
renews the Written Finding and the Commissioner approves such Finding, in
accordance with the procedures set forth in subdivisions (a), (b) and (c) of
this section. Any such application for renewal shall be submitted no later than
thirty days prior to the expiration date of the approval.
§ 27-09 Application for Approval of a Written Finding of Unavailability for
BART.
   (a)   If the BART required for a diesel fuel-powered motor vehicle or diesel
fuel-powered nonroad vehicle that is subject to a solid waste contract or
recyclable materials contract with a city agency is unavailable, and the city
agency that has entered into the applicable contract has made a written finding
that such technology is unavailable, the city agency may submit a Written
Finding of Unavailability for the Commissioner's approval. Any application for
approval of a Written Finding of Unavailability for the BART must contain the
following information:
      (1)   The name of the contractor applying for approval of the Written
Finding of Unavailability;
      (2)   The name and identification number of the subject contract;
      (3)   Identification of the specific diesel-fuel powered vehicle or
diesel fuel-powered nonroad vehicle that is the subject of the Written Finding
of Unavailability;
      (4)   Identification of the required BART;
      (5)   An explanation as to why the BART is unavailable. Such explanation
must include all documentation generated in the BART selection process
described in this chapter;
      (6)   Identification of a technology for reducing the emission of
pollutants, if any, that is available and appropriate for such vehicle, which
may include a technology that does not appear on the EPA or CARB verified
lists, and that, if available and appropriate, will be used instead of the
BART.
      (7)   The name and contact number of the applicant.
   (b)   Applications should be sent to:
      Director of the Division of Air and Noise Programs, Enforcement and
Policy
      Bureau of Environmental Compliance
      New York City Department of Environmental Protection
      59-17 Junction Blvd.
      Flushing, NY 11373
      or by email to bartwaivers@dep.nyc.gov
   (c)   The Department will make a determination whether to approve the
Written Finding of Unavailability no later than thirty days after receipt of
the Written Finding.
   (d)   Waivers shall expire three years after issuance, unless the agency
renews the Written Finding and the Commissioner approves such Finding, in
accordance with the procedures set forth in subdivisions (a), (b) and (c) of
this section. Any such application for renewal shall be submitted no later than
thirty days prior to the expiration date of the approval.
(Amended City Record 3/15/2017, eff. 4/14/2017)
Chapter 28: Citywide Construction Noise Mitigation
§ 28-100 General Construction Noise Mitigation Plan.
In accordance with § 24-219 and § 24-220 of the New York City Noise Control
Code, every construction site where construction activities take place shall
have, conspicuously posted and filed with the Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP), a complete and accurate Construction Noise Mitigation Plan,
except such sites that will have emergency work completed within three days or
less, shall not be required to file the plan. An after hours variance, pursuant
to § 24-223 of the Noise Control Code may be applied for if work is not
possible during otherwise allowable hours. Such plan must be readily available
for inspection at the construction site. The Construction Noise Mitigation Plan
Form is available at: http://www.nyc.gov/html/dep/html/noise/construction-
noise.shtml.
(Amended City Record 9/18/2018, eff. 10/18/2018)
§ 28-101 Required Noise Mitigation Measures for General Construction.
   a.   The responsible party shall self-certify in its Construction Noise
Mitigation Plan that all construction tools and equipment have been maintained
so that they operate at normal manufacturer's operating specifications,
including at peak loading. Such self-certification shall be indicated on the
Construction Noise Mitigation Plan form required by 15 RCNY §
28-100. Upon a DEP inspection of the work site, DEP shall use the noise level
guidelines in the Federal Highway Administration Roadway Construction Noise
Model User's Guide, Jan. 2006, page 3, located in the Appendix to this chapter,
as a means of identifying equipment that may be the cause of a noise complaint.
If an individual piece of equipment is identified by DEP as exceeding the level
specified in such Guide located in the Appendix to this chapter, upon
notification by DEP, the responsible party shall have the option of: (i)
performing maintenance to demonstrate a good faith effort, notwithstanding the
model year of the equipment, to mitigate the noise by a measurable level
acceptable to the Department, (ii) replacing the equipment with equipment that
complies with said level, or (iii) filing an Alternative Noise Mitigation Plan
pursuant to 15 RCNY §
28-104, within five business days of said inspection. If the responsible party
elects to perform maintenance pursuant to option (i), but cannot demonstrate
within five business days a reduction in noise by a measurable level acceptable
to the Department, such party shall pursue one of the other two options to the
satisfaction of the Department. The failure to exercise and complete one of
such three options within five business days of said inspection shall be a
violation of this rule.
   b.   All construction equipment being operated on site must be equipped with
the appropriate manufacturer's noise reduction device(s), including, but not
limited to, a manufacturer's muffler (or equivalently rated material) that is
free of rust, holes and exhaust leaks.
   c.   The responsible party shall mitigate noise from construction devices
with internal combustion engines by ensuring that the engine's housing doors
are kept closed, and by using noise-insulating material mounted on the engine
housing that does not interfere with the manufacturer's guidelines for engine
operation or exhaust. The responsible party shall further reduce noise by
operating the device at lower engine speeds during the work to the maximum
extent possible.
   d.   Portable compressors, generators, pumps and other such devices shall be
covered with noise-insulating fabric to the maximum extent possible that does
not interfere with the manufacturer's guidelines for engine operation or
exhaust, and shall further reduce noise by operating the device at lower engine
speeds during the work to the maximum extent possible.
   e.   Vehicle engine idling on site shall be prevented in accordance with New
York City Administrative Code § 24-163.
   f.   Quieter back-up alarms shall be used in pre-2008 model year vehicles
when practicable for the job site. 2008 model year or newer vehicles shall be
equipped with a quieter back-up warning device in accordance with OSHA
standards, as set forth in paragraph 4 of subdivision d of 15 RCNY §
28-102.
   g.   When DOB regulations require a perimeter barrier, or "construction
fence," and the site is within 200 feet of a receptor or a receiving property
as defined in 15 RCNY §
28-109, perimeter noise barriers shall be fabricated in accordance with the
standards set forth in subdivision e of 15 RCNY §
28-107 and lined with material set forth in subdivisions c and e of 15 RCNY §
28-107. Further, the responsible party shall fill in any gaps and holes in
adjacent panels of noise barriers with noise attenuation material, so as to
maximize the effectiveness of such barriers. Such noise attenuation material
shall include noise curtain material, additional plywood, or similar material.
When viewing ports are required in the curtain material, they shall be filled
in with clear plastic attached to the curtain.
   h.   The contractor shall create and utilize a noise mitigation training
program, which shall be implemented for all field-worker supervisory personnel
including subcontractor supervisors. Supervisory personnel shall field-train
all field workers to minimize construction noise. Such training program shall
be developed in consultation with DEP.
   i.   When work is planned near sensitive receptors, including but not
limited to facilities such as schools, hospitals, places of worship, and homes
for the aging, the responsible party shall cooperate with the facility owner or
operator to coordinate the work schedule so as to minimize the noise impact on
the facility.
   j.   A DEP inspector may visit a construction site to examine the Noise
Mitigation Plan upon receiving a complaint, or as a matter of routine
inspection, to ensure that the responsible party is complying with such Plan. A
responsible party found not to be complying with such Plan shall be provided a
cure period of three business days to correct the condition or to file an
Alternative Noise Mitigation Plan under 15 RCNY §
28-104. If the condition is not corrected nor an Alternative Noise Mitigation
Plan filed with DEP within three business days, then a Notice of Violation
shall be issued against the responsible party. Said violations may be issued
on-site or by mail. Notwithstanding the preceding sentences in this
subdivision, there shall be no cure period afforded with respect to compliance
with 15 RCNY §§
28-100;
28-101(a), (b), (e), (f), (h);
28-104;
28-105; and
28-106(a), (b), (d) (g) & (i).
   k.   Construction activities may take place during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m. on weekdays. At all other times, the permittee shall obtain after-
hours authorization, pursuant to 15 RCNY §
28-103.
   l.   Where construction projects are of shorter duration of less than 15
days and within the property line and do not require Department of Buildings
(DOB) perimeter barriers ("construction fences"), and where the work site is
within 75 feet of a residential receptor, a temporary or portable (i.e.
unanchored) noise barrier shall be fabricated in accordance with the
specifications in 15 RCNY §
28-108. For long-term street work, defined as 15 days or longer, that is
outside the property line and within 75 feet of a residential receptor and
where there is a dedicated lane available, a temporary barrier in accordance
with the specifications in 15 RCNY §
28-108 shall be required.
   m.   Whenever a responsible party is engaged in sandblasting operations that
require a perimeter or other barrier during sandblasting, said barrier shall be
lined with noise barrier material as set forth in subdivision e of 15 RCNY §
28-107.
   n.   Responsible parties conducting construction and roadway work that will
commence and be completed within a continuous period of no longer than 24 hours
or for emergency work that will last no longer than three consecutive days,
need not file with DEP a Construction Noise Mitigation Plan. However, the
responsible party for such construction work shall not create unreasonable
noise. In addition, if the work occurs near or adjacent to a sensitive receptor
as defined in 15 RCNY §
28-101(i), then the responsible party shall make modifications including
scheduling changes or employing additional noise mitigation methods listed in
15 RCNY §§
28-102,
28-107, and
28-108. This subdivision shall not apply to construction work that occurs after
hours.
   o.   Noise Monitoring at Construction Sites. 
      1.   When a new building construction project requires an Alternative
Noise Mitigation Plan (ANMP) pursuant to § 24-221, the duration of that ANMP is
for 30 days (consecutive or non-consecutive) or longer, the building’s gross
floor area, as defined in Section 202 of the Building Code, is 200,000 square
feet or more, and the work site is within 50 feet of a residential receptor; at
least one noise monitoring device must be placed facing the nearest sensitive
receptors, as defined in 15 RCNY §
28-101(i), or the nearest residential receptor, whichever is closer. The
application for the ANMP shall include a map identifying the sensitive and
residential receptors within a 75 foot radius of the site that are shown on the
Department of City Planning’s ZoLa Map, which can be accessed at ZoLa | NYC’s
Zoning & Land Use Map1, and the map shall show the proposed location of the
noise monitoring device(s). The ANMP application shall also provide the number
and locations of monitoring devices, and the responsible party’s name and
contact information.
      2.   The noise monitoring device(s) must be installed on the construction
site and collect data for the duration of the project, until the construction
activities taking place at the site are limited to minimal noise impact
construction activities, as set forth in 15 RCNY §
30-102, and interior renovation work, as defined in 15 RCNY §
28-110.
      3.   Readings must be measured in A-scale and must be taken 24 hours a
day for the duration of the project. The responsible party must transmit the
data collected by the monitoring device(s) to DEP via the designated public API
endpoint using the required API payload specifications. The data provided must
include the location of the monitoring device, whether indicated by GPS
coordinates or by an address entered manually; the recorded decibel level in A
scale; the date and time of the reading; and the Lmax as defined in § 24-203 of
the Noise Code, across a 5 minute sampling interval for the duration of the
project. Such data must be transmitted at a minimum of once every hour for the
duration of the project.
   p.   Noise Monitoring device installation and maintenance is required as
follows:
      1.   Noise monitoring devices must be mounted approximately 8-10 feet off
of the ground, either on a wall or on a pole. Each device must be equipped with
an outdoor microphone with wind and rain protection that is at least a class 2
type microphone and conforms to IEC 61672-1. If wall-mounted, the device must
be installed with the outdoor microphone at least one foot away from the
nearest surface to avoid sound reflection.
      2.   The windscreens on each monitoring device must be checked at least
once a month and replaced if there is any damage to the foam surface or other
defect.
      3.   Noise monitoring devices can be powered via an external source or a
rechargeable solar platform.
   q.   Subdivisions o and p of this section do not apply to:
      1.   the construction of a building in which all of the dwelling units
will be affordable housing units as defined in § 26-2201 of the Administrative
Code; or
      2.   emergency work as defined in § 24-223(e)(1) of the Administrative
Code.
   r.   DEP may maintain an “Approved Devices” list in order to facilitate
compliance with this rule. In order for a noise monitoring device to be added
to the list, the device must satisfy the criteria set forth in subdivision o of
this section. A device may be removed from the Approved Devices list at any
time if the department determines that it does not meet such criteria. The
Approved Devices list shall be posted on the department’s website.
   s.   Technical terms in these rules are defined in the Noise Code or in 15
RCNY §
28-109.
(Amended City Record 9/18/2018, eff. 10/18/2018; amended City Record 12/22/
2025, eff. 4/21/2026)
§ 28-102 Construction Devices and Activities.
The devices listed in this section require additional noise mitigation. A
responsible party using any of these devices shall mitigate the noise by
following the rules set forth in this section for the specific device. There
are five categories of devices:
   a.   Impact Equipment: Pile Drivers, Jackhammers, Hoe Rams, Blasting.
   b.   Earth Moving Devices: Vacuum Excavators.
   c.   Construction Trucks: Dump Trucks.
   d.   Stationary Devices: Cranes, Auger Drills, Street Plates, Backup Alarms.
   e.   Manual Devices: Concrete Saws. If the responsible party cannot in good
faith comply with the noise mitigation rules for each device, the responsible
party shall file with DEP an Alternative Noise Mitigation Plan in accordance
with 15 RCNY §
28-104.
   a.   Impact Equipment. 
      1.   Pile Drivers. This rule provides noise mitigation strategies that
responsible parties shall utilize in order to reduce the noise emissions from
pile driving and related equipment. Pile drivers for sheet piles and/or column
piles are a common necessity on a construction project. Piles can be used to
stabilize trench walls during excavation, create coffer dams to hold back
water, or to provide an anchored platform upon which structures can be built.
There are two basic types of pile drivers – impact hammers and vibratory
drivers. Noise emission levels from pile drivers can vary widely based on the
type of driver, the type of pile (steel, concrete, wood), and the underlying
ground conditions.
         A.   GENERAL RULES OF OPERATION
            i.   The hours of operation shall be in accordance with 15 RCNY §
28-103.
         B.   SOURCE CONTROLS: QUIETER MODELS & MUFFLERS
            i.   The quietest pile driving method shall be selected that allows
the work to be performed based on structural, geotechnical, and pile friction
requirements and ground conditions. The following list or their equivalent are
acceptable pile-driving methods to the Department: a hydraulic pile pushing
system, a vibratory pile driver; a hydraulic impact pile driver; a drop hammer,
a diesel impact pile driver.
            ii.   Hydraulic pushing method pile drivers, including the Ken-Jet
Still Worker, the Giken Silent Piler, or the SERF Pilemaster, or equivalent,
shall be utilized rather than louder impact or vibratory pile drivers when
ground conditions permit such use. Further, such quieter pile drivers shall be
utilized whenever a responsible party is working within 100 feet of a receptor.
            iii.   In accordance with the noise mitigation criteria outlined in
15 RCNY §
28-101(b), an impact pile driver shall be equipped with a well maintained
exhaust muffler in order to mitigate the amount of noise escaping out with the
diesel exhaust.
            iv.   The responsible party shall select the type of pile being
driven based on structural and/or geotechnical performance requirements. In
order of loudness, wooden piles shall be preferred first, followed by concrete
piles, and then steel piles.
            v.   The responsible party shall pre-auger or pre-trench the pile
holes to soften the underlying ground, reduce ground resistance, and thus
reduce pile driving noise based upon geotechnical conditions at the location.
Auger drill rigs may be mounted to the same crane as the pile driver or
alternatively, an excavator with a long bucket arm may pre-trench as deep as 25
feet below grade.
            vi.   A properly secured impact cushion shall be installed on top
of piles that are being driven by an impact hammer. Commercially available pile
cushions or those fabricated on the job site, out of scrap wood, leather or
rubber, may be utilized.
            vii.   Quieter alternative methods to pile driving, including the
use of drilled caissons filled with concrete, or slurry walls dug out initially
with a milling machine, shall be used whenever possible, depending on
structural and geotechnical performance requirements.
            viii.   Noise bellows systems such as the IHC Hydrohammer, or an
equivalent bellows device, may be used to provide further noise attenuation.
Bellows enclosures accompany the pile down to the ground and collapse accordion
style as the pile reaches the ground.
            ix.   When the responsible party uses a vibratory pile driver or a
hydraulic impact pile driver as set forth in clause (ii) of this subparagraph
and/or noise bellows as set forth in clause (viii) of this subparagraph,
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, the responsible party
need not utilize additional pathway controls listed in subparagraph C of this
paragraph, unless the responsible party is performing work within 35 feet of an
indoor receptor and with the exception of any required perimeter barriers as
specified in 15 RCNY §
28-101(g).
            x.   No violation shall be issued to the responsible party if the
bellows in clause (viii) of this subparagraph B or the barriers listed in
subparagraph C of this paragraph are adjusted such that the operator can view
the end of the hammer for safety purposes.
         C.   NOISE PATHWAY CONTROLS: NOISE BARRIERS & ENCLOSURES. The
responsible party shall utilize one of the following pathway controls. However,
if the Department receives noise complaints concerning the site, the
responsible party shall utilize additional pathway controls listed in this
subparagraph as required by DEP.
            i.   The responsible party shall construct a portable noise barrier
that shall be free from gaps and holes and constructed of a sufficiently
massive material to achieve a Sound Transmission Class rating of STC 30 or
greater. It shall be positioned as close as possible to the pile driver. A
portable (i.e. unanchored) noise barrier can be made, for example, of concrete
jersey bases with 3/4-inch plywood panels attached to fence posts extending
upwards to an overall height of 15 feet. This shall be the maximum height for a
free-standing barrier in order to avoid it tipping over from wind load.
Multiple jersey bases and plywood panels shall be positioned adjacent to one
another to form a barrier of any desired length. The gaps between adjacent
panels shall be filled-in with noise curtain material, additional plywood, or
similar material when practicable. A properly balanced canted panel, not
susceptible to windy conditions, may be placed on top of the barrier in order
to provide better shielding for multi-story receptors. However, said barrier's
height shall not exceed 15 feet including the balanced canted portion.
            ii.   The noise barrier shall be long and tall enough to completely
block the line of sight between the pile driver and any indoor receptor within
200 feet and that is a maximum of 20 feet above grade level, when work occurs.
The barrier should be placed as close to the actual pile driving work as
feasible. Greater noise attenuation occurs when barriers are placed as close as
possible to the noise source.
            iii.   Where applicable, portable noise shields made of steel
frames wrapped with noise curtain material, such as SoundSeal model BBC-13-2,
or equivalently rated material, shall be hoisted up into position on the
crane's second cable to form a noise barrier in the direction of sensitive
receptors. The shield shall be large enough to completely block the line of
sight between the receptors and the pile driver, and shall be lowered to the
ground as the pile is being driven in order to maintain the shielding effect.
Such portable noise shield shall be utilized when the pile driver is higher
than any barrier at the site required under 15 RCNY §
28-101(g).
            iv.   Alternative barriers may be utilized in accordance with site-
specific conditions. For example, shipping container (Conex) boxes or truck
trailers may be positioned along the edge of the work site to form an effective
semi-permanent noise barrier. Sufficient space at the site is necessary, as
these containers are generally 8 feet wide by 8 feet tall and can be double-
stacked to form a noise barrier 16 feet in height. The gaps between and/or
under container boxes shall be filled-in with heavy vinyl noise curtains or
similar materials. It should be noted that gaps and spaces are one of the
primary contributors to degrading a noise barrier's performance.
      2.   Jackhammers/Pavement Breakers. This rule shall provide noise
mitigation strategies that the responsible party shall utilize in order to
reduce the noise emissions from jackhammers and pavement breakers. These
devices are defined as manually-operated, powered (pneumatic or other) devices,
consisting of chisel-hammers or bits used to cut or break through pavement,
concrete, or street surfaces. Jackhammers can be very loud as the steel chisel
or bit hits the target object.
         A.   GENERAL RULES OF OPERATION
            i.   The hours of operation shall be in accordance with the rules
as set forth in 15 RCNY §
28-103.
         B.   SOURCE CONTROLS: QUIETER MODELS & MUFFLERS
            i.   Quieter makes and models of jackhammers such as the Copco
model TEX P90S or equivalent model with an elongated effective muffler casing
or bellows measuring a total of greater than 15 inches in length, shall be used
whenever practicable.
            ii.   The quietest jackhammer suitable to perform the given work
shall be selected for use. The quieter jackhammers, including the jackhammer
specified in clause (i) of this subparagraph or the Chicago Pneumatic CP1240,
with a model F-814004 muffler, or equivalent, shall be used when suitable and
whenever a responsible party is working in close proximity to receptors,
whenever a responsible party is using multiple jackhammers, and whenever
jackhammer operations are occurring during after hours as set forth in § 24-223
of the Administrative Code.
            iii.   In all cases, jackhammers shall be equipped with an
effective muffler, provided either from the manufacturer or from an aftermarket
vendor, which effectively reduces noise from the exhaust air by about 4 dBA or
more. In accordance with 15 RCNY §
28-101(b), an effective muffler shall be properly fitted to the jackhammer to
insure against air or noise leakage.
            iv.   If appropriate to the size of the job, smaller jackhammers
shall be used, as they tend to be quieter.
            v.   When the responsible party uses a device described in clause
(i) of this subparagraph between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on
weekdays, the responsible party need not utilize additional pathway controls
listed in subparagraph C of this paragraph, unless the responsible party is
performing work within 35 feet of an indoor receptor and with the exception of
any required perimeter barriers as specified in 15 RCNY §
28-101(g).
         C.   NOISE PATHWAY CONTROLS: NOISE BARRIERS & ENCLOSURES. The
responsible party shall utilize one of the following pathway controls for
jackhammers or pavement breaker operations within a property line or for long-
term work when outside of the property line as specified in 15 RCNY §
28-101(l). However, if the Department receives noise complaints concerning the
site, the responsible party shall utilize additional pathway controls listed in
this subparagraph as required by DEP. The pathway controls are set forth as
follows: jersey barriers, tents, or other portable noise barriers.
            i.   The responsible party shall construct a portable noise barrier
that shall be free from gaps and holes and constructed of a sufficiently
massive material to achieve a Sound Transmission Class rating of STC 30 or
greater and that shall be positioned as close as possible to the jack hammer.
The noise barrier shall be long and tall enough to completely block the line of
sight between the jackhammer and any indoor receptor within 200 feet and that
is a maximum of 20 feet above grade level, when work occurs. The barrier shall
be placed as close to the actual jackhammering work as feasible. Greater noise
attenuation occurs when barriers are placed as close as possible to the noise
source. A balanced canted panel, not susceptible to high winds shall be placed,
when feasible, on top of the barrier in order to provide better shielding for
multi-story receptors. However, said barrier's height shall not exceed 15 feet
including the balanced canted portion.
            ii.   Jersey barriers. A portable (i.e. unanchored) noise barrier
can be made, for example, of concrete jersey bases with 3/4-inch plywood panels
attached to fence posts extending upwards to an overall height of 15 feet. This
shall be the maximum height for a free-standing barrier in order to avoid it
tipping over from wind load. Multiple jersey bases and plywood panels can be
positioned adjacent to one another to form a barrier of any desired length. The
gaps between adjacent panels should be filled-in with noise curtain material,
additional plywood, or similar material. All jersey barriers shall comply with
the requirements in clause (i) of this subparagraph, including a Sound
Transmission Class rating of STC 30 or greater.
            iii.   Portable noise enclosures.
               (a)   Portable noise enclosures (so-called "noise tents") made
of steel frames wrapped with noise curtain material, such as SoundSeal model
BBC-13-2, or equivalently rated material, may be built to surround the
jackhammer (on the top and 3 sides) and the operator. A properly constructed
enclosure, using curtain material with a Sound Transmission Class rating of STC
30 or greater, generally provides a 5 dBA insertion loss. Such barrier shall
meet OSHA standards for worker exposure to particulate matter.
               (b)   The responsible party shall utilize multiple tents for
multiple jackhammers. For example, when two jackhammers are being utilized and
they cannot fit under the same noise tent, the responsible party shall provide
an additional noise tent.
               (c)   The noise tent shall be moved as the jackhammer work
progresses in order to maintain the tent's ability to block the line of sight
between the jackhammer and the receptors.
               (d)   In accordance with § 24-223 of the Administrative Code,
when emergency jackhammering occurs after normal working hours within 500 feet
of any residential receptor, the responsible party shall use noise tents with
double thick noise curtain material or a noise tent augmented with a portable
noise barrier to form a double layer of mitigation. See 15 RCNY §
28-108. Quieter jackhammers and compressor vehicles shall also be utilized
during after hours work whenever feasible.
               (e)   Where there are receptors surrounding the jackhammer work
site on all sides, two tents shall be used on either side of the jackhammer to
form a complete enclosure as close to the jackhammer as practicable.
      3.   Hoe Rams. This rule shall provide noise mitigation strategies that
the responsible party shall utilize in order to reduce the noise emissions from
hoe rams. Hoe rams, and hoe ram-like devices, are used to cut through roadway
pavement or concrete walls and for demolition of large concrete or steel
structures. They are typically large hydraulic chisel-hammers attached on the
end of a backhoe or excavator arm that can be very loud as the steel chisel
hits the target object.
         A.   GENERAL RULES OF OPERATION
            i.   The hours of operation shall be in accordance with the rules
as set forth in 15 RCNY §
28-103.
         B.   SOURCE CONTROLS: QUIETER MODELS & MUFFLERS
            i.   Quieter makes and models of hoe rams, such as the Bosma
Hammer-Head or equivalent quieter devices, shall be used whenever feasible,
especially near receptors.
            ii.   The smallest hoe ram necessary shall be selected to perform
the task, as smaller devices tend to produce less noise.
            iii.   A noise shroud enclosure shall be wrapped around the head
(i.e. chisel) of the hoe ram whenever working within 200 feet of a receptor.
Shrouds may be selected from various manufacturers such as Krupp Industries,
Allied Hi-Ram, Montabert, or Rammer Inc. with steel shrouds to attach to the
hoe ram head. Alternatively, a shroud may be fabricated on-site by wrapping the
chisel head with a heavy vinyl noise curtain material, such as SoundSeal BBC-
13-2, or equivalently rated material, and securing it with tie wire.
            iv.   A skilled hoe ram operator can significantly affect the
amount of noise produced during the work. In accordance with 15 RCNY §
28-101(h), responsible party and subcontractor personnel shall be trained on
the proper angle or position when the hoe ram chisel is placed against the
work. The operator shall position and operate the device in such a manner as to
minimize its noise output. A violation shall only be issued for failure to
train the operator as set forth in subdivision (h) of 15 RCNY §
28-101.
            v.   Alternative methods to hoe ramming concrete, including
hydraulic jacks or chemical splitting (use of expansive demolition agents),
shall be utilized whenever feasible. For steel demolition, alternative quieter
methods may include the use of hydraulic shears and grapples, or the use of
torches to cut the steel into more manageable pieces, which can then be trucked
off-site for further demolition.
            vi.   When the responsible party uses specific makes and models as
set forth in clause (i) of this subparagraph or a noise shroud as set forth in
clause (iii) of this subparagraph, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
on weekdays, then the responsible party need not utilize additional pathway
controls listed in subparagraph C of this paragraph, unless the responsible
party is performing work within 35 feet of an indoor receptor and with the
exception of any required perimeter barriers as specified in 15 RCNY §
28-101(g).
            vii.   No violation shall be issued to the responsible party if any
of the shrouds in clause (iii) of this subparagraph are adjusted such that the
operator can view the end of the bit for safety purposes.
         C.   NOISE PATHWAY CONTROLS: NOISE BARRIERS & ENCLOSURES. The
responsible party shall utilize one of the following pathway controls below.
However, if the Department receives noise complaints concerning the site, the
responsible party shall utilize additional pathway controls listed in this
subparagraph as required by DEP.
            i.   The responsible party shall construct a portable noise barrier
that shall be free from gaps and holes and constructed of sufficiently massive
material to achieve a Sound Transmission Class rating of STC 30 or greater and
shall be positioned as close as possible to the hoe ram. A portable (i.e.
unanchored) noise barrier can be made, for example, of concrete jersey bases
with 3/4-inch plywood panels attached to fence posts extending upwards to a
overall height of 15 feet. This shall be the maximum height for a free-standing
barrier in order to avoid it tipping over from wind load. Multiple jersey bases
and plywood panels can be positioned adjacent to one another to form a barrier
of any desired length. The gaps between adjacent panels should be filled-in
with noise curtain material, additional plywood, or similar material. A
balanced canted panel, not susceptible to high winds shall be placed, when
feasible, on top of the barrier in order to provide better shielding for multi-
story receptors. However, said barrier's height shall not exceed 15 feet
including the balanced canted portion.
            ii.   The noise barrier shall be long and tall enough to completely
block the line of sight between the hoe ram and any indoor receptor within 200
feet and that is a maximum of 20 feet above grade level, when work occurs. The
barrier should be placed as close to the actual hoe ram work as feasible.
Greater noise attenuation occurs when barriers are placed as close as possible
to the noise source.
            iii.   Alternative barriers may be utilized in accordance with
site-specific conditions. For example, shipping container (Conex) boxes or
truck trailers may be positioned along the edge of the work site to form a
semi-permanent noise barrier. Sufficient space must be available since
containers are generally 8 feet wide by 8 feet tall and can be double-stacked
to form a noise barrier 16 feet in height. The gaps between and/or under
container boxes should be filled-in with heavy vinyl noise curtains or similar
material.
            iv.   Where there are receptors surrounding the hoe ram work site
on all sides, several noise barriers shall be used to form a complete enclosure
around the hoe ram.
      4.   Blasting. This rule shall provide noise mitigation strategies that
the responsible party shall utilize in order to reduce the noise emissions from
blasting. The controlled use of explosives is occasionally necessary on a
construction site, primarily to loosen hard rock ledges or to demolish large
concrete structures. This rule does not apply to tunneling activities subject
to the regulations set forth in § 24-246 of the Administrative Code.
         A.   GENERAL RULES OF OPERATION
            i.   The hours of operation shall be in accordance with the rules
as set forth in 15 RCNY §
28-103.
            ii.   The necessary and FDNY-regulated use of blasting shall be
done in close coordination with the affected public in order to minimize
potential disturbance.
         B.   SOURCE CONTROLS:
            i.   The smallest appropriate blasting charge possible shall be
used in order to minimize blasting noise at its source. The quietest explosive
material possible shall also be selected. Relatively slow-burning explosives
produce quieter noise emissions as compared to faster-burning explosives.
         C.   NOISE PATHWAY CONTROLS: BLAST MATS AND BARRIERS
            i.   Blast mats made of heavy rubber shall be laid over the blast
site.
            ii.   When blasting occurs close to receptors, the responsible
party shall construct a portable noise barrier that shall be free from gaps and
holes, constructed of a sufficiently massive material to achieve a Sound
Transmission Class rating of STC 30 or greater, and positioned as close as
possible to the blast site.
            iii.   The noise barrier shall be long and tall enough to
completely block the line of sight between the blasting and any indoor receptor
within 200 feet and that is a maximum of 20 feet above grade level, when work
occurs. A portable (i.e. unanchored) noise barrier can be made, for example, of
concrete jersey bases with 3/4-inch plywood panels attached to fence posts
extending upwards to a maximum height of 15 feet.
   b.   Earth Moving Equipment. 
      1.   Vacuum Excavators. This rule shall provide noise mitigation
strategies the responsible party shall utilize when working with a vacuum
excavator, or vac-truck. A vac-truck is a vehicle equipped with a low pressure
suction hose leading to an on-board storage tank. Vac-trucks are generally used
when removing dirt to avoid disrupting underground utility services such as
telecommunications cables, water and sewer pipes, gas lines, or electrical
cables.
         A.   GENERAL RULES OF OPERATION
            i.   The hours of operation shall be in accordance with the rules
as set forth in 15 RCNY §
28-103.
         B.   SOURCE CONTROLS: QUIETER MODELS & SILENCERS
            i.   Smaller capacity (lower suction) vac-trucks tend to be quieter
and shall be used whenever practicable. Listed from the quietest to the loudest
order, examples include GapVac, BSI Dewitz, BoVac and Guzzler.
            ii.   Vac-trucks shall be run in their lower power setting whenever
practicable. While suction capacity is reduced with lower engine speeds, there
remains adequate suction to perform almost any job.
            iii.   Several manufacturers do provide silencers on the air intake
and exhaust sides of the blower. Heavier duty silencers including Universal,
Industrial Acoustics, McGill and Burgess-Manning, or equivalent, shall be used
whenever practicable.
            iv.   The vac-truck's suction creating component (i.e. blower)
shall be covered with a noise-reducing housing or enclosure.
            v.   When the responsible party uses a specific vac-truck as set
forth in clause (i) of this subparagraph and/or silencers specifically set
forth in clause (iii) of this subparagraph between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:
00 p.m. on weekdays, then the responsible party need not utilize additional
pathway controls listed in subparagraph C of this paragraph, unless the
responsible party is performing work within 35 feet of an indoor receptor and
with the exception of any required perimeter barriers as specified in 15 RCNY §
28-101(g).
         C.   NOISE PATHWAY CONTROLS: NOISE BARRIERS & CURTAINS. The
responsible party shall utilize one of the following pathway controls below.
However, if the Department receives noise complaints concerning the site, the
responsible party shall utilize additional pathway controls listed in this
subparagraph as required by DEP.
            i.   The responsible party shall construct a portable noise barrier
that shall be free of gaps and holes and constructed of a sufficiently massive
material to achieve a Sound Transmission Class rating of STC 30, or greater,
and shall be positioned as close as possible to the vac-truck. A portable (i.e.
unanchored) noise barrier can be made, for example, of concrete jersey bases
with 3/4-inch plywood panels attached to fence posts extending upwards to an
overall height of 15 feet. This shall be the maximum height for a free-standing
barrier in order to avoid it tipping over from wind load. Multiple jersey bases
and plywood panels shall be positioned adjacent to one another to form a
barrier of any desired length. The gaps between adjacent panels should be
filled-in with noise curtain material, additional plywood, or similar material.
A properly balanced canted panel, not susceptible to windy conditions, may be
placed on top of the barrier in order to provide better shielding for multi-
story receptors. However, such barrier's height shall not exceed 15 feet
including the balanced canted portion.
            ii.   The noise barrier shall be long and tall enough to completely
block the line of sight between the vac-truck and any indoor receptor within
200 feet and that is a maximum of 20 feet above grade level, when work occurs.
The barrier should be placed as close to the actual vac-truck work as feasible.
Greater noise attenuation occurs when barriers are placed as close as possible
to the noise source.
            iii.   Portable noise shields made of steel frames wrapped with
noise curtain material, such as SoundSeal model BBC-13-2, or equivalently rated
material, shall be used to form a noise barrier in the direction of sensitive
receptors and completely block the line of sight between the receptors and vac-
truck. Noise curtains are typically made out of a 1/4-inch thick heavy vinyl
material, often with a noise absorptive quilt attached to one side. These noise
curtains generally weigh 1.5 lbs/sq. ft., have an STC rating of about 32, and
come in 4-foot wide sheets complete with grommets and Velcro edges to aid in
hanging the curtains and sealing the sheets side-by-side.
            iv.   Alternative barriers may be utilized in accordance with site-
specific conditions. For example, shipping container (Conex) boxes or truck
trailers can be positioned along the edge of the work site to form a semi-
permanent noise barrier. Sufficient space at the site is necessary as these
containers are typically 8 feet wide by 8 feet tall and can be double-stacked
to form a noise barrier 16 feet in height. The gaps between and/or under
container boxes should be filled-in with heavy vinyl noise curtains or similar
materials.
            v.   Whenever possible, vac-truck exhaust shall be positioned and
directed away from receptors.
   c.   Construction Trucks and Vehicles. 
      1.   Dump Trucks. This paragraph shall provide noise mitigation
strategies that the responsible party shall utilize in order to reduce the
noise emissions from dump trucks. Dump trucks are commonly used on construction
sites in order to deliver construction materials, remove and excavate debris,
or transfer materials around the job site. However they can produce loud noises
when their tailgates are slammed when dumping a load, when their engines are
revved with inadequate exhaust mufflers, when the first shovel-full is dropped
into the bed, or due to use of their backup alarms.
         A.   GENERAL RULES OF OPERATION
            i.   The hours of operation shall be in accordance with the rules
as set forth in 15 RCNY §
28-103.
         B.   SOURCE CONTROLS
            i.   The smallest sized and quietest dump truck that is adequate
for a particular job shall be selected.
            ii.   A bed liner made of thick rubber, spray-on liner, plywood,
sand or gravel shall be installed to mitigate the noise of the first load being
dropped into the dump truck.
            iii.   Though not required for use in the United States (U.S.),
most U.S. dump truck manufacturers produce quieter models for use in Europe.
European Environmental Label (i.e. Blue Angel) low noise emission construction
equipment, which is required for import and use in European Union (EU) nations
in accordance with Quality Assurance Publication RAL UZ 53 and the Treaty on
European Union 992-02-07 Journal C224, shall be used whenever feasible if it
meets the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's emission requirements and/or
regulations. These models are generally 10 dBA quieter than similar equipment
used in the U.S.
            iv.   The positioning of the dump truck shall be carefully selected
in order to minimize operation near receptors. Responsible parties shall
attempt to reduce the necessity of backing-up by selecting a straight drive-
through truck route. If a backup alarm is used, a quieter warning device shall
be installed in accordance with 15 RCNY §
28-101(f).
            v.   The truck shall be equipped with an effective muffler in
accordance with 15 RCNY §
28-101(b), which shall be well-maintained to ensure maximum noise reduction.
            vi.   Slamming a tail gate shall be avoided to the extent possible
to prevent unreasonable noise. Alternately, a pad made of heavy rubber, leather
or wood, when practicable, shall be used under the tail gate to prevent metal
contact.
            vii.   The engine housing doors shall be kept closed while the
engine is in operation.
            viii.   When the responsible party uses quieter dump truck models
as set forth in clause (iii) of this subparagraph, between the hours of 7:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, the responsible party need not utilize
additional pathway controls listed in subparagraph C of this paragraph, unless
the responsible party is performing work within 35 feet of an indoor receptor
and with the exception of any required perimeter barriers as specified in 15
RCNY §
28-101(g).
         C.   NOISE PATHWAY CONTROLS: NOISE BARRIERS & CURTAINS The responsible
party shall utilize one of the following pathway controls. However, if the
Department receives noise complaints concerning the site, the responsible party
shall utilize additional pathway controls listed in this subparagraph as
required by DEP.
            i.   The responsible party shall construct a portable noise barrier
that shall be free from gaps and holes and constructed of a sufficiently
massive material to achieve a Sound Transmission Class rating of STC 30, and
shall be positioned as close as possible to the vehicle, in order to provide
the greatest insertion loss. A portable (i.e. unanchored) noise barrier can be
made, for example, of concrete jersey bases with 3/4-inch plywood panels
attached to fence posts extending upwards to an overall height of 15 feet. This
shall be the maximum height for a free-standing barrier in order to avoid it
tipping over from wind load. Multiple jersey bases and plywood panels may be
positioned adjacent to one another to form a barrier of any desired length. The
gaps between adjacent panels shall be filled-in with noise curtain material,
additional plywood, or similar material. A canted panel may be placed on top of
the barrier in order to provide better shielding for multi-story receptors;
however care must be taken to avoid having the barrier tip over from unbalanced
loading. Further, said barrier's height shall not exceed 15 feet including the
balanced canted portion.
            ii.   The noise barrier shall be long and tall enough to completely
block the line of sight between the dump truck and any indoor receptor within
200 feet and that is a maximum of 20 feet above grade level, when work occurs.
The barrier shall be placed as close to the actual dump truck work as feasible.
Greater noise attenuation occurs when barriers are placed as close as possible
to the noise source.
            iii.   Noise curtain material, such as SoundSeal model BBC-13-2, or
equivalently rated material, shall be used to form a noise barrier in the
direction of sensitive receptors and completely block the line of sight between
the receptors and dump truck. It shall also be draped over the dump truck to
augment the engine housing and exhaust stack. Noise curtains are typically made
out of a 1/4-inch thick heavy vinyl material, often with a noise absorptive
quilt attached to one side. These noise curtains generally weigh 1.5 lbs/sq.
ft., have an STC rating of about 32, and come in 4-foot wide sheets complete
with grommets and Velcro edges to aid in hanging the curtains and sealing the
sheets side-by-side.
            iv.   Conveyor belts shall be used whenever practicable, as they
may allow the dump trucks to operate much farther away from receptors.
            v.   Alternative barriers may be utilized in accordance with site-
specific conditions. For example, shipping container (Conex) boxes or truck
trailers may be positioned along the edge of the work site to form a semi-
permanent noise barrier. Sufficient space at the site is necessary as these
containers are generally 8 feet wide by 8 feet tall and can be double-stacked
to form a noise barrier 16 feet in height. The gaps between and/or under
container boxes shall be filled-in with heavy vinyl noise curtains or similar
material.
   d.   Stationary Equipment. 
      1.   Cranes. This rule shall provide noise mitigation strategies that the
responsible party shall utilize in order to reduce the noise emissions from
cranes. Cranes are an essential piece of equipment on most large construction
sites in order to load and unload delivery trucks, lift building materials to
required heights, lift excavated materials out of tunnels and for other
subsurface excavations, and move other equipment and personnel around the job
site. Cranes come in many varieties and sizes, including tracked or wheeled
mobile cranes, fixed or floating derricks, and tower cranes.
         A.   GENERAL RULES OF OPERATION
            i.   The hours of operation shall be in accordance with the rules
set forth in 15 RCNY §
28-103.
         B.   SOURCE CONTROLS: QUIETER MODELS
            i.   There are various makes and models that are inherently quieter
than others. Smaller, quieter cranes, including rubber-tired mobile cranes,
shall be used whenever possible based on load lifting requirements.
            ii.   New modern hydraulic cranes shall be used whenever possible
to avoid the squeal produced by cable drum brakes on mechanical cranes.
            iii.   Though not required for use in the United States, most U.S.
crane manufacturers produce quieter models for use in Europe. European
Environmental Label (i.e. Blue Angel) low noise emission construction
equipment, which is required for import and use in European Union (EU) nations
in accordance with Quality Assurance Publication RAL UZ 53 and the Treaty on
European Union 992-02-07 Journal C224, shall be used whenever feasible and if
it meets the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's emission requirements and/
or regulations. These cranes are about 10 dBA quieter than similar models sold
in the U.S.
            iv.   The positioning of the crane shall be carefully selected in
order to minimize the need to relocate it around the job site. Whenever
possible, tower cranes shall be used, as they essentially produce no noise at
ground level.
            v.   The crane shall be equipped with an effective muffler in
accordance with 15 RCNY §
28-101(b), which shall be well maintained to ensure maximum noise reduction.
            vi.   When the responsible party uses new modern hydraulic cranes
as set forth in clause (ii) of this subparagraph and/or additional source
controls set forth in clause (iii) of this subparagraph, between the hours of
7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, the responsible party need not utilize
additional pathway controls listed in subparagraph C of this paragraph, unless
the responsible party is performing work within 35 feet of an indoor receptor
and with the exception of any required perimeter barriers as specified in 15
RCNY §
28-101(g).
         C.   NOISE PATHWAY CONTROLS: NOISE BARRIERS & CURTAINS The responsible
party shall utilize one of the following pathway controls. However, if the
Department receives noise complaints concerning the site, the responsible party
shall utilize additional pathway controls listed in this subparagraph as
required by DEP.
            i.   The responsible party shall construct a portable noise barrier
that shall be free from gaps and holes constructed of a sufficiently massive
material to achieve a Sound Transmission Class rating of STC 30 or greater, and
shall be positioned as close as possible to the crane. A portable (i.e.
unanchored) noise barrier can be made, for example, of concrete jersey bases
with 3/4-inch plywood panels attached to fence posts extending upwards to an
overall height of 15 feet. This shall be the maximum height for a free-standing
barrier in order to avoid it tipping over from wind load. Multiple jersey bases
and plywood panels shall be positioned adjacent to one another to form a
barrier of any desired length. The gaps between adjacent panels shall be
filled-in with noise curtain material, additional plywood, or similar material.
A properly balanced canted panel, not susceptible to windy conditions, may be
placed on top of the barrier in order to provide better shielding for multi-
story receptors. However, said barrier's height shall not exceed 15 feet
including the balanced canted portion.
            ii.   The noise barrier shall be long and tall enough to completely
block the line of sight between the crane and any indoor receptor within 200
feet and that is a maximum of 20 feet above grade level, when work occurs. The
barrier shall be placed as close to the actual crane work as feasible. Greater
noise attenuation occurs when barriers are placed as close as possible to the
noise source.
            iii.   Portable noise shields made of steel frames wrapped with
noise curtain material, such as SoundSeal model BBC-13-2, or equivalently rated
material, shall be used to form a noise barrier in the direction of sensitive
receptors and completely block the line of sight between the receptors and
crane. Noise curtains are typically made out of a 1/4-inch thick heavy vinyl
material, often with a noise absorptive quilt attached to one side. These noise
curtains generally weigh 1.5 lbs/sq. ft., have an STC rating of about 32, and
come in 4-foot wide sheets complete with grommets and Velcro edges to aid in
hanging the curtains and sealing the sheets side-by-side.
            iv.   Alternative barriers may be utilized in accordance with site-
specific conditions. For example, shipping container (Conex) boxes or truck
trailers may be positioned along the edge of the work site to form a semi-
permanent noise barrier. Sufficient space at the site is necessary as these
containers are generally 8 feet wide by 8 feet tall and can be double-stacked
to form a noise barrier 16 feet in height. The gaps between and/or under
container boxes shall be filled-in with heavy vinyl noise curtains or similar
material.
      2.   Auger Drill Rigs. This rule shall provide mitigation strategies the
responsible party shall utilize when using auger drill rigs. Auger drill rigs
are typically mounted to cranes or they can be built as dedicated machines as
well. Auger drill rigs are used to drill shafts into the ground, which are then
filled with cement form concrete piles, to loosen underlying soil and allow
solid piles to be driven more easily, or used in multiple configuration to
"mix" grout into the soil and change the soil's properties (i.e. strengthen it
and reduce its water content).
         A.   GENERAL RULES OF OPERATION
            i.   The hours of operation shall be in accordance with the rules
set forth in 15 RCNY §
28-103.
         B.   SOURCE CONTROLS: QUIETER MODELS & SILENCERS
            i.   The auger drill rig or crane shall be equipped with an
effective muffler in accordance with 15 RCNY §
28-101(b), which shall be well- maintained to ensure maximum noise reduction.
            ii.   All moving parts shall be well lubricated for proper drilling
performance and to avoid unnecessary noise from squeaking parts.
            iii.   Debris on the drill bit shall be removed without quick
twisting, jerking or hammering the bit, unless geotechnical conditions at the
location so require. Alternative quieter methods include use of a high pressure
water hose where debris is not contaminated or a laborer using a hand shovel.
         C.   PATHWAY CONTROLS: NOISE BARRIERS & CURTAINS The responsible party
shall utilize one of the following pathway controls. However, if the Department
receives noise complaints concerning the site, the responsible party shall
utilize additional pathway controls listed in this subparagraph as required by
DEP.
            i.   The responsible party shall construct a portable noise barrier
that shall be free from gaps and holes and constructed of a sufficiently
massive material to achieve a Sound Transmission Class rating of STC 30, or
greater, and shall be positioned as close as possible to the auger drill rig. A
portable (i.e. unanchored) noise barrier may be made, for example, of concrete
jersey bases with 3/4-inch plywood panels attached to fence posts extending
upwards to an overall height of 15 feet. This shall be the maximum height for a
free-standing barrier in order to avoid it tipping over from wind load.
Multiple jersey bases and plywood panels shall be positioned adjacent to one
another to form a barrier of any desired length. The gaps between adjacent
panels shall be filled-in with noise curtain material, additional plywood, or
similar material. A properly balanced canted panel, not susceptible to windy
conditions, may be placed on top of the barrier in order to provide better
shielding for multi-story receptors. However, said barrier's height shall not
exceed 15 feet including the balanced canted portion.
            ii.   The noise barrier shall be long and tall enough to completely
block the line of sight between the auger drill rig and any indoor receptor
within 200 feet and that is a maximum of 20 feet above grade level, when work
occurs. The barrier should be placed as close to the actual auger drill rig
work as feasible. Greater noise attenuation occurs when barriers are placed as
close as possible to the noise source.
            iii.   Noise curtain material, such as SoundSeal model BBC-13-2, or
equivalently rated material, shall be used to form a noise barrier in the
direction of sensitive receptors and completely block the line of sight between
the receptors and auger drill rig. Noise curtains are typically made out of a
1/4-inch thick heavy vinyl material, often with a noise absorptive quilt
attached to one side. These noise curtains generally weigh 1.5 lbs/sq. ft.,
have an STC rating of about 32, and come in 4-foot wide sheets complete with
grommets and Velcro edges to aid in hanging the curtains and sealing the sheets
side-by-side.
            iv.   Alternative barriers may be utilized in accordance with site-
specific conditions. For example, shipping container (Conex) boxes or truck
trailers may be positioned along the edge of the work site to form a semi-
permanent noise barrier. Sufficient space at the site is necessary as these
containers are generally 8 feet wide by 8 feet tall and can be double-stacked
to form a noise barrier 16 feet in height. The gaps between and/or under
container boxes shall be filled-in with heavy vinyl noise curtains or similar
material.
      3.   Street Plates. In addition to the Department of Transportation rules
set forth in 34 RCNY §
2-11(10), the responsible party shall follow one or more of the following
methods to reduce noise emissions from loose or rattling street plates.
         A.   SOURCE CONTROLS:
            i.   The street plates shall be installed in the street surface in
accordance with 34 RCNY §
2-11(10) in order to have a level and smooth transition from pavement to plate
surface and to keep the plates firmly in place.
            ii.   Asphalt cold-patch shall be applied when feasible around the
edges of the street plate to minimize vehicular tire impact on the plate and to
help keep the plate in place.
         B.   NOISE PATHWAY CONTROLS:
            i.   Whenever feasible, traffic shall be routed around the street
plates by placing traffic cones, barrels, and/or warning tape around the plated
area.
      4.   Backup Alarms. In accordance with 15 RCNY §
28-101(f), all existing vehicles that enter a work site shall be equipped with
OSHA-approved, and OEM manufacturer-approved (if necessary), quieter backup
alarms by January 1, 2008. All new vehicles that enter the work site shall be
equipped with OSHA-approved quieter backup alarms by January 1, 2008. All on-
road vehicles that do not enter the work site, but are in operation after hours
pursuant to 15 RCNY §
28-103, shall also be equipped with OSHA-approved, and OEM manufacturer-
approved (if necessary), quieter backup alarms by January 1, 2008. The work
site referenced in this paragraph shall mean construction sites within the
property line. Subparagraph A of this paragraph contains a list of quieter
OSHA-approved backup alarms pursuant to OSHA Regulations, 29 C.F.R. Part 1926,
Subpart "O", 1926.601.b.4 and 1926.602.a.9. If the responsible party cannot
reasonably comply with the requirements of this paragraph, such person shall
file an Alternative Noise Mitigation Plan in accordance with 15 RCNY §
28-104.
         A.   SOURCE CONTROLS: QUIETER MAKES & MODELS
            i.   Quieter alarms or similar backup devices that meet OSHA
requirements may be selected from the list below or from equivalent quieter
alarms.
               (a)   Examples of manually-adjustable backup alarms include:
                  •   Preco Model 45AA
                  •   Ecco Model 820
               (b)   Examples of automatically-adjustable backup alarms
include:
                  •   Preco Model 1048
                  •   Ecco Model SA907
                  •   Grote Model 73100
               (c)   Examples of community sensitive backup alarms include:
                  •   BBS-TEK Brigade Model BBS-92
            ii.   When the responsible party uses quieter backup alarms as
described in clause (i) of this subparagraph, the responsible party need not
utilize additional pathway controls listed in subparagraph B of this paragraph,
unless the responsible party is performing work within 35 feet of an indoor
receptor and with the exception of any required perimeter barriers as specified
in 15 RCNY §
28-101(g).
         B.   NOISE PATHWAY CONTROLS. If it is not feasible to select one of
the OSHA-approved alarms in subparagraph A of this paragraph, responsible
parties shall utilize one of the following pathway controls. However, if the
Department receives noise complaints concerning the site, the responsible party
shall utilize additional pathway controls listed in this subparagraph as
required by DEP.
            i.   Responsible parties shall attempt to reduce the necessity of
backing-up by selecting a straight drive-through truck route.
            ii.   The responsible party shall construct a portable noise
barrier that shall be free from gaps and holes and constructed of a
sufficiently massive material to achieve a Sound Transmission Class rating of
STC 30 or greater. It shall be positioned as close as possible to the vehicle,
in order to provide the greatest insertion loss. A portable (i.e. unanchored)
noise barrier may be made, for example, of concrete jersey bases with 3/4-inch
plywood panels attached to fence posts extending upwards to an overall height
of 15 feet. This shall be the maximum height for a free-standing barrier in
order to avoid it tipping over from wind load. Multiple jersey bases and
plywood panels may be positioned adjacent to one another to form a barrier of
any desired length. The gaps between adjacent panels shall be filled-in with
noise curtain material, additional plywood, or similar material. A canted panel
may also be built on top of the barrier in order to provide better shielding
for multi-story receptors; however care must be taken to avoid having the
barrier tip over from unbalanced loading. Further, said barrier's height shall
not exceed 15 feet including the balanced canted portion.
            iii.   The noise barrier shall be long and tall enough to
completely block the line of sight between the backup alarm and any indoor
receptor within 200 feet and that is a maximum of 20 feet above grade level,
when work occurs. The barrier should be placed as close to the actual backup
alarm as feasible. Greater noise attenuation occurs when barriers are placed as
close as possible to the noise source.
            iv.   Alternative barriers may be utilized in accordance with site
specification. Conex containers are likely already available to the responsible
party. For example, where sufficient work site space exists, container (Conex)
boxes or truck trailers may be positioned along the edge of the work site to
form a semi-permanent noise barrier. These containers are typically 8 feet wide
by 8 feet tall and can be double-stacked to form a noise barrier 16 feet in
height. The gaps between and/or under container boxes shall be filled-in with
heavy vinyl noise curtains or similar material.
   e.   Manually Operated Equipment. 
      1.   Concrete Saws. This rule shall provide noise mitigation strategies
that the responsible party shall utilize in order to reduce the noise emissions
from concrete saws. Concrete saws are used on construction projects primarily
for demolition purposes, but can also be used for opening access holes, cutting
stress relief channels, and finishing off new construction.
         A.   GENERAL RULES OF OPERATION
            i.   The hours of operation shall be in accordance with the rules
as set forth in 15 RCNY §
28-103.
         B.   SOURCE CONTROLS: QUIETER MODELS
            i.   Smaller saws shall be used, based on the power and cutting
depth necessary to perform the job, as they tend to be quieter.
            ii.   A quieter-type saw blade, including a grinding saw blade or
one made of ceramic or special-tipped cutting teeth, shall be chosen whenever
practicable.
         C.   NOISE PATHWAY CONTROLS: NOISE BARRIERS & ENCLOSURES. The
responsible party shall utilize one of the following pathway controls. However,
if the Department receives noise complaints concerning the site, the
responsible party shall utilize additional pathway controls listed in this
subparagraph as required by DEP.
            i.   The responsible party shall construct a portable noise barrier
that shall be free from gaps and holes and constructed of a sufficiently
massive material to achieve a Sound Transmission Class rating of STC 30 or
greater, and is positioned as close as possible to the saw. A portable (i.e.
unanchored) noise barrier may be made, for example, of concrete jersey bases
with 3/4-inch plywood panels attached to fence posts extending upwards to an
overall height of 15 feet. This shall be the maximum height for a free-standing
barrier in order to avoid it tipping over from wind load. Multiple jersey bases
and plywood panels shall be positioned adjacent to one another to form a
barrier of any desired length. The gaps between adjacent panels shall be
filled-in with noise curtain material, additional plywood, or similar material.
A properly balanced canted panel, not susceptible to windy conditions, may be
placed on top of the barrier in order to provide better shielding for multi-
story receptors. However, said barrier's height shall not exceed 15 feet
including the balanced canted portion.
            ii.   The noise barrier shall be long and tall enough to completely
block the line of sight between the saw and any indoor receptor within 200 feet
and that is a maximum of 20 feet above grade level, when work occurs. The
barrier shall be placed as close to the actual saw work as feasible. Greater
noise attenuation occurs when barriers are placed as close as possible to the
noise source.
            iii.   Portable noise enclosures made of steel frames wrapped with
noise curtain material, such as SoundSeal model BBC-13-2, or equivalently rated
material, shall be built to surround (top and 3 sides) the concrete saw and the
operator. A well made enclosure, using curtain material with a Sound
Transmission Class rating of STC 30 or greater, can generally provide a 5 dBA
insertion loss providing there are no gaps in the enclosure. Noise tents may be
reused at other sites with proper care and maintenance.
            iv.   There shall be multiple tents for multiple concrete saws. For
example, when two saws are being utilized and they cannot fit under the same
noise tent, the responsible party shall provide an additional noise tent.
            v.   The noise tent shall be moved as the concrete saw work
progresses in order to maintain the tent's ability to block the line-of-sight
between the saw and the receptors.
            vi.   Emergency concrete sawing that occurs on any public right-of-
way after normal working hours as set forth in 15 RCNY §
28-103, within 500 feet of any residential receptor, shall require noise tents
with double-thick noise curtain material, or a noise tent augmented with a
portable noise barrier to form a double layer of mitigation.
            vii.   Where there are receptors surrounding the concrete saw work
site on all sides, two tents shall be used whenever practicable, on either side
of the saw, to form a complete enclosure.
(Amended City Record 9/18/2018, eff. 10/18/2018)
§ 28-103 Authorized Work Hours.
   a.   Equipment shall be used only during the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. on weekdays, unless the responsible party obtains an after hours work
authorization, in which case the equipment shall be used in accordance with the
hours specified in the permit and in the after hours work authorization, as set
forth in § 24-223 of the Administrative Code.
   b.   When work occurs after hours in accordance with § 24-223 of the
Administrative Code, or falls within one of the exceptions to limits on after
hours and weekend construction work set forth in § 24-222 of such Code,
additional noise mitigation measures and/or techniques shall be implemented
when required by DEP.
§ 28-104 Alternative Noise Mitigation Plan.
When required by § 24-221 of the Administrative Code or this chapter, a
complete and accurate Alternative Noise Mitigation Plan shall be filed with DEP
in accordance with § 24-221 of such Code. If and when approved by DEP, such
plan shall be conspicuously posted at the job site. When an Alternative Noise
Mitigation Plan is required, no construction activities shall take place until
said plan is filed with and approved by DEP. The Alternative Noise Mitigation
Plan Form is available at: http://www.nyc.gov/dep or at DEP's Offices at:
   New York City Department of Environmental Protection
   Bureau of Environmental Compliance, 9th Floor
   59-17 Junction Blvd.
   Flushing, NY 11373
§ 28-105 Utility Noise Mitigation Plan.
Pursuant to § 24-219 and § 24-220 of the Administrative Code, every authorized
publicly franchised New York City utility company that provides gas, electric,
steam and telecommunication services, except when emergency work will be
performed in three days or less, shall have conspicuously posted, a complete
and accurate Utility Noise Mitigation Plan at all sites where construction
activities take place. A generic plan per borough may be used to satisfy the
filing and posting requirement, provided such plan is posted and filed with the
department and otherwise complies with the requirements for a Utility Noise
Mitigation Plan. Although the plan need not be filed with DEP, it shall be
readily available for inspection should a complaint be filed or during a
routine inspection. The Utility Noise Mitigation Plan Form is available at:
http://www.nyc.gov/html/dep/html/noise/construction-noise.shtml.
(Amended City Record 9/18/2018, eff. 10/18/2018)
§ 28-106 Required Noise Mitigation Measures for Utilities.
   a.   A utility company conducting construction activity shall self-certify
in its Construction Noise Mitigation Plan that all construction tools and
equipment have been maintained so that they operate at normal manufacturer's
operating specifications, including at peak loading. Such self-certification
shall be indicated on the Construction Noise Mitigation Plan form required by
15 RCNY §
28-100. Upon a DEP inspection of the work site, DEP shall use the noise level
guidelines in the Federal Highway Administration Roadway Construction Noise
Model User's Guide, Jan. 2006, page 3, located in the Appendix to this chapter,
as a means of identifying equipment that may be the cause of a noise complaint.
If an individual piece of equipment is identified by DEP as exceeding the level
specified in such Guide located in the Appendix to this chapter, upon
notification by DEP, the responsible party shall have the option of: (i)
performing maintenance to demonstrate a good faith effort, notwithstanding the
model year of the equipment, to mitigate the noise by a measurable level
acceptable to the Department, (ii) replacing the equipment with equipment that
complies with said level, or (iii) filing an Alternative Noise Mitigation Plan
pursuant to 15 RCNY §
28-104, within five business days of said inspection. If the responsible party
elects to perform maintenance pursuant to option (i), but cannot demonstrate
within five business days a reduction in noise by a measurable level acceptable
to the Department, such party shall pursue one of the other two options to the
satisfaction of the Department. The failure to exercise and complete one of
such three options within five business days of said inspection shall be a
violation of this rule.
   b.   All tools and equipment being operated on site must be equipped with
the appropriate manufacturer's noise reduction device. These devices, including
but not limited to portable compressors and other such pneumatic tools, such as
jackhammers/pavement breakers, shall be equipped with a standard muffler and
jacket, free from air or exhaust leaks.
   c.   Specialized vehicles, including but not limited to compressor trucks,
vacuum excavators, pavement-coring, power-roding, flush trucks, and other
vehicles with internal combustion motors, shall require additional noise
mitigation measures as specified by DEP, such as the use of noise-insulating
material that does not interfere with the engine operation and/or other
techniques to reduce noise.
   d.   Portable compressors, generators, pumps and other such devices shall be
covered with noise-insulating fabric, which is not to interfere with engine
operations, and/or shall employ other techniques to reduce noise.
   e.   The time of day that work is in progress shall also determine the
technology that provides the appropriate noise mitigation. All work that occurs
after the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on weekdays shall require an after
hours work authorization in accordance with § 24-223 of the Administrative
Code. From the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. on weekdays, the utility shall
use daytime noise mitigation controls. However, work between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekends
may be required by DEP to employ additional techniques, including noise
blankets and barriers to reduce the level of noise for receptors within 200
feet.
   f.   Quieter jackhammers, compressors, and other such construction devices
shall be used when available and/or may be required by DEP. A program shall be
initiated between DEP and the utilities to perform additional noise-testing of
construction devices and to make recommendations to DEP for future rules and
use of devices.
   g.   All unnecessary vehicle engine-idling on site shall be prevented in
accordance with § 24-163 of the Administrative Code.
   h.   All steel traffic plates are to be properly installed and secured to
the roadway surface in compliance with 34 RCNY §
2-11(10)(e). Within 24 hours after a call to the utility from DEP, plates shall
be re-set and secured properly.
   i.   Notification shall be given to residents within 200 feet of the
construction when work is scheduled for longer than 3 days. Such notification
shall include information on construction work schedules and locations.
   j.   The permit-holder shall respond to all noise complaints and/or official
notice from DEP the same day as received or the next day if received after
regular utility work hours or as may be required by DEP.
   k.   All new vehicles will be phased in with the installation of quieter
backup warning devices in accordance with paragraph 4 of subdivision d of 15
RCNY §
28-102.
   l.   A formal noise mitigation training program shall be established and
implemented for all field-worker supervisory personnel including subcontractor
supervisors. Supervisory personnel shall field-train all field workers in an
effort to minimize construction noise.
   m.   When work is planned near sensitive receptors, including but not
limited to schools, hospitals, places of worship, homes for the aging, etc.,
the permit-holder shall cooperate with the facility owner/operator to
coordinate the work whenever possible so as to minimize the impact on the
facility and the utility shall use quieter devices and other noise mitigation
methods, such as blankets and barriers.
   n.   A DEP Inspector may visit the site to examine the Utility Noise
Mitigation Plan upon receiving a complaint and may require further action to
reduce the level of noise. The responsible party will be provided a 24-hour
cure period to correct the condition or to file an Alternative Noise Mitigation
Plan under 15 RCNY §
28-104. If the condition is not corrected after 24 hours or if an Alternative
Noise Mitigation Plan is not filed with DEP, a Notice of Violation shall be
issued. However, there shall be no 24-hour cure period with respect to
compliance with 15 RCNY §§
28-100,
28-101(a), (b), (f), or (h),
28-104,
28-105, and
28-106(a), (b), (d), (g), or (i).
   o.   Perimeter noise barriers shall be used as set forth in 15 RCNY §
28-101(g). All gaps and spaces in the semi-permanent or temporary barriers
shall be filled with noise attenuation material, and such barriers shall be
placed as close as possible to the noise source to promote greater noise
attenuation.
   p.   [Repealed.]
(Amended City Record 9/18/2018, eff. 10/18/2018)
§ 28-107 Perimeter Noise Barriers.
   a.   Perimeter Noise Barriers - Noise barriers, positioned between
construction equipment and receptors, must be used for all construction
projects. Such barriers may be semi-permanent given the time and space
requirements of the job site. They may be made of wood, plastic, Plexiglas,
precast concrete or steel panels, or where work site space permits, natural
materials, such as dirt piles or earthen berms.
   b.   Noise barriers shall be used to reduce noise affecting pedestrians.
Being relatively tall and solid, noise barriers form an excellent perimeter
and/or security fence around a job site in addition to reducing noise at street
level. Greater noise attenuation occurs when barriers are placed as close as
possible to the noise source.
   c.   When the work site is within 200 feet of a residential receptor, the
responsible party that is required to use a work site perimeter noise barrier
(or "construction fence") under DOB rules and regulations shall ensure that
noise-resistant material fully lines the interior face (facing the work site)
of the perimeter barrier, and shall ensure that:
      1.   the barrier breaks the line-of-sight between the noise source and
indoor receptors within 200 feet and a maximum of 20 feet above grade level
where practicable; however, said barrier's height shall not exceed 15 feet,
including the balanced canted portion;
      2.   the barrier is made of a material sufficiently resistant to noise in
accordance with subdivision e of this section; and
      3.   there are no leaks or gaps that will allow noise to pass through the
barrier.
   d.   Noise Barrier Design Options. 
      1.   Semi-permanent noise barriers are barriers that, due to their
height, will require some form of anchoring system. Typically, semi-permanent
barriers are intended for long term continuous use. Thus they are built out of
materials suitable to withstand weather conditions for several years. Materials
such as tongue and groove wooden timbers, vertical I-beam posts and lagging, or
precast concrete panels, serve very well as semi-permanent noise barriers.
Being anchored, semi-permanent barriers can easily extend to heights of 15 feet
and must be in accordance with DOB and FDNY rules and regulations.
      2.   Where practicable, the responsible party shall build a pitched panel
on top of the barrier in order to provide better shielding for multi-story
receptor buildings, however care must be taken to avoid having the barrier tip
over from unbalanced loading.
      3.   Alternative barriers may be utilized in accordance with site-
specific conditions. For example, shipping container (Conex) boxes are likely
already available to the responsible party. For example, where work site space
permits, these container boxes or truck trailers may be positioned along the
edge of the work site to form a semi-permanent noise barrier. These containers
are typically 8 feet wide by 8 feet tall and can be double-stacked to form a
noise barrier 16 feet in height. The gaps between and/or under container boxes
shall be filled-in to avoid having noise flank around or under the container
boxes.
      4.   There are also several product vendors that design and manufacture
noise barrier materials and barrier systems. These special purpose products are
available in various colors and materials including wood, plastic, Plexiglas,
precast concrete or steel panels. They are available with or without anchoring
systems, as needed.
   e.   Noise Barrier Specifications. Noise barriers shall be made of noise-
resistant material sufficient to achieve a Sound Transmission Class (STC)
rating of STC 30 or greater, based on sound transmission loss data taken
according to ASTM Test Method E 90. Such a barrier can provide as much as a 10
dBA insertion loss providing it is positioned as close as possible to the noise
source or to the receptors. To be at all effective, the barrier must be long
and tall enough to completely block the line-of-sight between the noise source
and the receptors. The gaps between adjacent panels must be filled-in to avoid
having noise penetrate directly through the barrier.
(Amended City Record 3/15/2017, eff. 4/14/2017)
§ 28-108 Temporary or Portable Noise Barriers.
   a.   Where there is a dedicated lane for such barrier, temporary or portable
(i.e. unanchored) noise barriers shall be used for street work lasting longer
than 15 days as set forth in this section. All such barriers shall be placed as
close as possible to the noise source in order to maximize noise attenuation.
   b.   Where construction projects are of shorter duration than 15 days and
within the property line and do not require perimeter barriers and are within
75 feet of a residential receptor, a temporary or portable (i.e. unanchored)
noise barrier shall be made in accordance with this section.
   c.   Construction of temporary barrier. Noise barriers shall be made of
noise-resistant material sufficient to achieve a Sound Transmission Class (STC)
rating of STC 30 or greater, based on sound transmission loss data taken
according to ASTM Test Method E 90. Such a barrier may provide as much as a 10
dBA insertion loss, provided it is positioned as close as possible to the noise
source or to the receptors. To be at all effective, the barrier must be long
and tall enough to completely block the line-of-sight between the noise source
and the receptors. The gaps between adjacent panels must be filled-in to avoid
having noise penetrate directly through the barrier.
      i.   Temporary or portable noise barriers, where required, may be made,
for example, of concrete jersey bases with 3/4-inch plywood panels attached to
fence posts extending upwards to an overall height of 15 feet and must be in
accordance with DOB and FDNY rules and regulations. This shall be the maximum
height for a free-standing barrier in order to avoid it tipping over from wind
load. Multiple jersey bases and plywood panels may be positioned adjacent to
one another to form a barrier of any desired length. The gaps between adjacent
sections shall be filled-in to form a continuous solid barrier surface.
      ii.   Wherever practicable, a pitched panel shall be built on top of the
barrier in order to provide better shielding for multi-story receptor
buildings; however care must be taken to avoid having the barrier tip over from
unbalanced loading. Further, the barrier shall not exceed 15 feet in height
including the pitched panel.
   d.   Noise curtains. Noise curtain material may be mounted or hung over
perimeter chain link fences, or draped over small noise sources, to form a
flexible noise barrier. The chain link fences can also be attached to the top
of jersey bases.
      i.   Noise curtains shall be made of a 1/4-inch thick heavy vinyl
material, with a noise absorptive quilt attached to one side (the side facing
the noise source).
      ii.   Noise control curtains shall have a Sound Transmission Class (STC)
rating of STC 30 or greater, based on sound transmission loss data according to
ASTM Test Method E 90. The noise absorptive face of the curtains shall have a
Noise Reduction Coefficient (NRC) rating of 0.85 or greater, based on sound
absorption coefficient data taken according to ASTM Test Method C 423.
      iii.   Noise curtains of this sort, such as SoundSeal model BBC-13-2, or
equivalently rated material, generally weigh about 1.5 lbs/sq. ft. They come in
4-foot wide sheets complete with grommets and Velcro edges to aid in hanging
the curtains and sealing the sheets side-by-side.
   e.   Noise Tents. A noise tent may be used within the property line.
      i.   Noise curtain material may be attached to a metal frame to form a
portable enclosure (known as a "noise tent"). The noise tent shall have noise
curtain material attached on three sides and on top of the frame, with the
remaining side of the frame left open for work access and ventilation.
      ii.   A frame size of 8 feet tall by 6 feet wide by 6 feet deep shall
allow the tent to be positioned over small noise sources, such as pumps,
generators or compressors. The tent may also be used to cover a laborer using
hand-held power tools, such as jackhammers, saws or grinders. Caster wheels may
be placed under the frame for mobility, or the tent may be picked up and moved
with the arm of a backhoe, for example.
§ 28-109 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the meaning of terms shall be as follows
(unless the context specifically indicates otherwise):
   ASTM. "ASTM" shall mean ASTM International, the international standards
organization.
   Canted Panel. "Canted Panel" shall mean a tilted panel of noise mitigation
material that extends a noise barrier to protect upper floor receptors from
noise sources.
   Insertion Loss. "Insertion Loss" shall mean the reduction in noise level at
the receptor's location attributable to the introduction of a noise barrier,
muffler, or other mitigation measure.
   Jersey Bases. "Jersey Bases," also known as concrete traffic dividers or
jersey barriers, shall mean movable concrete bases used in construction that
can accommodate fencing poles to which noise curtain material can be attached.
   Noise absorptive quilt. "Noise absorptive quilt" shall mean padded light-
weight porous material sewn together into a quilt-like pattern and then
attached to one side of a vinyl sheet.
   Noise Barrier. "Noise Barrier" shall mean a structure used for the purpose
of placing near a noise source to reduce the noise level measurable at a
receptor location. This can consist of noise resistant materials such as
plywood, timbers, trailer containers, or noise curtains.
   Noise curtain. "Noise curtain" shall mean noise control product comprised of
(typically) 1/4-inch thick vinyl sheet, to act as a noise resistant material,
with some noise absorptive quilt material attached on one side of the vinyl as
well.
   Noise Pathway Controls. "Noise Pathway Controls" shall mean noise mitigation
techniques placed between the source of noise and the receptor.
   Noise-resistant material. "Noise-resistant material" shall mean material
that has sufficient mass and stiffness to resist noise from transmitting
through the material.
   Receptor. "Receptor," also known as receiving property, shall mean real
property, including but not limited to buildings, grounds, offices and dwelling
units, from which sound levels from sound sources outside such property may be
measured.
   Responsible party. "Responsible party" shall mean, with respect to any
activity regulated or covered by these rules, the owner of the premises on or
where such activity occurs, and any agent of the owner engaged in such activity
or any participant in such activity, including contractors and subcontractors.
Any agency of the City of New York may also be a responsible party.
   Sound Transmission Class (STC). The "Sound Transmission Class", or "STC
rating", shall mean a single index number used to describe a solid panel or
material's ability to prevent noise from transferring directly through it.
Determination of a material's STC is done in accordance with ASTM Test Method E
90.
(Amended City Record 3/15/2017, eff. 4/14/2017)
§ 28-109 Appendix – Federal Highway Administration Roadway Construction Noise
Model User's Guide, Jan. 2006.
CA/T Equipment 50 ft Noise Emission Reference Levels and Usage Factors – All
noise levels expressed in A-weighted decibels with RMS "slow" time constant
 
                                                  Spec 721.560  Actual Measured
Label ID Equipment   Impact Device? Usage Factor  Lmax          Lmax
         Description                (%)           @ 50 ft (dBA, @ 50 ft (dBA,
                                                  slow)         slow)
                                                    Spec 721.560  Actual
Label ID Equipment     Impact Device? Usage Factor  Lmax          Measured Lmax
         Description                  (%)           @ 50 ft (dBA, @ 50 ft (dBA,
                                                    slow)         slow)
         All Other
A        Equipment > 5 No             50            85            n/a
         HP
B        Auger Drill   No             20            85            84
         Rig
C        Backhoe       No             40            80            78
D        Bar Bender    No             20            80            80
E        Blasting      Yes            N/A           94            n/a
F        Boring Jack   No             50            80            83
         Power Unit
G        Chain Saw     No             20            85            84
H        Clam Shovel   Yes            20            93            87
         (dropping)
I        Compactor     No             20            80            83
         (ground)
J        Compressor    No             40            80            78
         (air)
K        Concrete      No             15            83            83
         Batch Plant
L        Concrete      No             40            85            79
         Mixer Truck
M        Concrete Pump No             20            82            81
         Truck
N        Concrete Saw  No             20            90            90
O        Crane         No             16            85            81
P        Dozer         No             40            85            82
Q        Drill Rig     No             20            84            79
         Truck
R        Drum Mixer    No             50            80            80
S        Dump Truck    No             40            84            76
T        Excavator     No             40            85            81
U        Flat Bed      No             40            84            74
         Truck
V        Front End     No             40            80            79
         Loader
W        Generator     No             50            82            81
         Generator
X        (<25KVA, VMS  No             50            70            73
         signs)
Y        Gradall       No             40            85            83
Z        Grader        No             40            85            85
AA       Grapple (on   No             40            85            87
         backhoe)
         Horizontal
AB       Boring Hydr.  No             25            80            82
         Jack
AC       Hydra Break   Yes            10            90            90
         Ram
AD       Impact Pile   Yes            20            95            101
         Driver
AE       Jackhammer    Yes            20            85            89
AF       Man Lift      No             20            85            75
         Mounted
AG       Impact Hammer Yes            20            90            90
         (hoe ram)
AH       Pavement      No             20            85            90
         Scarafier
AI       Paver         No             50            85            77
AJ       Pickup Truck  No             40            55            75
AK       Pneumatic     No             50            85            85
         Tools
AL       Pumps         No             50            77            81
AM       Refrigerator  No             100           82            73
         Unit
AN       Rivet Buster/ Yes            20            85            79
         chipping gun
AO       Rock Drill    No             20            85            81
AP       Roller        No             20            85            80
AQ       Sand Blasting No             20            85            96
AR       Scraper       No             40            85            84
AS       Shears (on    No             40            85            96
         backhoe)
AT       Slurry Plant  No             100           78            78
         Slurry
AU       Trenching     No             50            82            80
         Machine
AV       Soil Mix      No             50            80            80
         Drill Rig
AW       Tractor       No             40            84            84
         Vacuum
AX       Excavator     No             40            85            85
         (Vac-truck)
AY       Vacuum Street No             10            80            82
         Sweeper
AZ       Ventilation   No             100           85            79
         Fan
BA       Vibrating     No             50            85            87
         Hopper
         Vibratory
BB       Concrete      No             20            80            80
         Mixer
BC       Vibratory     No             20            95            101
         Pile Driver
BD       Warning Horn  No             5             85            83
BE       Water Jet     No             20            85            92
         deleading
BF       Welder/Torch  No             40            73            74
 
§ 28-110 Interior Renovation Work Noise Measures.
Pursuant to Administrative Code § 24-219(a)(6), the responsible party
performing interior renovation work, defined as work within an existing
building, must utilize noise mitigation strategies and techniques to reduce
noise from such interior renovation work. Construction activities that have a
minimal noise impact as set forth in 15 RCNY §
30-102 shall not be required to utilize the interior renovation work noise
measures set forth below provided such activities do not exceed the decibel
levels set forth in § 24-228 of the New York City Noise Control Code. The form
for the Interior Noise Mitigation Plan is available at http://www.nyc.gov/html/
dep/html/noise/construction-noise.shtml and shall be filed and kept on site.
   a.   General Rules of Operation. It shall be unlawful to engage in or to
cause or permit any person to engage in interior renovation work other than on
weekdays between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. A person may however
perform interior renovation work in connection with the alteration or repair of
an existing one or two family owner-occupied dwelling classified in occupancy
group J-3 or a convent or rectory on Saturdays and Sundays between the hours of
10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. provided that such dwelling is located more than 300
feet from a house of worship.
   b.   Source and Pathway Controls. Build sound barriers around noisy tool
tasks as per below.
      1.   Noise Barriers. 
         A.   Acceptable examples include but are not limited to:
            • Carsonite Sound Barrier www.carsonite.com
            • Sound Fighter LSE Sound Barrier www.soundfighter.com
            • Kinetics Noise Block www.kineticsnoise.com
            • one inch plywood rated at 30 STC
         B.   Place noise curtains on the walls of rooms where noisy operations
are being performed. Acceptable examples include but are not limited to:
            • Sound Seal BBC-13-2 www.soundseal.com
            • Illbruck Acoustic SONEX Curtain www.illbruck-sonex.com
            • McGill AirSilence Fibersorb Curtains www.mcgillairsilence.com
            • Acoustiblok, Acoustiblok-Wallcover www.acoustiblok.com
            • AcoustiGuard, GenieClip, Mass Loaded Vinyl, Barrer Material, Iso-
sill www.acoustiguard.com
            • Kinetics Model ICC, KSCH, IsoGrid, IsoMax, PSB,Wallmat, IPRB
www.kinetcsnoie.com
            • any equivalent curtain that meets the applicable decibel level
set forth in § 24-228 of the New York City Noise Control Code
         C.   Floor Sound Isolation. Acceptable examples include but are not
limited to:
            • Acoustiblok, Acoustiwool, Acoustipad www.acoustiblok.com
            • AcoustiGuard, OT 4005& 4010, Duraoustic, Barrier Material, Iso
Sep 25HD www.kineticsnoise.com
            • Kinetics, Model RIM, SR Floorboard, Soundmatt, FC Isolayment BR
www.kineticsnoise.com
      2.   Tools. 
         A.   Drills. The responsible party should select drills with the
lowest loaded A-weighted sound power level (SWLA) that meet their needs.
Acceptable examples include but are not limited to:
 
 
Manufacturer brand name Model number
Milwaukee               0302-20
Milwaukee               0299-20
Milwaukee               0300-20
Makita                  6303H
Hitachi                 D10VH
Makita                  6408
 
         B.   Circular Saws. The responsible party should select saws with the
lowest loaded A-weighted sound power level (SWLA) that meet their needs.
Acceptable examples include but are not limited to:
 
Manufacturer brand name Model number
Porter Cable            345
Milwaukee               6370-20
Porter Cable            314
Makita                  5277NB
Makita                  5057KB
Hitachi                 C7SB2
Porter Cable            743
Bosch                   CS20
 
         C.   Portable Generators. The responsible party should select models
with the lowest levels (dBA) that meet their needs. Acceptable examples include
but are not limited to:
 
 
Manufacturer brand name Model number
Honda                   EU3000isAN
Honda                   EU1000iAN
Honda                   EU2000 series
Honda                   EU6500isA
 
         D.   Orbital Sanders. The responsible party should select orbital
sanders with the lowest loaded A-weighted sound power level (SWLA) that meet
their needs. Acceptable examples include but are not limited to:
 
 
Manufacturer brand name Model number
Black and Decker        MS500K
Black and Decker        MS550GB
 
         E.   Power Screw Drivers. The responsible party should select power
screw drivers with the lowest loaded A-weighted sound power level (SWLA) that
meet their needs. Acceptable examples include but are not limited to:
 
 
Manufacturer brand name Model number
Hitachi                 W6V3
DeWalt                  DW272
 
         F.   Reciprocating Saws. The responsible party should select
reciprocating saws with the lowest loaded A-weighted sound power level (SWLA)
that meet their needs. Acceptable examples include but are not limited to:
 
 
Manufacturer brand name Model number
DeWalt                  DW309K
Milwaukee               6519-22
Milwaukee               6509-22
Milwaukee               6524-21
 
         G.   Miter Saws. The responsible party should select miter saws with
the lowest loaded A-weighted sound power level (SWLA) that meet their needs.
Acceptable examples include but are not limited to:
 
 
Manufacturer brand name Model number
Delta                   MS250
Hitachi                 C10FCE
DeWalt                  DW706
 
         H.   Grinders. The responsible party should select grinders with the
lowest loaded A-weighted sound power level (SWLA) that meet their needs.
Acceptable examples include but are not limited to:
 
Manufacturer brand name Model number
Ryobi                   AG401
Ryobi                   AG451
Hitachi                 G12SR2
Ridgid                  R1000
Milwaukee               6148-6
DeWalt                  DW402
Bosch                   1700A
 
         I.   Jig Saws. The responsible party should select jig saws with the
lowest loaded A-weighted sound power level (SWLA) that meet their needs.
Acceptable examples include but are not limited to:
 
 
Manufacturer brand name Model number
Skil                    4380
Milwaukee               6266-22
Black and Decker        JS600
 
         J.   Hammer Drills. The responsible party should select hammer drills
with the lowest loaded A-weighted sound power level (SWLA) that meet their
needs. Acceptable examples include but are not limited to:
 
 
Manufacturer brand name Model number
Hitachi                 DH24PE
DeWalt                  D25103
Bosch                   11224VSR
DeWalt                  DW505
 
         K.   The responsible party must consult the Federal CDC NIOSH power
tools database to ensure that no quieter tools are available. If any of the
tools set forth in subparagraphs A through J of this paragraph have been
discontinued, the responsible party must contact the manufacturer to obtain the
model number for any available newer model that has an equivalent or lower
decibel level. If a tool is selected that is not on the DEP approved list, the
tool must be rated to the same sound reduction or be certified to a lower
decibel level than the tool cited in each applicable section.
(Added City Record 9/18/2018, eff. 10/18/2018)
Chapter 29: Commercial Music Noise Mitigation Rules
§ 29-100 Definitions.
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
   a.   "Board" shall mean the New York City Environmental Control Board.
   b.   "Code" shall mean the New York City Administrative Code.
   c.   "Commissioner" shall mean the Commissioner of the Department of
Environmental Protection.
   d.   "Department" shall mean the New York City Department of Environmental
Protection.
   e.   "Noise Consultant" shall mean any person on the "Approved Noise
Consultants" list maintained by DEP whose appearance on such list was obtained
in accordance with 15 RCNY §
29-101.
§ 29-101 Noise Consultants.
   a.   DEP shall maintain an "Approved Noise Consultants" list in order to
effectively carry out the requirements of § 24-231 and § 24-206 (as amended by
Local Law No. 113 of 2005) of the Code and this chapter. The following persons
are eligible to appear on such list, provided that they submit in detail their
experience, qualifications, and references to DEP and request that their names
be included on such list:
      (1)   A licensed New York State professional engineer possessing at least
two years of experience measuring sound levels utilizing the ANSI standards. At
least one year of such experience shall have been performed within the City of
New York, and such experience shall include developing or proposing sound
mitigation measures for buildings and noise-producing equipment.
      (2)   A person possessing a Bachelor of Science degree or a Bachelor of
Engineering degree from an accredited college or university with at least four
years of experience measuring sound levels utilizing the ANSI standards. Two of
such four years of experience shall have been performed within the City of New
York, and such experience shall include developing or proposing sound
mitigation measures for buildings and noise-producing equipment.
      (3)   A person possessing ten years of experience measuring sound levels
utilizing the ANSI standards. Five years of such experience shall have been
performed within the City of New York, and such experience shall include
developing or proposing sound mitigation measures for buildings and noise-
producing equipment.
   b.   A person may be removed from the "Approved Noise Consultants" list for
cause. If it is determined that a Noise Consultant provided false, misleading
or materially incorrect information to DEP in the course of providing reports
as specified in this chapter, or providing test results under § 24-206 of the
Code, as amended by Local Law No. 113 of 2005, such person shall be removed
from such list after a hearing before an administrative law judge. The burden
of proof in such hearing shall be on DEP to establish a cause for removal from
the list based on a preponderance of the evidence.
§ 29-102 Certification to the Department.
   a.   Pursuant to paragraph 1 of subdivision b of § 24-231 of the Code, the
Commissioner shall recommend to the Board that there be no civil penalty
imposed for a first violation of subdivision a of § 24-231 of such Code
provided that, within 30 days after the issuance of such violation or, if
applicable, within the time granted by the Commissioner pursuant to paragraph
two of such subdivision of the Code, the respondent admits liability for the
violation, and files a certification with the Department in the form and manner
and containing the information and documentation prescribed in subdivision b of
this section.
   b.   The certification referenced in subdivision a of this section shall be
made by a Noise Consultant, retained by the owner of the subject commercial
music establishment or enterprise and acceptable to the Department. Such Noise
Consultant shall certify a written report to the Department that shall include
the following information and documentation:
      (1)   A certification that the commercial music establishment is in
compliance with the sound levels set forth in subdivision a of § 24-231 of the
Code at the establishment's maximum decibel musical performance level.
      (2)   A description of all permanent improvements and modifications made
at such commercial music establishment to achieve compliance with such sound
levels, including but not limited to, the installation of appropriate sound
insulation, isolators, suspension mounting and/or sound mitigation devices or
materials, and diagrams of such work, together with copies of all bills and
receipts for such work, and;
      (3)   All sound level measurements taken at a location within the two
closest receiving properties abutting the establishment and/or in a location
specified by the Department. Should there be difficulty gaining entry to any
abutting location, DEP shall be informed and DEP will set an alternate
location. All such measurements shall be performed by a Noise Consultant. Such
measurements shall be in accordance with the ANSI standards in § 24-231 of the
Code, and shall be taken using an ANSI meter operating in the A and/or C
weighted scales and/or third octave bands.
      (4)   A description of the method by which the maximum allowable
amplified sound level in the A and/or C weighted scales and/or third octave
bands shall be permanently set within the commercial music establishment.
   c.   The report referenced in subdivision b of this section shall be
submitted to the Department within six weeks of the date of violation. The
respondent may ask DEP to grant an adjournment for an additional 30 days to
submit such report upon a showing of substantial hardship due to site
conditions or limitations.
   d.   If the Commissioner accepts the certified report referenced in
subdivisions a, b, and c of this section, he or she shall recommend to the
Board that no civil penalty be imposed for the violation. Such violation may
nevertheless serve as a predicate for purposes of imposing penalties for
subsequent violations of § 24-231 of the Code.
§ 29-103 Application for a Variance From the Decibel Limits for Commercial
Music Establishments and Enterprises.
   a.   In accordance with subdivision d of § 24-231 of the Code, the
Commissioner may grant a variance from strict compliance with the decibel
limits set forth in subdivision a of § 24-231 of the Code to a commercial
establishment or enterprise if:
      (1)   the commercial music establishment or music enterprise was in
existence and was operating at the same location prior to the date of enactment
of § 24-231 of the Code; and
      (2)   the owner of the subject commercial music establishment or
enterprise submits sufficient evidence or data to the Department showing that
strict compliance with such decibel levels would cause practical difficulties
or unnecessary hardship due to the physical condition of the premises or zoning
district conditions, including irregularity in lot size characteristics and
zoning changes. Such evidence or data shall be submitted in accordance with
subdivision b of this section.
   b.   Applications for a variance shall include the following evidence or
data and shall be submitted in the following form and manner:
      (1)   Applications for a variance shall be submitted on forms provided by
the Department and shall contain the information required by this section as
well as any other documentation requested by the Department to verify the
eligibility of the subject commercial music establishment or enterprise for a
variance under the law.
      (2)   An application for a variance must include decibel measurements
demonstrating that such establishment or enterprise is currently in compliance
with the decibel limits that were previously set forth in § 24-241.1 of the
prior Code.
      (3)   An application for a variance must include a written report to the
Department certified by a Noise Consultant retained by the applicant and
acceptable to the Department. Such report shall include, but not necessarily be
limited to, the following information and documentation:
         i.   A certification that strict compliance by the subject commercial
music establishment or enterprise with the decibel levels in subdivision a of §
24-231 of the Code will result in a substantial hardship due to site conditions
or limitations.
         ii.   A description of all proposed permanent improvements and
modifications to be performed upon the subject commercial music establishment
or enterprise to meet the intent of § 24-231 of the Code to practically
minimize noise emanating from the location. Such description shall include an
estimate of the cost of such improvements and a timetable for their completion.
         iii.   All sound level measurements taken at locations within the two
closest receiving properties abutting the establishment and/or in alternative
locations specified by the Department. All reported measurements shall be
performed in accordance with ANSI standards as indicated in § 24-231 of the
Code and using an ANSI compliant meter operating in the A and/or C weighted
scales and/or third octave bands.
         iv.   A description of the method by which the maximum allowable
amplified sound level shall be permanently set within the subject commercial
music establishment or enterprise. The sound levels shall be measured in the A
and/or C weighted scales and/or third octave bands.
      (4)   An application for a variance must also include competent evidence,
in a form acceptable to the Department, that 51% of the outstanding shares as
of the date of such application are held by the same person or persons who
owned the entity as of the date of enactment of the Noise Code, December 29,
2005. If the subject entity is a corporation, such evidence shall include, at a
minimum, corporate records, certified in a manner acceptable to the Department,
demonstrating that at least 51% of the voting securities of such entity were
owned as of the date of such application by the same person or persons owning
at least 51% of such voting securities as of December 29, 2005.
   c.   The Department shall afford all documents submitted such
confidentiality as may be provided by applicable law.
   d.   Variance limitations.
      (1)   A variance granted under this section to an applicant/owner of a
commercial music establishment or enterprise shall be a one-time variance only.
      (2)   A variance granted under this section shall only be applicable to
the business for which it is issued, and shall not be transferable to a new
owner in accordance with subdivision d of § 24-231 of the Code and paragraph
(4) of subdivision b of this section. Any change in ownership, as defined in
paragraph (4) of subdivision b of this section, of a commercial establishment
or enterprise, shall automatically void the variance. A change in the size or
location of the commercial establishment or enterprise, or a change in the type
of business shall also negate the variance.
      (3)   A change in the size or location of the music establishment or
enterprise from its original size or original location prior to the enactment
of § 24-231 of the Code shall negate any right of the establishment to apply
for a variance.
      (4)   In granting a variance, the Commissioner may impose such terms and
conditions as he or she deems necessary to carry out the intent of § 24-231 of
the Code to minimize noise emissions from the location. Violation of the
conditions of any variance shall be deemed to be a violation of subdivision d
of § 24-231 of the Code.
   e.   A violation of the terms of the variance by the establishment shall
constitute violation of § 24-231 of the Code, where applicable, and shall
result in the immediate cancellation of the variance.
Chapter 30: Minimal Noise Impact Construction Activities
§ 30-101 Definitions.
   (a)   "DEP" shall mean the New York City Department of Environmental
Preservation.
   (b)   "Power Tools" shall mean all tools other than those powered solely by
the person using them, including pneumatic tools.
   (c)   "Responsible Party" shall mean, with respect to any activity regulated
or covered by this chapter, the owner of the premises on or where such activity
occurs, and any agent of the owner engaged in such activity or any participant
in such activity, including contractors and subcontractors. Any agency of the
City of New York may also be a responsible party.
§ 30-102 Minimal Noise Impact Construction Activities.
   (a)   Pursuant to § 24-223(e)(4) of the New York City Administrative Code,
the activities listed in this section shall constitute the list of construction
activities with minimal noise impact and the mitigation measures applicable to
such activities. The activities listed herein are not intended to impede or
supersede the authority for Department of Buildings and Department of
Transportation authorization that otherwise exists in the New York City
Administrative Code.
   (b)   For the purpose of this chapter, the use of power tools within twenty-
five feet of a legal residential unit within the building or abutting location
is prohibited.
   (c)   The following interior construction activities within a structure
before window placement are classified as creating a minimal noise impact:
      1.   Taping of dry wall without the use of power tools.
      2.   Paint application without power tools and without removal of
existing material from the surface.
      3.   Caulking, without removal of existing material from the surface and
without the use of power tools.
      4.   Interior plastering or spackling without removal of existing
material from the surface.
      5.   Carpeting without the use of power tools.
      6.   Flash patching walls and floors without removal of existing material
from the surface and without the use of power tools for the J3 occupancy group
only.
      7.   Gluing interior moldings without the use of power tools.
      8.   Landscaping within the premise property line and without power tools
and as further restricted pursuant to § 24-242 of the New York City
Administrative Code.
      9.   Interior cleanup without power tools and without removing attached
surface and wall material.
   (d)   The following exterior construction activities are classified as
creating a minimal noise impact before window placement:
      1.   Installation of roofing membrane without the use of power tools; and
      2.   Insulation of non-structural and non-demolition activities without
the use of power tools.
   (e)   Interior activities within a structure, after window placement, in new
vacant and existing vacant buildings, are classified as creating a minimal
noise impact so long as the following conditions are met:
      1.   All windows and doors shall be tightly sealed; and
      2.   Any openings to the outdoors that allow the external emission of
noise are prohibited; and
      3.   Such work entails only non-structural and non-demolition
construction activities as those activities are defined by the Department of
Buildings or the Department of Transportation, as applicable.
   (f)   Interior construction activities within a structure, after window
placement, in non-vacant buildings, are classified as creating a minimal noise
impact so long as the following conditions are met:
      1.   Windows and doors shall be tightly sealed and;
      2.   Any openings to the outdoors that allow the external emission of
noise are prohibited; and
      3.   Such work entails only non-structural and non-demolition
construction activities as those activities are defined by applicable
authorizing agencies; and
      4.   Such activities take place where the floors directly below and above
the floor are unoccupied; and
      5.   Notice has been given, to the maximum extent possible, to all
residents regarding the time, place and nature of the construction activities.
   (g)   All work performed pursuant to this section where power tools are
permitted can only be performed when the responsible party, acting in good
faith, selects and uses the quietist tools reasonably available for such work.
§ 30-103 Noise Complaint Procedure.
If DEP receives noise complaints, determined to be valid after inspection,
regarding any construction activities performed pursuant to this section, DEP,
after consultation with the responsible party, can require said party to make
modifications to the construction activities or seek from the responsible party
certain noise mitigation methods, including but not limited to, changing of
truck routes, providing mitigation barriers, using different devices, or other
mitigation techniques that shall be employed at the site so that said
activities can continue after hours. The failure to comply with the
modifications required by DEP may result in DEP issuing noise-related
violations pursuant to this chapter and/or requesting that any City permits be
suspended, revoked or denied renewal. Responsible parties shall be on notice
that § 24-223(d) of the New York City Administrative Code is not applicable to
the activities listed in this chapter.
§ 30-104 Undue Hardship.
After complying with the procedures outlined in § 24-223(e)(5) of the New York
City Administrative Code, responsible parties may seek authorization from the
Department of Buildings or the Department of Transportation for after hours
construction work.
Chapter 31: Rule Governing House / Site Connections to the Sewer System
§ 31-01 Applicability and Scope.
   (a)   Applicability.
      (1)   This Rule applies to the certification of sewer availability and to
the issuance of permits for the construction, alteration, repair or relay,
plugging, unplugging, and inspection of all Sewer connections and
appurtenances.
      (2)   The portion of a new Sewer connection extending from the curb line
to sewers built under New York City capital sewer construction projects are not
subject to this Rule and are covered by the standards and specifications for
such projects.
   (b)   Definitions. For the purposes of this Rule, the following definitions
apply:
      Agency. "Agency" means an agency of the City.
      Allowable flow. "Allowable flow" means the storm flow from developments
that can be released into an existing storm or combined sewer based on existing
sewer design criteria.
      Allowable sewer or drain. "Allowable sewer or drain" means an existing
sewer or drain built in accordance with a City drainage plan or an approved
Drainage proposal, and is the approved outlet to receive Flow from the site of
an existing or a proposed development.
      Alteration map. "Alteration map" means a map showing proposed changes to
the City map.
      A.N.S.I. "A.N.S.I." means the American National Standards Institute.
      Applicant. "Applicant" means the Owner of an existing or a proposed
development or his or her legally designated representative.
      Applicant's offering plan. "Applicant's offering plan" or "Applicant's
offering prospectus" means the set of legal documents setting forth the rights,
privileges, and duties of purchasers of shares in the Applicant's proposed
development, and which is submitted to the New York State Department of Law in
accordance with the requirements of Section 352-e of the New York State General
Business Law.
      Approved outlet. "Approved outlet" means an existing storm, sanitary or
combined sewer or drain built to receive flow from a development.
      As-built drawing or Record drawing. "As-built drawing" or "Record
drawing" means a map or a drawing which represents the actual constructed state
of a City sewer, a Private sewer, or a Private drain and appurtenances.
      ASTM. "ASTM" means the American Standards for the Testing of Materials,
latest edition.
      Available sewer or drain. "Available sewer or drain" means an existing
fronting sewer or drain which has existing adequate capacity for use by an
existing or a proposed development.
      Bell. “Bell” means the end of the pipe, which is larger than the rest of
the pipe.
      Block. "Block" means a tract of land bounded by consecutive intersecting
streets.
      Building. "Building" means a structure having a specific Block and Lot
(or tax sublot). In general, a structure will be considered a Building if it
has a separate entrance from an outdoor area.
      Building Drain. "Building drain" means part of the lowest piping of a
drainage system that receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage
pipes inside and that extends to the exterior face of the exterior building
wall; or the outlet of the most downstream trap, private manhole, catch basin,
detention tank, or similar fixture or equipment, and conveys the drainage
directly to the building sewer or, in the absence of building sewer, to an
approved place of disposal.
      Building Sewer. "Building sewer" means part of the drainage system that
extends from the end of the building drain or the outlet of the most downstream
trap, private manhole, catch basin, detention tank or similar fixture or
equipment and conveys the discharge to a public sewer.
      BWSO. "BWSO" means the Bureau of Water & Sewer Operations or its
successor.
      Catch basin. "Catch basin" means a structure designed to collect and
convey stormwater runoff to a Storm sewer, a Combined sewer, or an approved
outlet by means of a catch basin connection pipe.
      City. "City" means the City of New York.
      City drainage plan. "City drainage plan" or "drainage plan" means a plan
for the proper sewage and drainage of the City of New York, or any part
thereof, prepared and adopted in accordance with § 24-503 of the Administrative
Code of the City of New York.
      City map. "City map" means the City map referred to in Sections 198 and
199 of the Charter.
      Code. "Code" means the Administrative Code of the City of New York.
      Combined sewage. "Combined sewage" means a combination of Sanitary
sewage, industrial wastewater and stormwater runoff.
      Combined sewer. "Combined sewer" means a sewer receiving a combination of
sanitary and/or industrial wastewater and stormwater runoff.
      Commissioner. "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of the New York City
Department of Environmental Protection.
      Condominium association. "Condominium association" means the legal entity
comprising the present and future unit-Owners of a condominium development and
established in accordance with Article 9-B of the New York State Real Property
Law.
      Connection permit. "Connection permit" means a written authorization
issued by the DEP to connect to an existing sewer or drain or an approved
outlet.
      Contractor. "Contractor" means an entity retained by the Owner/Applicant
to construct a facility.
      Contributory drainage area. "Contributory drainage area" means a drainage
area bounded by the ridgelines of the furthest boundaries from which flow
reaches a point of discharge.
      DEP. "DEP" means the New York City Department of Environmental Protection
or its successor Agency.
      Detention system. "Detention system" means a system designed to slow and
temporarily hold an accumulation of stormwater runoff and release it at a
controlled rate.
      Direct discharge. "Direct discharge" means a discharge by means of a
sewer connection to a City sewer, a Private sewer, a Private drain, or an
approved outlet fronting the property.
      DOB. "DOB" means the New York City Department of Buildings or its
successor Agency.
      DOF. "DOF" means the New York City Department of Finance or its successor
Agency.
      DOT. "DOT" means the New York City Department of Transportation or its
successor Agency.
      Drainage proposal. "Drainage proposal" means a plan showing a proposed
sewerage system to serve an existing or a proposed development and Contributory
drainage area that does not conform to the City drainage plan.
      Dwelling unit. "Dwelling unit" means one or more rooms in a Building that
are arranged, designed, used or intended for use by one family.
      Final mapped street. "Final mapped street" means a street as shown on the
City map.
      Flow. "Flow" means a continuous movement of storm water or wastewater.
      Fronting. "Fronting" means an existing sewer or drain abutting an
existing or proposed development.
      Groundwater. "Groundwater" means any existing water in subsoil stratums,
including water from springs and natural underground streams, but excluding
water from wells used for the delivery of potable or processed water.
      Groundwater table. "Groundwater table" means the actual depth of ground
water below surface.
      Homeowners' association. "Homeowners' association" means the legal entity
compromising the present and future homeowners/unit owners of a development.
      House connection proposal. "House connection proposal" means a plan
showing proposed Sewer connection(s) to a City sewer, a Private sewer, a
Private drain, or an approved outlet to serve Fee Simple One (1), Two (2) or
Three (3) Family Dwelling Units less than 20,000 square feet in total site
area, connecting to a sewer that fronts the site.
      Indirect discharge. "Indirect discharge" means a discharge from a private
sewer to a public sewer, or a discharge to any street, gutter, pipe, channel,
pumping station, catch basin, drain, waterway, or other conveyance leading to
or connecting with a public sewer, including but not limited to the placement
or abandonment of any substance which could reasonably enter a public sewer
under the force of stormwater or other influence.
      Industrial waste. "Industrial waste" means any liquid, gaseous or solid
substance, or a combination thereof, resulting from any process of industry,
manufacturing, trade or business, or from the development or recovery of
natural resources.
      Inspector. "Inspector" means a DEP or DOB sewer connection inspector.
      Internal drain. "Internal drain" means a drainage system which is not
located in a Final Mapped street, a Record street or an Easement under the
jurisdiction of DEP.
      Intercepting sewer. "Intercepting sewer" or "Interceptor sewer" means a
sewer that was built as part of the Treatment plant, which, during dry weather,
receives the dry-weather flow from a number of transverse Sanitary or Combined
sewers and conveys such Flow to a wastewater pollution control plant. During
storms, it receives predetermined quantities of dry-weather flow mixed with
stormwater and conveys combined sewage to a wastewater pollution control plant.
      Legally designated representative. "Legally designated representative"
means a Professional Engineer or Registered Architect licensed by the State of
New York who represents the Owner in connection with a proposal, plan, or
application.
      Licensed Master Plumber. "Licensed Master Plumber" means a plumber
licensed to perform plumbing work within the City by the City agency having
jurisdiction over such licensing.
      Lot. "Lot" means a tax lot as shown on the Tax map of the City.
      Mapping action. "Mapping action" means a proceeding to change the City
map pursuant to the New York City Charter.
      Non-plumbing work. "Non-plumbing work" means any work not referenced in
the definition of "Plumbing Work", including excavation work, construction work
or any other work not classified as plumbing work.
      NYC Stormwater Manual. "NYC Stormwater Manual" (the "Manual") refers to
the procedural and technical stormwater requirements set forth as an
Appendix to 15 RCNY Chapter 19.1.
      Opinion of dedication. "Opinion of dedication" means an opinion by the
Corporation Counsel that a street is an open and continuously traveled street
dedicated for public use.
      Owner. "Owner" means any individual, firm, corporation, company,
association, society, institution or any other legal entity that owns the
property, appurtenances, and easements compromising an existing or a proposed
development.
      Plumbing work. "Plumbing work" means the installation, maintenance,
repair, modification, extension or alteration of plumbing or piping system
within a tax lot.
      Private drain. "Private drain" means a private sanitary, stormwater, or
combined drain that is constructed in a Final Mapped street, a Record street,
or an easement and discharges into an approved outlet.
      Private pumping station. "Private pumping station" means a privately
owned, operated, and maintained wastewater collection facility required for the
pumping of sanitary or stormwater runoff or Combined sewage to a Private force
main.
      Private force main. "Private force main" means a privately owned,
operated and maintained pressurized pipe designated to receive the wastewater
discharged from a Private pumping station and to convey it under pressure to a
point of discharge.
      Private sewage treatment plant. "Private sewage treatment plant" means a
privately owned, operated and maintained wastewater collection facility located
on private property that is used for the physical, chemical, and/or biological
treatment of wastewater.
      Private sewer. "Private sewer" means a private sanitary, stormwater, or
combined sewer that is designed and constructed in accordance with the
requirements of the City drainage plan to serve a specific development and is
located in a final mapped street, a Record street, or a sewer easement, and
discharges into an approved outlet.
      Private sewer plan or private drain plan. "Private sewer plan" or
"Private drain plan" means a construction plan for the installation of Private
sewers or Private drains and appurtenances thereto.
      Protrusion. “Protrusion” means an extension of the sewer connection
beyond the inner wall of the sewer.
      Record street. "Record street" means a street that appears on the Tax map
of the City, but is not a final mapped street.
      Repair/relay. "Repair/relay" means complete, substantial, or partial
repair or replacement of any existing Sewer connection.
      Retention system. "Retention system" means a system designed to capture
an accumulation of stormwater runoff on site through infiltration,
evapotranspiration, storage for reuse, or a combination thereof.
      Rule. "Rule" means all the standards and requirements of the DEP
governing connection to the sewer system, as contained herein.
      Runoff. "Runoff" means overland stormwater flow that is not absorbed into
the ground.
      Sanitary sewage. "Sanitary sewage" means bodily waste, swimming pool
discharge, wash water, or similar waste which is discharged into a Sanitary
sewer or a Combined sewer.
      Sanitary sewer. "Sanitary sewer" means a sewer which conveys Sanitary
sewage and/or industrial waste.
      Section. “Section” means the area of sewer pipe from existing bell to
bell.
      Seepage basin. "Seepage basin" means a drainage structure constructed in
the street area designed to dispose of street storm water runoff collected by
catch basins and catch basin connections at locations where storm or combined
sewer do not exit.
      Sewer certification. "Sewer certification" or "Sewer availability
certification" means a house connection proposal application or site connection
proposal application to certify the adequacy of the existing abutting sewer to
receive site storm and sanitary discharge from a development.
      Sewer connection. "Sewer connection" means that part of a sanitary,
stormwater, or combined sewer disposal pipe which extends from the property
line of a Building to an existing City sewer, a Private sewer, a Private drain,
or an approved outlet under the jurisdiction of the DEP.
      Sewer easement. "Sewer easement" means a nonpossessory interest in
private property, which allows for the limited right to use the property that
is designated for the construction and maintenance of a drainage facility such
as a City sewer, a Private drain, a Watercourse, a Watercourse diversion, or
related structures.
      Shared sewer connection. "Shared sewer connection" means a sewer
connection serving two or more tax lots.
      Site. "Site" means the area that is being developed.
      Site connection proposal. "Site connection proposal" means a plan showing
proposed Sewer connection(s) from existing or proposed developments other than
a House Connection Proposal.
      Special conditions. "Special conditions" mean and include, but is not
limited to, the construction or use of a Private sewage treatment plant, a
Private on-site pumping station, a private on-site Detention basin, a private
Watercourse diversion by an open channel or closed piping, or a proposed
development requiring a Mapping action.
      Storm sewer. "Storm sewer" means a sewer which conveys only stormwater.
      Stormwater. "Stormwater" means the excess water running off the surface
of a drainage area during, and immediately following, a period of
precipitation.
      Stormwater management facility. "Stormwater management facility" means a
stormwater management practice serving a developed site and consisting of
technology or strategies designed to reduce pollutants in stormwater runoff or
reduce runoff rate or volume from the developed site through infiltration,
retention, detention, direct plant uptake, filtration, or other method or
treatment. Such term includes, but is not limited to, detention systems and
retention systems.
      Stormwater release rate. "Stormwater release rate" means the rate at
which stormwater is released from a site, calculated in terms of cubic feet per
second (cfs).
      Stormwater volume requirement. "Stormwater volume requirement" means the
minimum volume of stormwater required to be managed on the site.
      Tax ma   p. "Tax map" means the Tax map of the City as defined and
referred to in § 11-203 of the Administrative Code of the City of New York.
      Tentative lot. "Tentative lot" means a proposed tax lot as shown on the
"Request to Real Property Assessment, Department of Surveying, Division for
Tentative Lot Numbers".
      Water Board. "Water Board" means the New York City Water Board.
      Watercourse. "Watercourse" means a natural or artificial channel, a
visible path or an active trench, which carries stormwater runoff from a
Contributory drainage area.
      Watercourse diversion. "Watercourse diversion" means the re-routing of an
existing Watercourse by either open channel or closed piping.
      Water service connection. "Water service connection" – The pipe from the
street water main or other source of water supply to the building served.
   (c)   Variances.
      (1)   The DEP may grant a variance from one or more of the requirements
of this Rule only upon:
         (a)   written request by the Applicant; and
         (b)   the presentation of adequate proof substantiating that
compliance with the requirements of this Rule would impose an exceptional
hardship.
      (2)   Every request for a variance shall:
         (a)   identify the specific provision(s) of this Rule for which a
variance is sought;
         (b)   demonstrate that an exceptional economic, technological or
safety hardship would result from compliance with the identified provision(s)
and that the variance requested is the minimum necessary to afford relief; and
         (c)   demonstrate that the proposed variance would not result in any
adverse impact on public health, safety, or welfare, the environment, or any
natural resource(s).
      (3)   There shall be no variances granted from the bonding, insurance, or
security requirements of this Rule.
      (4)   In granting variance, the DEP may impose specific conditions
necessary to assure that the variance will have no adverse impact on public
health, safety, or welfare, the environment, or any natural resource. Failure
to comply with any condition of a variance shall be a violation of these rules.
(Amended City Record 2/15/2022, eff. 2/15/2022; amended City Record 12/31/2024,
eff. 1/30/2025)
§ 31-02 Sewer Availability Certification.
   (a)   General Requirements. Owners proposing to connect to a City sewer, a
private sewer, a private drain, or an approved outlet to serve an existing or a
proposed development must file a sewer certification application with the
appropriate department of the City, in accordance with the following
requirements:
      (1)   For an existing or a proposed Fee Simple One (1), Two (2) or Three
(3) Family Dwelling Unit less than 20,000 square feet in total site area, a
House Connection Proposal for sewer availability certification shall be
required. Stormwater management systems for developments that include
subdivision of lots must be submitted to DEP for review and approval.
      (2)   For all existing or proposed developments other than House
Connection Proposals, a Site Connection Proposal for sewer availability
certification shall be required and must be submitted to DEP. Stormwater
management systems for developments that include multiple construction phases
or subdivision of lots must be submitted to DEP for review and approval as a
master/phased plan site connection application proposal.
      (3)   For the elimination of existing cesspools, septic tanks, or shared
sanitary connections for existing buildings other than House Connection
Proposals, a Site Connection Proposal for sewer availability certification
shall be required, unless the site has been granted a prior sewer availability
certification.
      (4)   All House Connection Proposals or Site Connection Proposals for
sewer availability certification shall be prepared by, or under the supervision
of, a professional engineer or registered architect licensed by the State of
New York and shall be submitted with the appropriate sewer certification
application form. The signature and seal of a professional engineer or
registered architect shall appear on each proposal.
   (b)   Specific Requirements. 
      (1)   A professional engineer or registered architect may self-certify
the availability of sewers by using the appropriate self-certified sewer
certification application, except as specified in paragraph (2) of this
subdivision.
      (2)   A professional engineer or registered architect shall not self-
certify sewer certification applications for the cases listed below. Such
applications shall be submitted to the DEP for review and certification:
         (i)   Applications for projects not filed with DOB;
         (ii)   Applications for proposed developments where a sewer does not
front the property, but is available;
         (iii)   Applications for proposed developments where a storm or
combined sewer extension is feasible;
         (iv)   Applications involving mapping actions;
         (v)   Applications for connection(s) to a proposed private sewer or
private drain under construction by the applicant to serve a proposed
development;
         (vi)   Applications for proposed developments to be constructed in
staged phases;
         (vii)   Applications for proposed developments on part of a tax lot;
         (viii)   Applications to connect to a sewer or drain where the flow
discharged must pass through a private pumping station;
         (ix)   Applications for proposed developments which must utilize an
easement through, or cross, adjacent properties, to gain access to an approved
outlet;
         (x)   Applications for proposed developments on a site traversed by a
watercourse, active ditch, or existing sewer easement;
         (xi)   Applications for proposed discharge of flow to a private drain
not built in accordance with the City drainage plan and which is not owned by
the owner(s) of the proposed development(s);
         (xii)   Applications to connect to sewers or drains discharging to a
private sewage treatment plant;
         (xiii)   Applications for proposed sanitary discharge to an
interceptor sewer;
         (xiv)   Applications for proposed sanitary discharge to six (6) inch
diameter sanitary sewers or drains;
         (xv)   Applications for proposed discharge of site storm flow to a
highway drain, Work Project Administration (WPA) sewer, Temporary Connection
(TC), plumber's drain, watercourse diversion, or State arterial highway drain;
         (xvi)   Applications for skewed connections or connections to stub
extensions from existing manholes; and
         (xvii)   Application for proposed developments in areas rezoned after
June 1993.
      (3)   All sewer certification applications shall contain the appropriate
identification number(s) as issued by the DOB, except for:
         (i)   Applications using DOB's self-certification process; or
         (ii)   Applications which are not required to be filed with the DOB.
      (4)   Sewer certification applications shall include a site plan that
shows the proposed sanitary discharge;; stormwater volume requirement; the
actual stormwater release rate from the site; and the maximum stormwater
release rate, in accordance with the following:
         (i)   The stormwater technical requirements as outlined in the NYC
Stormwater Manual.
         (ii)   Computation of the stormwater release rate shall be in
accordance with 15 RCNY §
31-03(a)(1) for connections in a combined or storm sewer system. In no case
shall the maximum release rate exceed the allowable flow. If it is determined
by DEP that the allowable flow is less than the maximum release rate outlined
in 15 RCNY §
31-03(a)(1), then the maximum release rate will be equal to the allowable flow.
Computation of allowable flow to be discharged into stormwater or combined
sewers or drains shall be based on either the City drainage plan or an approved
drainage proposal under which the existing sewers or drains were constructed.
         (iii)   DEP will accept for review applications that minimize the
runoff coefficient of the entire site by maximizing open areas, and areas with
grass or vegetative cover, green roofs, permeable pavements with suitable
infiltration, or other techniques based on the runoff coefficients published by
DEP. Further runoff coefficient reductions must be substantiated by soil
borings taken at the location of the proposed areas in addition to a
permeability test performed in situ.
         (iv)   Overall site runoff coefficients must not be decreased without
the express written approval of DEP.
         (v)   Applicants shall specify the method(s) of disposal of all
developed site storm flow in conformance with the provisions of local laws
governing such disposal.
         (vi)   Sanitary flow discharged to sanitary or combined sewers or
drains shall be computed based on the density development permissible under
zoning designation for the proposed development in accordance with the most
recent drainage design criteria of the DEP.
      (5)   Block and lot numbers shall correspond to the most recent records
supplied by the DOF. Any applicant proposing to alter an existing block and/or
lot layout shall submit to the DEP a Tentative Lot Number(s) Request Form
bearing the applicant's signature and seal and showing the proposed block or
lot modifications.
      (6)   All existing and proposed sewer connections shall be shown on the
site plan and supporting documents. The minimum size of pipe for proposed or
reused connections to the sewer system shall be an eight (8) inch pipe in the
Borough of Manhattan and a six (6) inch pipe in all other Boroughs. The
diameter of a sewer service connection may never be larger than the diameter of
the sewer to which it is connecting.
      (7)   No horizontal bends for sewer connections shall be permitted
outside the property lines of the project site.
      (8)   All sewer connections shall be gravity connections. Single
structures utilizing an internal ejector shall follow provisions of the New
York City Building Code and shall connect to the sewer by gravity for such use.
In cases where multiple structure developments use internal ejectors, the
internal ejector system shall discharge into a pressure relief manhole within
the property lines, and then flow into the existing sewer by a gravity sewer
connection.
      (9)   All site plans submitted to the DEP with sewer certification
applications shall be prepared in accordance with the latest standards and
requirements of the DEP, as indicated below:
         (i)   Site plans shall be drawn to scale, and shall contain the
original seal and signature of the filing professional engineer or registered
architect.
         (ii)   All hydraulic computations, and the proposed method(s) of
disposal for all sanitary and storm discharge, must be shown on the site plan.
         (iii)   Swimming pool(s) must be shown on the site plan, but are not
reviewed as part of the sewer certification application(s). A separate approval
for the discharge from swimming pools must be obtained from the DEP. All
swimming pools must discharge to an internal sanitary system prior to discharge
into the existing sewer or drain.
         (iv)   Computations and details for the stormwater management
facilities proposed for the on-site retention and/or detention of stormwater
runoff from the developed site necessary to ensure compliance with this rule
and/or with 15 RCNY
Chapter 19.1 must be shown on the site plan.
      (10)   Subsoil boring logs and soil permeability testing information must
be submitted, in accordance with the NYC Stormwater Manual, to substantiate any
proposed on-site stormwater infiltration.
      (11)   Any person constructing a new development abutting a waterway
shall discharge its stormwater to that waterway. All direct discharges shall
comply with all applicable laws and regulations.
      (12)   For sites with industrial waste discharge, the applicant must
obtain approval from the DEP for such discharge prior to the certification of
the sewer certification application. For self-certified sewer certification
applications, the approval for the discharge of industrial waste must be
obtained prior to submission of the self-certified sewer certification
application to the City.
   (c)   (1)   System Availability. The Department will determine the sewer
availability based on the following requirements. The Department shall
determine that connection is feasible if:
         (i)   the sewer is considered a Department asset;
         (ii)   the sewer is of adequate capacity to receive all sewage flowing
from the tributary area;
         (iii)   the sewer is in adequate physical condition to receive such
flow;
         (iv)   no physical obstacles exist, between the boundaries of the lot
or tract of land on which the building is located and the sewer, which would
make connection to the sewer impracticable;
         (v)   the sewer is located in the same drainage area as all or most of
the lot or tract of land on which the building is located; and
         (vi)   no other factor reasonably related to the conveyance of flow
from the building to the sewer would make such connection impracticable or
undesirable as a proper means of sewage disposal.
      (2)   Sanitary flow. A public sanitary sewer or combined sewer for the
purpose of conveying sewage, shall be deemed available to a one, two and three
family dwelling, if a property line of such dwelling is within one hundred feet
(measured along a street or right-of-way) of the sewer. A public sanitary sewer
or combined sewer for the purpose of conveying sewage, shall be deemed
available to a building in which plumbing fixtures are installed, except to a
one, two and three family dwelling, if a property line of such building is
within five hundred feet (measured along a street, or right-of-way) of the
sewer.
      (3)   Storm flow. A public storm or combined sewer for the purpose of
conveying stormwater shall be deemed available in accordance with
Administrative Code § 24-526.
(Amended City Record 2/15/2022, eff. 2/15/2022; amended City Record 12/31/2024,
eff. 1/30/2025)
§ 31-03 Stormwater Performance Standard for Connections to Combined or Storm
Sewer Systems.
   (a)   Stormwater release rates. The following provisions apply to the
issuance of permits for sewer availability certifications and connections to
combined and storm sewer systems for new buildings and alterations as defined
in the Construction/Plumbing Codes and related requirements for any horizontal
building enlargement or any proposed increase in impervious surfaces.
      (1)   The maximum Stormwater Release Rates are set forth in the following
table.
 
Sewer Type            Maximum Stormwater Release Rate
Storm Sewer System    1 cfs per acre or 0.046 cfs, whichever is greater
Combined Sewer System 0.1 cfs per acre or 0.046 cfs, whichever is greater
 
      (2)   For applications where the site is part of a lot, the stormwater
release rate for the altered area must be no more than the stormwater release
rate for the entire site, determined in accordance with subparagraph (1) above,
multiplied by the ratio of the altered area to the total site area. No new
points of discharge are permitted.
      (3)   For sites where stormwater management facilities other than
detention systems are proposed, applicants may be entitled to a reduction of
the stormwater volume requirement. The NYC Stormwater Manual identifies
eligible stormwater management facilities, which must provide a reliable
reduction in peak runoff rates for large events, and sets forth methods for
determining the amount of volume that may be reduced. Requests for any volume
reduction must be shown on the site connection proposal application and
reviewed by DEP and must be made in accordance with the NYC Stormwater Manual.
(Amended City Record 2/15/2022, eff. 2/15/2022)
§ 31-04 Standards for Issuance of Permits.
   (a)   Permits.
      (1)   No person or Owner shall connect to, make use of, or make an
opening into any interceptor sewer, or sanitary, storm, or combined sewer or
drain; or install, repair, relay or plug sewer connections, except upon
issuance of a permit consistent with the provisions of this Rule. No sewer
connections shall be permitted to any catch basin. Any such connection made
without a permit shall be in violation of this Rule.
      (2)   Permits for a new connection or connections shown on certified
sewer certification applications shall be required for the following:
         (i)   new developments;
         (ii)   alterations performed on existing buildings, where sewer
availability certification is required by the DOB;
         (iii)   existing buildings served by cesspools, septic tanks or shared
sanitary connections to be connected to fronting sewers or drains; and
         (iv)   unplugging and reuse of a plugged sewer connection.
      (3)   Plug permit(s) shall be required when an existing connection or
connections are to be abandoned.
      (4)   Repair or relay permits shall be required for the repair or
replacement of an existing sewer connection. Where realignment of the existing
sewer connection or connections to new points of connection results in the
plugging of an existing sewer connection or connections, no separate plug
permit shall be required.
      (5)   Permits shall be required to install manholes on existing sewers or
drains.
      (6)   Permits shall be required to install catch basins and catch basin
connections outletting to existing sewers or drains, or an approved outlet.
      (7)   Permits shall be required to install seepage basins and catch
basins outletting to such seepage basins.
      (8)   Any detention or retention system and any replacement of such a
system proposed and implemented in order to comply with this rule must be
properly maintained throughout the useful life of the system and maintenance
records maintained, until replacement as approved by DEP. This obligation
applies to current property owners, their successors, assigns, and other
persons in control of the property, and shall be made binding in a deed
restriction or other form satisfactory to DEP. Three years after the date of
approval of a retention or detention system and every three years thereafter
the operation of the system shall be inspected by a licensed professional
engineer, a registered architect or a licensed master plumber. Such architect,
engineer or master plumber shall submit certification to DEP that the system is
free of debris and sediments, that its orifice is unobstructed and flowing and
that the system is otherwise operating in compliance with this rule.
   (b)   General Requirements. Sewer connection permits shall be required as
follows:
      (1)   For a single structure on an individual tax lot fronting an
existing combined sewer, a new sewer connection permit shall be required for
each connection.
      (2)   For individual structures on one tax lot with individual combined
sewer connections to an existing combined sewer or drain, a sewer connection
permit shall be required for each individual combined connection. Where such
structures have separate connections to separate sanitary and storm sewers, a
new connection permit shall be required for each individual sanitary and/or
storm sewer connection.
      (3)   For several individual structures on one tax lot sharing a common
internal drain or drains connecting to existing combined sewers, one new sewer
connection permit shall be required for each connection. Where such structures
have common sanitary and storm internal drains for connection to separate
sanitary and storm sewers or drains, a new sewer connection permit shall be
required for each connection made to the sewers or drains.
      (4)   For individual structures on individual tax lots, which will share
common internal drains owned, operated or maintained by a Homeowners
Association, connections to existing combined sewers shall require a new sewer
connection permit for each tax lot.
      (5)   Where individual structures on individual tax lots, which share
common internal drains owned, operated and maintained by a Homeowners
Association, connect to separate sanitary and storm sewers or drains, a sewer
connection permit shall be required for each sanitary and storm sewer
connection made to the common internal drains from each tax lot.
   (c)   Application Procedure.
      (1)   A certified house connection proposal or site connection proposal
shall be required for all permits, except for the following:
         (i)   plug permits;
         (ii)   repair/relay permits;
         (iii)   catch basin, catch basin connection, and manhole permits;
         (iv)   catch basin, catch basin connection, and seepage basin permits;
and
         (v)   connection to an existing sewer for elimination of existing
cesspool or septic tanks for fee simple one, two, or three family dwelling
units.
      (2)   Prior to the issuance of a permit, applicants shall comply with the
following requirements:
         (i)   Upon certification of a house connection proposal or site
connection proposal by the DEP or DOB, the applicant's Licensed Master Plumber
shall apply for the required sewer connection permits at the DEP's water and
sewer records office.
         (ii)   If the Licensed Master Plumber retains a subcontractor, that
subcontractor is only authorized to conduct non-plumbing work. All plumbing
work must be done by the Licensed Master Plumber or persons under the direct
employment and continuing supervision of the Licensed Master Plumber. If work
is to be done by a subcontractor, said subcontractor must be identified on the
application and an affidavit of authorization must be executed by the Licensed
Master Plumber. The authorization shall specify the location and work to be
done and shall state that the work is being done under the supervision of the
Licensed Master Plumber. Such authorization and responsibility will be
effective for the duration of the permit. If coring is to be done as part of
the work, it shall be performed by the Licensed Master Plumber, or his/her
authorized designee.
         (iii)   Only a Licensed Master Plumber may apply for a permit to
install new catch basins, catch basin connections, and manholes on existing
sewers or drains.
         (iv)   A Licensed Master Plumber or a Contractor may apply for a
permit or permits to install seepage basins, catch basins, and catch basin
connections outletting to such seepage basins.
         (v)   No sewer connection permit shall be issued without the
presentation of a valid building construction permit or alteration repair
application (ARA) from DOB or other required work permit from any other agency
having jurisdiction.
         (vi)   No permits shall be issued to install new catch basins, catch
basin connections, seepage basins, or manholes on existing sewers or drains
until an approved builder's pavement plan has been submitted.
   (d)   Permit Issuances.
      (1)   Prior to the issuance of any permit for sewer connection,
applicants must submit the following to the DEP:
         (i)   the appropriate permit application form and, if applicable, an
affidavit by the Licensed Master Plumber authorizing a subcontractor to perform
non-plumbing work;
         (ii)   a certified house connection proposal or site connection
proposal application;
         (iii)   a valid street/sidewalk opening permit from the DOT or other
entity having jurisdiction;
         (iv)   proof of payment of the appropriate permit fee to the Water
Board;
         (v)   proof of compliance with all conditions set forth in the
certified house connection proposal or site connection proposal application
form;
         (vi)   a letter of authorization from the Owner to retain a Licensed
Master Plumber;
         (vii)   except for a single structure condominium development, which
is exempt from this requirement, a declaration of covenants and restrictions
establishing a Homeowners Association or a declaration of condominium recorded
at the appropriate City Register's or County Clerk's Office and a letter issued
by the New York State Attorney General accepting the offering plan/prospectus
for filing; or a "No- Action Letter" issued by the New York State Attorney
General and reviewed by the Legal Counsel of the DEP;
         (viii)   easement documents, declaration of maintenance and deed
restrictions approved by the Legal Counsel of the DEP and recorded at the
office of the County Clerk.
         (ix)   proof of compliance with all other conditions that may be set
forth by the City and with all applicable Federal, State, and Local Laws, Rules
and Regulations.
      (2)   Reuse of Plugged Connection and Reuse of Existing Connection.
Permits for unplugging and reuse of a plugged sewer connection, or reuse of an
existing sewer connection will be issued upon:
         (i)   compliance with all of the requirements listed in paragraph (1)
of this subdivision (d); and
         (ii)   submission to the DEP of the following:
            (A)   notarized letter of intent from the owner requesting reuse of
the plugged sewer connection or reuse of the existing sewer connection;
            (B)   signed and sealed certification from the filing professional
engineer or registered architect that the existing sewer connection is
adequate; and
            (C)   signed and sealed certification from the Licensed Master
Plumber that such plumber has verified that the existing sewer connection is in
good working order.
      (3)   Plug Permit for plug of an existing sewer connection will be issued
upon:
         (i)   compliance with the requirements contained in subparagraphs (i),
(iii), (iv), (vi) and (ix) of paragraph (1) of this subdivision (d);
         (ii)   presentation of a notarized letter of intent from the Owner to
plug the existing sewer connection and to retain a Licensed Master Plumber for
this purpose; and
         (iii)   verification of the existence of the sewer connection to be
plugged.
      (4)   Repair or Relay of Existing Sewer Connections. Permits for repair/
relay of existing sewer connections will be issued upon compliance with the
requirements in subparagraphs (i), (iii), and (ix) of paragraph (1) of this
subdivision (d);
      (5)   Connections to an existing sewer for the purpose of eliminating
cesspools, septic systems or shared sanitary connections. Permits for sewer
connections to an existing sanitary or combined sewer in order to eliminate
cesspools, septic systems or shared sanitary connections will be issued upon:
         (i)   compliance with the requirements contained in subparagraphs (i),
(ii), (iii), (iv), (v), and (ix) of paragraph (1) of this subdivision (d);
         (ii)   for fee simple one, two or three family dwelling units,
submission of approval from DOB to abandon the existing cesspool, septic system
or shared sanitary connection;
         (iii)   for other than fee simple one, two or three family dwelling
units, submission of:
            (A)   an approval from DOB to abandon the existing cesspool, septic
system or shared sanitary connection; and
            (B)   a certified site connection proposal from the appropriate
department, as required by subparagraphs (i), (ii) and (v) of paragraph (1) of
this subdivision (d).
      (6)   New manholes on existing sewers or drains for new sewer connections
or for new catch basin connections. Permits for new manholes to be placed on
existing sewers for new sewer connections or for new catch basin connections
will be issued upon:
         (i)   compliance with all of the requirements in subparagraphs (i),
(ii), (iii), (iv), (v), and (ix) of paragraph (1) of this subdivision (d); and
         (ii)   for new catch basin connections, compliance with all
requirements contained in paragraph (7) of this subdivision (d).
      (7)   New catch basins, catch basin connections, and seepage basins.
Permits for new catch basins, catch basin connections, and seepage basins will
be issued upon:
         (i)   compliance with the requirements contained in subparagraphs (i),
(iii), (iv), and (ix) of paragraph (1) of this subdivision (d); and
         (ii)   presentation of a valid approved Builders Pavement Plan. A
Builders Pavement Plan, approved by the City, must be on file with the Borough
office of BWSO prior to issuance of the permit.
   (e)   Terms and Conditions.
      (1)   Each permit shall be valid for a period not to exceed sixty (60)
calendar days from the date of issuance. An additional one time thirty (30) day
extension may be granted upon written request by the Licensed Master Plumber
explaining reasons for the delay.
      (2)   After expiration of the permit period and any extension, the
permittee shall be required to file for a new permit and pay all required fees.
      (3)   Any permit issued by the DEP pursuant to this Rule may be revoked
by the Commissioner for cause.
   (f)   Fees.
      (1)   All fees shall conform to the latest fee schedule published by the
Water Board.
      (2)   All fees shall be paid to the Water Board.
   (g)   Violations. It shall be a violation to perform any operation or work
without a permit as required by this Rule.
(Amended City Record 2/15/2022, eff. 2/15/2022; amended City Record 12/31/2024,
eff. 1/30/2025)
§ 31-05 Standards for Installation of Sewer Connections.
   (a)   General Requirements. All new sewer connections shall comply with this
Rule. All work must be done in such a way that the connection to the sewer will
not result in any protrusion beyond the internal wall of the sewer.
   (b)   Specific Requirements.
      (1)   Sewer connections may be made to available existing sewers, drains,
or approved outlets, upon the issuance of a permit.
      (2)   New sewer connections shall have a minimum of four (4) feet of
cover unless the DEP grants approval for a lesser cover. No cover above a sewer
connection less than two and a half (2.5) feet shall be permissible. Sewer
connections with less than three (3) feet of cover must be encased in concrete.
      (3)   Connections to sewers supported by piles must be ductile iron pipe
Class fifty-six (56), on broken stone with push on joints. The thickness of the
broken stone bedding shall be a minimum of nine (9) inches.
      (4)   Where the replacement or repair of an existing sewer connection
results in damage or defect to adjacent or connected facilities, the
Commissioner, upon being notified of such damage or defect, may order the
Licensed Master Plumber to investigate and effect any repairs to the adjacent
or connected facilities that may be required at such plumber's own expense.
Representatives of adjacent or connected facilities shall be mailed copies of
the Commissioner's order.
      (5)   Catch basin connections to storm or combined sewers of forty-eight
(48) inches in diameter or smaller shall be made to existing or new manholes.
For sewers larger than forty-eight (48) inches in diameter, the catch basin
connections shall be made to existing manholes, if available, or directly to
the sewer. Details of all other methods of connections shall be reviewed and
approved by the DEP. All work must be in accordance with any Builders Pavement
Plan, approved by the City.
      (6)   New sewer connections shall be made to existing spurs fronting the
property.
      (7)   In cases where no spurs exist, or connection to an existing spur is
not feasible, one of the following methods of connection shall be used:
         (i)   For six (6) inch diameter sewer connections to six (6) inch
diameter sewers or drains, or eight (8) inch diameter sewer connections to
eight (8) inch diameter sewers or drains; when connecting to clay sewers, three
(3) sections of the existing sewer or drain shall be replaced with two (2)
straight pipe sections and a central spur piece; when connecting to sewers or
drains of other materials, minimum one section shall be replaced with three (3)
shorter segments with minimum length of four (4) feet each.
         (ii)   For six (6) inch diameter sewer connections to eight (8) inch
diameter sewers or drains, or eight (8) inch diameter sewer connections to ten
(10) inch diameter sewers or drains, if the existing eight (8) or ten (10) inch
diameter sewer or drain is not supported by a concrete cradle, the connection
method described in subparagraph (i) of this paragraph (7) shall apply. For
sewers or drains on concrete cradles, a minimum of two (2) feet in length of
the existing sewer or drain on either side of the point of connection shall be
encased in concrete. The concrete encasement shall follow Department sewer
design standards. The concrete shall be allowed to set for forty-eight (48)
hours, after which time, core drilling shall be performed.
         (iii)   Core drilling to install a spur into an existing sewer or
drain shall only be performed with an approved coring machine. Such coring
shall be made at the one (1) or two (2) o’clock or ten (10) to eleven (11)
o’clock position as described in paragraph (9) of this subdivision (b). The
cored portion of the sewer shall be retained and submitted to the Inspector.
Core drilling shall only be permitted in the following circumstances:
            (A)   where the new sewer connection is six (6) inches in diameter
and the existing sewer or drain is ten (10) inches in diameter or larger;
            (B)   where the new sewer connection is eight (8) inches in
diameter and the existing sewer or drain is twelve (12) inches in diameter or
larger;
            (C)   where the new sewer connection is ten (10) inches in diameter
and the existing sewer or drain is fifteen (15) inches in diameter or larger;
            (D)   where the new sewer connection is twelve (12) inches in
diameter and the existing sewer or drain is eighteen (18) inches in diameter or
larger; and
            (E)   where the new sewer connection is fifteen (15) or sixteen
(16) inches in diameter and the existing sewer or drain is thirty (30) inches
in diameter or larger.
         (iv)   Any sewer connection ten (10) inches in diameter to existing
sewers or drains less than 15 (fifteen) inches in diameter; or sewer connection
twelve (12) inches in diameter to existing sewers or drains less than eighteen
(18) inches in diameter; or sewer connection fifteen (15) or sixteen (16)
inches in diameter to existing sewers or drains less than thirty (30) inches in
diameter, shall be made only to an existing or proposed manhole. For sewer
connections larger than sixteen (16) inches in diameter, the applicant shall
submit a detail of the proposed method of connection to the Department for
review and approval, and a manhole must be constructed in accordance with
Department standards to accommodate the connection. When a non-standard manhole
is required, an additional Department review is required. No new manhole may be
built on a Department sewer within 50’ of an existing manhole without proof of
substantial hardship.
      (8)   Core drilling. Core drilling shall be performed in accordance with
the following requirements:
         (i)   Clay or Cement Sewers or Drains. A six (6) inch thick concrete
encasement on top and bottom of the existing sewer or drain for a minimum of
four (4) feet length along the existing sewer shall be provided. The concrete
encasement shall be allowed to set for a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours
before the core drill may be performed.
         (ii)   Brick Sewers or Drains. A three (3) inch concrete encasement
with six (6) by six (6) w2.9/w2.9 wire mesh over the top half of the sewer for
a minimum of four (4) feet along the length of the sewer shall be provided. The
concrete encasement shall be allowed to set for a minimum of twenty-four (24)
hours before the core drill may be performed.
      (9)   Installation of a spur on the existing sewer or drain shall be
performed in accordance with the following requirements:
         (i)   A hole shall be core drilled with an approved core drilling
machine to produce a smooth hole equal to the inside diameter of the sewer
connection. A tap saddle/tee made of cast iron shall be installed and bonded to
the existing sewer or drain with a quick setting two-part mix of epoxy adhesive
that will harden in four (4) to seven (7) hours.
         (ii)   A hole shall be core drilled with an approved core drilling
machine to produce a smooth hole equal to the outside diameter of either a
Dutchman (short piece of pipe with belt) or the outside diameter of a neoprene
rubber tee fitting, which shall be placed in the drilled hole and held in place
by a tampered plastic insert. The sewer connection shall fit into the open end
of the tee fitting and be held in place by a mechanically tightened steel band.
      (10)   Should unanticipated field conditions necessitate a different
method of construction than that shown on the certified sewer certification
application, such method shall be submitted for review and approval by the DEP,
prior to any work being performed.
   (c)   Materials.
      (1)   The materials used for new sewer connections or replacement of
existing sewer connections and appurtenances shall meet the following
requirements:
         (i)   Extra strength vitrified clay pipe (ESVP), conforming to ASTM C
700 on six (6) inch concrete cradle, class forty (40), for sewer connections up
to and including an eighteen (18) inch diameter;
         (ii)   Ductile iron pipe (DIP), Class fifty-six (56) with push-on
joints, conforming to A.N.S.I. specification on broken stone bedding conforming
to ASTM C 33, size sixty-seven (67);
         (iii)   Pre-cast Reinforced Concrete Pipe (PCRP) Class three (3) or
higher on six (6) inch concrete cradle conforming to ASTM. Class thirty five
(35) for sewer connections of a twenty-four (24) inch diameter and larger;
         (iv)   Extra heavy cast iron soil pipe (EHCI) on broken stone bedding
conforming with ASTM. Class thirty-three (33), size sixty seven (67).
      (2)   Materials differing from those described in paragraph (1) of this
subdivision (c) shall not be issued without written approval of the DEP. The
burden of establishing the suitability of the material shall be with the
applicant.
   (d)   Manhole Connections.
      (1)   The inner top of the proposed sewer connection shall not be lower
than the inner top of the sewer. The invert of the proposed sewer connection
shall be at least three (3) inches above the bench elevation at the manhole
wall. The invert of the proposed sewer connection shall not be more than four
(4) feet above the spring line (1/2 the diameter) of the sewer.
      (2)   The use of pre-cast manholes on existing sewers or drains shall be
in conformance with the latest DEP Sewer Design Standards, and shall be
supplied by an approved vendor.
      (3)   No pre-cast manholes shall be installed on existing brick sewers.
   (e)   Seepage Basins, Catch Basins and Catch Basin Connections.
      (1)   All proposed seepage basins, catch basins, and catch basin
connections shall be installed in accordance with any Builders Pavement Plan
approved by the City and the latest DEP standards and requirements, and shall
be supplied by approved vendors.
   (f)   Trench Excavation.
      (1)   Prior to performing any excavation, the permittee shall give notice
to the New York City & Long Island One Call Center in accordance with 16 NYCRR
Part 753.
      (2)   Excavations, trenching, and shoring as required, shall be in
conformance with sections 23 and 53 of the New York State Industrial Code, and
all other applicable Federal, State, and Local Laws, Rules and Regulations.
      (3)   Permittees shall comply with all requirements of the DOT or other
entity having jurisdiction.
      (4)   The permittee shall properly support, protect, and maintain all
facilities encountered.
      (5)   Rock excavation for proposed sewer connections shall be made in
compliance with applicable sections of the DEP's Standard Specifications.
      (6)   The maximum width of a sheeted trench shall be in accordance with
DEP Sewer Design Standards.
   (g)   Backfilling.
      (1)   Backfilling and pavement restoration shall be in compliance with
the Standards and Requirements of the DOT or other entity having jurisdiction.
      (2)   No backfilling shall commence until the sewer connection, seepage
basin, catch basin and catch basin connection has been properly installed,
inspected and accepted by the Inspector.
      (3)   If the work is not accepted by the Inspector, the permittee shall
make the trench safe, including plating in as required by the DOT or other
entity having jurisdiction.
(Amended City Record 2/15/2022, eff. 2/15/2022; amended City Record 12/31/2024,
eff. 1/30/2025)
§ 31-06 Tree Plantings Adjacent to Existing Water and Sewer Infrastructure.
   (a)   Specific requirements. When planting trees, the separation distance
shall not be less than:
      (1)   six feet center to center from distribution mains;
      (2)   eight feet center to center from mains greater than twenty inches
in diameter; or
      (3)   four feet from the sheeting area for sewers.
   (b)   Variances. Variances from these requirements may be granted in cases
where the minimum separation distances cannot be physically met and, subject to
DEP approval, where additional root protection systems are proposed. In no case
may a tree be planted directly above a water main or a sewer.
§ 31-07 Inspections.
   (a)   General Requirements. 
      (1)   All sewer connections, including new connections, relays/repairs,
plugs, catch basin and catch basin connections, and seepage basins shall be
inspected and approved by a Department Inspector unless the Department accepts
photographic or video verification that the work meets Department standards.
      (2)   For connection work in the vicinity of the sewer, all work must be
done in such a way that connections to the sewer will not result in any
protrusions beyond the internal wall of the sewer. The Department must be able
to confirm by inspection during installation or by a permittee-provided
photographic or televised inspection of the sewer, as required and specified by
the department, that there are no protrusions into the sewer wall beyond the
internal wall of the sewer.
      (3)   DOB will inspect the building drain(s) and DEP will inspect the
building sewer(s).
      (4)   A permittee shall be granted an inspection one business day
following the request for such inspection.
      (5)   Prior to commencing excavation for sewer connections, the permittee
shall verify that the sewer or drain is not surcharged, obstructed, or damaged.
If the sewer is surcharged, obstructed, or damaged, the permittee shall not
perform any work and shall immediately notify the DEP.
      (6)   No sewer connection or related work shall be inspected or approved
by an Inspector unless the trench is open for any length of previously un-
inspected work and all pipes, joints, and related work are visible. A suitable
ladder affording safe access for such inspection shall be provided by the
permittee. Trenches must conform to all applicable Rules, Regulations and laws
regarding safety.
      (7)   An Inspector is required to be present during any drill-in to a
sewer or drain.
      (8)   Any trench backfilled without completed inspection shall be re-
excavated to the degree necessary as determined by the Inspector.
      (9)   Inspections will be conducted Monday through Friday (except on
holidays) between the hours of 7 a.m. and 4 p.m. Exceptions to this requirement
may be granted upon traffic and work stipulations set forth by the DOT or other
entity having jurisdiction or for other unforeseen circumstances, at the
discretion of the department.
      (10)   No inspection shall be performed unless all permits and
appropriate documentation required by the DEP are displayed at the work site.
Such documentation shall include:
         (i)   the certified house connection proposal or certified site
connection proposal, with all pertinent supporting documents where required;
         (ii)   the approved permit application and sewer connection permit;
         (iii)   the street opening permit from the DOT or other entity having
jurisdiction, and when a Builder's Pavement Plan has been required, an approved
copy thereof;
         (iv)   all approved shop drawings;
         (v)   all Mayor's Traffic Construction Coordination Committee traffic
stipulations, where weekend and/or night work is scheduled; and
         (vi)   all applicable notarized affidavits regarding the reuse of
existing connections.
   (b)   Certificate of Inspection.
      (1)   A certificate of inspection shall be issued for each permit granted
by the DEP upon: (i) successful completion of an inspection; and
         (ii)   compliance with all applicable requirements in 15 RCNY §§
31-04,
31-05, and
31-07.
      (2)   For sewer certifications with multiple permits, a certificate of
inspection shall be issued for each unit.
      (3)   No certificate of inspection shall be issued unless all sewer work
shown on the certified house connection proposal or site connection proposal
has been completed and inspected.
(Amended City Record 2/15/2022, eff. 2/15/2022; amended City Record 12/31/2024,
eff. 1/30/2025)
§ 31-08 Repair Order.
   (a)   General Requirements.
      (1)   When a sewer house connection, private pumping station, private
sanitary ejector, private sanitary force main house connection, or a private
force main is found to be leaking, inoperative or defective at a particular
premises, the DEP shall issue a repair order to the Owner of such premises. The
repair order shall instruct the Owner to make all necessary repairs and
otherwise comply with the requirements of such order within 30 days of the date
of issuance of such order, except when the DEP determines that there is an
immediate danger to public health, property or to the environment, in which
case such order may provide that repairs shall be made immediately upon
issuance of such order. For purposes of this section, "ejector" shall mean a
mechanical device used to pump or eject sewage.
      (2)   If the Owner has not complied with the repair order in the period
allowed, the DEP shall shut off the water service tap/wet connection of the
premises. All repair work concerning a sewer connection shall be performed by a
Licensed Master Plumber, as provided herein.
      (3)   If an Owner believes that a repair order has been issued in error
or that exigent circumstances exist such that shutting off the tap/wet
connection of the premises would result in extreme hardship, the Owner may
apply by letter to the Commissioner who shall make a final determination as to
whether the repair order was issued in error or whether exigent circumstances
exist warranting an abeyance of issuance of the repair order.
      (4)   A Licensed Master Plumber shall obtain a sewer connection repair
permit prior to performing work pursuant to a repair order on a sewer
connection or in compliance with 15 RCNY §§
31-04(a)(4) and
31-08(a). Upon completion of all necessary repairs by the Licensed Master
Plumber and approval by the DEP, a Licensed Master Plumber shall obtain a tap/
wet connection permit to restore the water service.
      (5)   When the water service is shut off by the DEP, the Owner must
engage a Licensed Master Plumber to assume responsibility for the excavation
over the tap or wet connection. If the Owner fails to engage a Licensed Master
Plumber, the water service will remain shut off, the excavation will be
backfilled, and the street will be properly restored.
§ 31-09 Effectiveness.
   (a)   The amendments to this chapter made by the rule that added this
section do not apply to any site with a sewer availability certification issued
prior to February 15, 2022.
   (b)   Notwithstanding subdivision a of this section, a site that is within
an area that was rezoned as a result of a zoning map amendment application
filed by the Department of City Planning, that received final approval after
November 15, 2021 but before the effective date of the rule that added this
section, must comply with the requirements of the amendments to this Chapter
made by such rule if such site seeks to develop a parcel of land pursuant to
such rezoning. Where any application for certification for such a site was
submitted or any certification for such a site was issued under the rules in
effect prior to the effective date of the rule that added this section, the
applicant may not proceed under that application for certification or issued
certification and must submit a new application for certification in compliance
with 15 RCNY §§
31-02 and
31-03, as amended by the rule that added this section.
(Added City Record 2/15/2022, eff. 2/15/2022)
Chapter 32: Adjudications
§ 32-01 Conduct of Adjudicatory Hearings by the Department of Environmental
Protection.
Pursuant to Sections 1041, 1046, 1047 and 1048 of the Charter, the Department
of Environmental Protection has determined that the following adjudications
shall continue to be conducted by the Department:
   (a)   Revocation or Suspension of a certificate issued by the Asbestos
Control Program, pursuant to Administrative Code § 24-136(e)(4).
   (b)   Revocation or Removal of a Noise Consultant from the "Approved Noise
Consultants" list, pursuant to Administrative Code § 24-206(b)(i-ii) and 15
RCNY §
29-101.
   (c)   Appeal of Commissioner's Order issued pursuant to the Hazardous
Substances Emergency Response Law, Administrative Code § 24-610(a)(4).
   (d)   Appeal of a Stop Work Order issued pursuant to Administrative Code §
24-136(h) or 24-223.1.
   (e)   Appeal of Written Abatement Order issued pursuant to Administrative
Code § 24-146(f).
   (e-1)   Adjudications of sanctions or other actions imposed pursuant to §
24-337 of the Administrative Code of the City of New York in accordance with
the procedure set forth in subdivisions (b), (c) or (d) of 15 RCNY §
21-03.
   (f)   [Repealed.]
   (g)   [Repealed.]
   (h)   [Repealed.]
(Amended City Record 8/27/2015, eff. 5/6/2016; amended City Record 2/2/2017,
eff. 3/4/2017; amended City Record 9/10/2018, eff. 10/10/2018; amended City
Record 4/13/2022, eff. 5/13/2022)
§ 32-02 Hearing Procedures.
   (a)   The Hearing Procedures in this 15 RCNY §
32-02 shall apply to the hearings referred to in 15 RCNY §
32-01.
   (b)   Hearing procedures.
      (1)   All parties shall be given reasonable notice of the hearing,
including a statement of the nature of the proceeding and the time and place it
will be held, a statement of the legal authority and jurisdiction under which
the hearing is to be held, and a reference to the particular section of the law
and rules involved, and a short statement of the matters to be heard, including
reference to the particular law and rules involved.
      (2)   The party who initiated the Proceeding has the burden of proving
the facts claimed by a preponderance of the relevant evidence.
      (3)   All parties shall be afforded due process of law, including the
opportunity to be represented by counsel, to issue subpoenas or request that
subpoenas be issued to call witnesses, to examine and cross-examine witnesses,
to make factual or legal arguments orally or in writing, to present evidence in
support of their claims and to have other rights essential for due process and
a fair hearing.
      (4)   Testimony given and other proceedings had at a hearing shall be
recorded verbatim. For this purpose, the Department may use whatever means it
deems appropriate, including but not limited to the use of stenographic
transcriptions or recording devices.
         (i)   Depending on the means used, a copy of the Department's
transcription may be available at reasonable cost to the parties.
         (ii)   When such a copy will not be available, the parties may arrange
for a transcript at their own expense.
      (5)   Translation services shall be made available for all hearings held
under this chapter except for hearings regarding the possible suspension or
revocation of an asbestos handler supervisor certificate or an asbestos
investigator certificate, which shall be held in English only.
   (c)   Hearing officer.
      (1)   The hearing officer shall have power to:
         (i)   rule upon motions and requests;
         (ii)   set the time and place of hearing;
         (iii)   administer oaths and affirmations;
         (iv)   summon and examine witnesses;
         (v)   admit or exclude evidence;
         (vi)   hear argument on facts or law;
         (vii)   do all acts and take all measures necessary for the
maintenance of order and efficient conduct of the hearing.
      (2)   The hearing officer shall admit all relevant, competent, and
material evidence, except where such evidence is unduly repetitious, or where
its value as proof is substantially outweighed by a potential for unfair
prejudice, confusion of the issue, undue delay, waste of time or needless
presentation of the repetitious or duplicative evidence. Adherence to the
formal rules of evidence is not required.
      (3)   Report.
         (i)   The hearing officer shall prepare and submit a report to the
Commissioner for her/his review, which shall contain proposed findings of fact
and recommended decisions.
         (ii)   Such report shall be submitted within thirty (30) business days
of the close of the record.
   (d)   Final determination.
      (1)   Within a reasonable time after receipt of the hearing officer's
report, the Commissioner, or his/her designee, shall make a final
determination, based on the hearing officer's report and on the record.
      (2)   A copy of the final determination and order shall be served
personally or by certified or registered mail or by email to an address
supplied by any party at the hearing with the written consent of such party,
or, when applicable, in accordance with §§ 24-115 or 24-213 of the
Administrative Code of the City of New York, to all parties to the proceeding.
      (3)   At any time prior to the issuance of the final determination of the
Commissioner, or his/her designee, the Department may enter into a stipulation
or consent order with any party. Such a stipulation or consent order may be
used as factual evidence in a later proceeding brought by the Department
against such party.
(Amended City Record 8/27/2015, eff. 8/27/2015; amended City Record 2/2/2017,
eff. 3/4/2017)
§ 32-03 Conduct of Adjudicatory Hearings by the Office of Administrative Trials
and Hearings.
New York City Department of Environmental Protection hearings regarding the
fitness and discipline of agency employees will be conducted by the Office of
Administrative Trials and Hearings. After conducting a hearing and analyzing
all testimony and other evidence, the hearing officer shall make written
proposed findings of fact and recommend decisions, which shall be reviewed and
finally determined by the Commissioner.
(Amended City Record 2/2/2017, eff. 3/4/2017)
Chapter 33: Sale of Tax Liens and Complaint Resolution
§ 33-01 Sale of Liens Arising from Outstanding Water and Wastewater Charges.
Please refer to the New York City Water Board Water and Wastewater Rate
Schedule, Part VIII – Collection Enforcement, Section 1, Sale of Liens Arising
from Outstanding Water and Wastewater Charges.
§ 33-02 Installment Agreements.
   (a)   Generally. A property owner may enter into an installment payment
agreement with the Department of Environmental Protection or the Water Board
for delinquent charges. Please refer to the New York City Water Board Water and
Wastewater Rate Schedule, Part VIII – Collection Enforcement, Section 4,
Installment Payment Agreements.
   (b)   Down payment. Please refer to the New York City Water Board Water and
Wastewater Rate Schedule, Part VIII – Collection Enforcement, Section 4,
Installment Payment Agreements.
   (c)   Payment schedule. An installment agreement must provide that the
property owner will make payments on a monthly basis.
   (d)   Term of agreement. Please refer to the New York City Water Board Water
and Wastewater Rate Schedule, Part VIII – Collection Enforcement, Section 4,
Installment Payment Agreements.
   (e)   Default.
      (1)   Definition of default: Please refer to the New York City Water
Board Water and Wastewater Rate Schedule, Part VIII – Collection Enforcement,
Section 4, Installment Payment Agreements.
      (2)   Consequences of default; cure of default: Please refer to the New
York City Water Board Water and Wastewater Rate Schedule, Part VIII –
Collection Enforcement, Section 4, Installment Payment Agreements.
      (3)   Bar from executing future installment agreements: Please refer to
the New York City Water Board Water and Wastewater Rate Schedule, Part VIII –
Collection Enforcement, Section 4, Installment Payment Agreements.
      (4)   "Extenuating circumstances" in which default in an installment
agreement would be forgiven:
         (i)   "Extenuating circumstances" shall mean (1) the death of the
signatory to the agreement, of any person named on the deed for the property or
of a contributing household member, (2) a loss of income to the signatory, to
any person named on the deed for the property or to a contributing household
member due to his or her involuntary absence from the property for any
consecutive period of six months or more for treatment of an illness, for
military service, or pursuant to a court order, that results in a default of
the agreement or inability to cure the default prior to the date of sale of the
tax lien or tax liens or (3) a loss of income to the signatory to the
agreement, to any person named on the deed for the property or to a
contributing household member due to his or her unemployment for any
consecutive period of six months or more that results in a default of the
agreement or inability to cure the default prior to the date of sale of the tax
lien or tax liens.
         (ii)   For purposes of this paragraph, "contributing household member"
shall mean any person eighteen years of age or older who has lived in the
property that is the subject of the installment agreement at least since the
execution of the agreement and has paid household expenses since the execution
of the agreement in an amount equal to at least fifty percent of each
installment amount due under the agreement.
         (iii)   An application for a finding of extenuating circumstances may
be made only on a form prepared by the Commissioner of Environmental Protection
or his or her designee and shall include a certification by the applicant that
extenuating circumstances exist. The Department of Environmental Protection may
require additional documentation to support a claim of extenuating
circumstances by a property owner. If the Department of Environmental
Protection determines that the applicant has provided inaccurate information in
the application, any installment agreement entered into based on the finding of
extenuating circumstances shall be revoked and the property owner shall not be
eligible to enter into an installment agreement with the department for the
subject property for five years from the date of sale. The determination on an
application for a finding of extenuating circumstances or on the accuracy of
such application will be made by the Bureau of Customer Services of the
Department of Environmental Protection. If the application is denied or if the
information in the application is determined to be inaccurate, the property
owner may appeal the determination within 30 days to the Commissioner of
Environmental Protection or his or her designee.
         (iv)   No signatory to an installment agreement who has defaulted on
such agreement and who, as a result of a finding of extenuating circumstances,
has been allowed to enter into a second installment agreement for the subject
property, shall be eligible to enter into any subsequent agreement on the
subject property by applying for a finding of extenuating circumstances for the
default of such second installment agreement. The same restriction shall apply
to any other person whose change of circumstances was the basis, in whole or in
part, for the original finding of extenuating circumstances.
   (f)   Information regarding exemptions. Property owners will be given
information regarding eligibility for real property tax exemption programs
prior to entering into an installment agreement under this section.
   (g)   Consolidated monthly bill. Beginning January 1, 2012, any property
owner who has entered into an installment agreement with the Department of
Environmental Protection and who has automated meter reading shall receive a
consolidated monthly bill for current sewer rents, sewer surcharges and water
rents and any payment due under such installment agreement.
§ 33-03 Complaint Resolution and Appeal Process.
Please refer to the New York City Water Board Water and Wastewater Rate
Schedule, Part IX – Customer Account Information and Complaint Resolution,
Section 2, Complaint Resolution and Appeal Process for existing procedures
governing challenges to the validity of any sewer rent, sewer surcharge, or
water rent charge.
Chapter 34: [Air Pollution Control Code Fees]
§ 34-01 General Provisions.
This chapter establishes fees pursuant to Chapter 1 of Title 24 of the
Administrative Code (the "Air Code").
(Added City Record 3/29/2016, eff. 4/28/2016)
§ 34-02 Definitions.
All terms shall have the same meaning as the definitions set forth in § 24-104
of the Administrative Code.
(Added City Record 3/29/2016, eff. 4/28/2016)
§ 34-03 Registration Fees.
The fee for a new registration or registration renewal is as follows:
   (a)   (1)   For boilers or water heaters:
 
 
Input in MMBTU/HR     Fee No. 2 FUEL OIL &/Or Fee No. 4 FUEL OIL ONLY OR #4
                      NATURAL GAS             FUEL OIL & NATURAL GAS
0.35 to less than 1.0 $110                    $110
1 to less than 2.8    $190                    $345
2.8 to less than 4.2  $345                    $345
 
      (2)   The fee for each field re-inspection required because of a notice
of disapproval for a major deficiency shall be equal to the fee required in
paragraph (1) of this subdivision for those boilers and water heaters 2.8 to
less than 4.2 MMBTU/HR.
      (3)   There shall be an additional fee imposed for each registration
issued or renewed on the basis of a notarized affidavit supplied in response to
a notice of disapproval for a minor deficiency issued after a field inspection
shall be equal to fifty percent of the fee required in paragraph (1) of this
subdivision for those boilers and water heaters 2.8 to less than 4.2 MMBTU/HR.
   (b)   For demolitions, a person applying for the registration of the
demolition of a building shall pay a fee to be computed by multiplying the
street frontage in feet by the number of stories of the building times 25
cents, provided that the minimum fee shall not be less than $250.00. Wherever a
building shall have frontage on more than one street, the longer frontage shall
be used in the above computation.
   (c)   For spraying of insulation, a person applying for the registration of
the spraying of insulating material shall pay a fee to be computed by
multiplying the street frontage in feet by the number of stories of the
building times 60 cents, provided that the minimum fee shall not be less than
$250.00. Wherever a building shall have frontage on more than one street, the
longer frontage shall be used in the above computation.
   (d)   For generators:
 
 
Output in KW         Fee
40 to less than 100  $110
100 to less than 280 $190
280 to less than 450 $345
 
For higher outputs, see subdivision (h) of 15 RCNY §
34-04.
   (e)   For engines:
 
 
Output in HP         Fee
50 to less than 135  $110
135 to less than 375 $190
375 to less than 600 $345
 
For higher outputs, see subdivision (i) of 15 RCNY §
34-04.
   (f)   For cogeneration, and other fossil fuel burning equipment:
 
 
Total Heat Input in MMBTU/HR Fee
0.35 to less than 1.0        $110
1 to less than 2.8           $190
2.8 to less than 4.2         $345
 
   (g)   For flares, one hundred ninety (190) dollars.
   (h)   For equipment used in a process with an environmental rating of C:
 
 
Emission in CFM Fee
100 To 2,000    $250
 
   (i)   For gasoline dispensing stations, one hundred ($190) dollars.
Editor's note: the fee in 15 RCNY §
34-03(i) above is presented herein exactly as promulgated by DEP Rule effective
3/29/2016.
   (j)   The fee to amend a registration shall be sixty-five ($65) dollars.
   (k)   The fee to register a commercial char broiler shall be one hundred ten
($110) dollars.
   (l)   The fee to register a mobile food vending unit shall be one hundred
ten ($110) dollars, except that the fee will be waived for up to twelve (12)
years if a Tier IV engine is installed.
   (m)   The fee for any other registrations shall be one hundred ten ($110)
dollars.
(Added City Record 3/29/2016, eff. 4/28/2016; amended City Record 8/5/2016,
eff. 9/4/2016)
§ 34-04 Fees for Work Permits and Certificates of Operation.
The fee for a new work permit required under § 24-121 of the Air Code, or for a
new certificate of operation required under § 24-122 of the Air Code, or for a
renewal of a certificate of operation, is as follows:
   (a)   For boilers and water heaters using fuel oil grade # 2 or natural gas:
 
Input in MMBTU/HR    Fee
4.2 To Less Than 10  $345
10 To Less Than 20   $470
20 To Less Than 35   $595
35 To Less Than 50   $700
50 To Less Than 70   $830
70 To Less Than 100  $940
100 To Less Than 140 $1,440
140 Or More          $1,440 plus $125 per additional 10 MMBTU/HR Or Fraction
                     Thereof Not To Exceed $10,000.
 
   (b)   For boilers and water heaters using fuel oil grade #4 or fuel oil
grade #6:
 
Input in MMBTU/HR  Fee
4.2 To Less Than 7 $470
7 To Less Than 14  $595
14 To Less Than 21 $700
21 To Less Than 28 $830
28 To Less Than 35 940
35 To Less Than 42 $1,440
42 Or More         $1,440 plus $125 per additional 10 MMBTU/HR Or Fraction
                   Thereof Not To Exceed $10,000.
 
For boiler using both fuel oil and natural gas, the fee imposed will be based
on the grade of fuel oil used.
   (c) For equipment used in a process with an environmental rating of C:
 
 
Emission in CFM     Fee
2,001 thru 5,000    $250
5,001 Thru 20,000   $470
20,001 Thru 50,000  $700
50,001 Thru 100,000 $940
100,001 Or More     $1,405
 
   (d)   For equipment used in a process with an environmental rating of B:
 
 
Emission in CFM     Fee
5,000 Or Less       $280
5,001 Thru 20,000   $525
20,001 Thru 50,000  $795
50,001 Thru 100,000 $1,060
100,001 Or More     $1,580
 
   (e)   For equipment used in a process with an environmental rating of A:
 
 
Emission in CFM     Fee
5,000 Or Less       $315
5,001 Thru 20,000   $590
20,001 Thru 50,000  $875
50,001 Thru 100,000 $1,175
100,001 Or More     $1,750
 
   (f)   For dry cleaning equipment, two hundred and fifty ($250) dollars per
unit.
   (g)   For cogeneration, and other fossil fuel burning equipment:
 
Total Heat Input in MMBTU/HR Fee
4.2 to less Than 10          $345
10 To Less Than 20           $470
20 To Less Than 35           $595
35 To Less Than 50           $700
50 To Less Than 70           $830
70 To Less Than 100          $940
100 To Less Than 140         $1,440
140 Or More                  $1,440 plus $125 per additional 10 MMBTU/HR Or
                             Fraction Thereof Not To Exceed $10,000.
 
   (h)   For generators:
 
Output in KW               Fee
450 to less than 1,000     $345
1,000 to less than 2,000   $470
2,000 to less than 3,500   $595
3,500 to less than 5,000   $700
5,000 to less than 7,000   $830
7,000 to less than 10,000  $940
10,000 to less than 14,000 $1,440
Over 14,000                $1,440 plus $125 per additional 1,000 KW Or Fraction
                           Thereof Not To Exceed $10,000.
 
   (i)   For engines:
 
Output in HP               Fee
600 to less than 1,340     $345
1,340 to less than 2,680   $470
2,680 to less than 4,695   $595
4,695 to less than 6,705   $700
6,705 to less than 9,385   $830
9,385 to less than 13,410  $940
13,410 to less than 18,775 $1,440
Over 18,775                $1,440 plus $125 per additional 1,350 HP Or Fraction
                           Thereof Not To Exceed $10,000.
 
   (j)   For refuse burning equipment, incinerators and crematoriums:
 
 
Cross Section of Chamber in SF Fee
8 Or Less                      $300
8.1 Through 25                 $475
25.1 Through 50                $750
50.1 Through 75                $1,500
75.1 Or More                   $2,400
 
   (k)   The fee to amend a work permit or certificate of operation shall be
sixty-five ($65) dollars.
   (l)   The fee for an application to reinstate an expired permit to install
or alter equipment or apparatus filed more than thirty days but less than one
hundred eighty days after the expiration date of the permit shall be equal to
fifty percent of the fee for the permit to install or alter equipment.
   (m)   The fee for an application to reinstate an expired permit to install
or alter equipment or apparatus more than one hundred eighty days after the
expiration date of the permit shall be equal to the fee for a permit to install
or alter equipment.
   (n)   The fee for each field re-inspection required because of a notice of
disapproval for a major deficiency shall be equal to the fee required in
subdivisions (a) through (i) of this section.
   (o)   There shall be an additional fee imposed for each operating
certificate issued or renewed on the basis of a notarized affidavit supplied in
response to a notice of disapproval for a minor deficiency issued after a field
inspection shall be equal to fifty percent of the fee required in subdivisions
(a) through (i) of this section.
   (p)   The expiration date of a valid operating certificate may be abridged
by the commissioner for the convenience of the department for good cause shown.
The fee to renew the abridged operating certificate shall be reduced by one
third per each full or partial year that the unabridged operating certificate
would have been, as set forth in subdivisions (a) through (i) of this section.
(Added City Record 3/29/2016, eff. 4/28/2016; amended City Record 8/5/2016,
eff. 9/4/2016)
§ 34-05 Fees for Equipment Approvals.
The fees for equipment approvals are as follows:
   (a)   For each application for acceptance of fuel burning equipment rated at
equal to or greater than 2.8 million Btu per hour input or gross output firing
rate, whichever is greater, $600.00.
   (b)   For each application for acceptance of apparatus, or of equipment
other than fuel burning equipment, $400.00.
   (c)   For each application for an amendment of prior acceptance of equipment
or apparatus, $300.00.
(Added City Record 3/29/2016, eff. 4/28/2016)
§ 34-06 Asbestos Fees.
   (a)   An asbestos project notification (Form ACP7) shall be submitted with
the following filing fee:
 
 
Project Size in LF or SF       Fee
26 to 99 LF or 11 to 49 SF     $200
100 to 259 LF or 50 to 159 SF  $400
260 to 999 LF or 160 to 999 SF $800
1,000 LF or 1,000 SF or more   $1,200
 
   (b)   An application for an asbestos abatement permit shall be submitted
with the following filing fee:
 
 
Project Size in LF or SF                       Fee
More than 25 to 99 LF or More than 10 to 49 SF $100
100 to 259 LF or 50 to 159 SF                  $300
Large projects up to 1,000 LF or SF            $500
1,000 to 4,999 LF or SF                        $700
5,000 to 9,999 LF or SF                        $1,100
10,000 or More LF or SF                        $1,300
 
   (c)   The fee for a new or renewed asbestos certificate is as follows:
 
 
Type of Certificate         Fee
Restricted Asbestos Handler $50
Asbestos Handler            $100
Asbestos Handler Supervisor $100
Investigator                $250
 
   (d)   For each variance application where the combined amount (total of both
square and linear feet on the ACP-7) of ACM is less than 5,000 feet, payment of
the variance processing fee shall accompany the application and shall conform
with the payment schedule as follows:
      (1)   Request to modify no more than one lettered subsection in any
section category listed in subsection (e) below: $400 fee.
      (2)   For each additional subsection in any category listed in subsection
(e): $200 fee.
      (3)   The maximum fee: $1,200.
   (e)   For each variance application where the combined amount (total of both
square and linear feet on the ACP-7) of ACM is greater than or equal to 5,000
feet, payment of the variance processing fee shall accompany the application
and shall conform with the payment schedule as follows:
      (1)   Request to modify no more than one lettered subsection in any
section category listed in subsection (e): $600.
      (2)   For each additional subsection in any category listed in subsection
(e): $300.
      (3)   The maximum fee: $1,800.
   (e)   Section categories shall be as follows:
 
CATEGORY                NYC Asbestos Control 12 NYCRR Part 56 Section #s
                        Program Section #s
Air Monitoring          31-45                56-4, 6
Materials and Equipment 61                   56-7
Work Place Preparation  81-84                56-7
Work Place Procedures   91-94                56-7
Abatement Procedures    101-110              56-8
Clean-up Procedures     111-112              56-9
Pre-Demolition          120-129              —
 
(Added City Record 3/29/2016, eff. 4/28/2016)
Chapter 35: Voluntary Master Environmental Hazard Remediation Technician
Registration Program
§ 35-01 Definitions.
"Certificate of completion" means any license, certificate, diploma or other
NYC Department of Environmental Protection approved documentation indicating
that the applicant has satisfactorily completed department approved training
programs or courses by a department approved training provider or providers.
"Master environmental hazard remediation technician" means a person registered
with the NYC Department of Environmental Protection after successfully
presenting to the commissioner current documentation of having completed
required environmental remediation training programs or courses from a
department approved training provider as demonstrated by a certificate of
completion.
"Training provider" means training programs or courses approved by the
department covering topics identified in § 24-1002 of the Administrative Code
conducted by any entity approved by the NYC Department of Environmental
Protection, including but not limited to: a registered New York State
Department of Labor apprenticeship program, an educational institution or
school chartered, licensed, or registered by the New York state education
department, or the institute of inspection, cleaning, and restoration
certification. Each program or course must be offered by an instructor or
institution authorized by the appropriate governing authority to conduct such
training.
§ 35-02 Requirements for Registration.
   (a)   For an applicant to be eligible to become a master environmental
hazard remediation technician, he/she must meet all of the qualifications set
forth in § 24-1002(a) of the Administrative Code.
   (b)   All licenses or certifications held by a master environmental hazard
remediation technician associated with asbestos handling and lead training must
remain current for the applicant to be eligible for registration. The master
environmental hazard remediation technician's registration will not be
considered valid if the applicant does not possess a valid certificate from the
New York State Department of Labor for asbestos handling, and a United States
Environmental Protection Agency certification in lead.
   (c)   The applicant must complete a registration form that will be available
on the NYC Department of Environmental Protection website that contains the
following information at a minimum:
      (1)   Names of Training Providers.
      (2)   Names of Training Programs or Courses Completed.
      (3)   Number of Hours Attended Programs or Courses.
      (4)   Certificates of Completion.
§ 35-03 Expiration Date.
A master environmental hazard remediation technician registration shall expire
four years from the applicant's most recent birthday at the time the
application is submitted.
§ 35-04 Fees for Registration.
   (a)   The fee to register with the department as a master environmental
hazard remediation technician shall be $375.
   (b)   The fee to renew the master environmental hazard remediation
technician registration shall be $375.
§ 35-05 Effect of Certification.
The program covered by these rules is a voluntary registration program.
Registration as a Master Environmental Remediation Technician does not replace
any license, permit or certification required by any federal, state or local
law or rules for the work referenced by such registration and a person who is
not registered as a Master Environmental Remediation technician may perform any
work otherwise authorized by law as if this program were not in effect.
Registration pursuant to this program is based on documentation provided by the
applicant. The department does not independently verify such documentation or
the qualifications of registrants to perform the work referenced by such
registration.
Chapter 36: Cure Period for Certain Air and Noise Code Violations
§ 36-01 Definitions
As used in this Chapter, the following terms are defined as follows:
   (a)   "Board" means the New York City Environmental Control Board.
   (b)   "Code" means the New York City Administrative Code.
   (c)   "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of the Department of
Environmental Protection.
   (d)   "Department" means the New York City Department of Environmental
Protection.
§ 36-02 Certification of Cure – Violation of § 24-165.
.   (a)   Pursuant to subdivision g of § 24-165 of the Code, the Commissioner
may recommend to the Board that no civil penalty be imposed for a first
violation of such section provided that, within 45 days after the return date,
the respondent admits liability and files a certification with the Department
containing the information and documentation prescribed in subdivision b of
this section.
   (b)   The certification required by subdivision a of this section must be
made by a licensed oil burner installer in a notarized letter to the Department
that includes:
      (1)   A certification that the air contaminant recorder is functioning
properly and is in compliance with § 24-165 of the Code; and
      (2)   A description of the work that was done to bring the device into
compliance.
   (c)   If the Commissioner accepts the certification required by this
section, he or she will recommend to the Board that no civil penalty be imposed
for the violation. The violation may still serve as a predicate for purposes of
imposing penalties for subsequent violations of § 24-165 of the Code.
§ 36-03 Certification of Cure – Violation of § 24-166.
   (a)   Pursuant to subdivision (c) of § 24-166 of the Code, the Commissioner
may recommend to the Board that no civil penalty be imposed for a first
violation of such section provided that, within 45 days after the return date,
the respondent admits liability and files a certification with the Department
containing the information and documentation prescribed in subdivision b of
this section.
   (b)   The certification required by subdivision (a) of this section must be
made by a licensed oil burner installer in a notarized letter to the Department
that includes:
      (1)   A certification that the combustion shutoff is functioning properly
and is in compliance with § 24-166 of the Code; and
      (2)   A description of the work that was done to bring the device into
compliance.
   (c)   If the Commissioner accepts the certification required by this
section, he or she will recommend to the Board that no civil penalty be imposed
for the violation. The violation may still serve as a predicate for purposes of
imposing penalties for subsequent violations of § 24-166 of the Code.
§ 36-04 Certification of Cure – Violation of § 24-227.
   (a)   Pursuant to paragraph (d) of § 24-227 of the Code, the Commissioner
may recommend to the Board that no civil penalty be imposed for a first
violation of such section provided that, within 45 days after the return date,
the respondent admits liability and files a certification with the Department
containing the information and documentation prescribed in subdivision b of
this section.
   (b)   The certification required by subdivision (a) of this section must be
made by a contractor or consultant retained by the owner of the circulation
device in a notarized letter to the Department that includes:
      (1)   A certification that the circulation device is in compliance with
the sound levels set forth in § 24-227 of the Code;
      (2)   A description of all permanent improvements and modifications made
to achieve compliance with such sound levels, including but not limited to, the
installation of appropriate sound insulation, isolators, suspension mounting
and/or sound mitigation devices or materials, and diagrams of such work,
together with copies of all bills and receipts for such work; and
      (3)   All sound level measurements taken at a location within the two
closest receiving properties abutting the establishment and/or in a location
specified by the Department. If there is difficulty gaining entry to any
receiving property, the Department must be informed and will set an alternate
location. All such measurements must be performed by a noise consultant or
contractor. In the alternative, the respondent may request the Department to
take measurements.
   (c)   If the Commissioner determines that the work described in the
certification required by this section is insufficient to correct the
violation, the Commissioner may not recommend a zero penalty. If the
Commissioner accepts the certification required by this section, he or she will
recommend to the Board that no civil penalty be imposed for the violation. Such
violation may still serve as a predicate for purposes of imposing penalties for
subsequent violations of § 24-227 of the Code.
§ 36-05 Effect of Certification.
Before the Commissioner recommends that no civil penalty be imposed for a first
violation pursuant to 15 RCNY §
36-02,
36-03, or
36-04, the Department may independently verify the documentation submitted by a
respondent or the qualifications of the licensed oil burner installer,
consultant, or contractor who performs the required corrective measures.
Chapter 37: Emission Reduction Technologies for Char Broilers
§ 37-01 Definitions.
Catalytic Oxidizer. "Catalytic Oxidizer" means an emissions control device
which burns or oxidizes smoke and gases from the cooking process into carbon
dioxide and water, using an infrastructure coated with a noble metal alloy.
Chain-driven commercial char broiler. "Chain-driven commercial char broiler"
means a commercial char broiler that is a semi-enclosed cooking device with a
mechanical chain that automatically moves food through the device.
Commercial char broiler. "Commercial char broiler" means a device that consists
primarily of a grated grill and a heat source and that is used to cook meat,
including beef, lamb, pork, poultry, fish, and seafood, for human consumption
at a food service establishment, as such term is defined in 24 RCNY Health Code
§
81.03.
Electrostatic Precipitator (ESP). "Electrostatic Precipitator (ESP)" means a
filtration device that removes fine particles, like dust and smoke, from a
flowing gas using the force of an induced electrostatic charge minimally
impeding the flow of gases through the unit. An ESP is a type of emissions
control device.
Emissions Control Device. "Emissions control device" means equipment that is
installed on a commercial char broiler to reduce particulate matter emissions.
Existing. "Existing" means installed before May 6, 2016.
Meat. "Meat" means tissue of an animal body that is used for food and includes,
but is not limited to, beef, lamb, pork, poultry, fish, or seafood.
New. "New" means installed on or after May 6, 2016.
Particulate Matter. "Particulate Matter" or "PM" means any air or gas-borne
material, except water, that exists as a liquid or solid. "PM 10" means PM with
an aerodynamic diameter equal to or less than 10 micrometers.
Under-fired commercial char broiler. "Under-fired commercial char broiler"
means a commercial char broiler that has a grill, a high temperature radiant
surface, and a heat source that is located below the food.
Week. "Week" means a period of 7 consecutive days starting on Sunday, unless a
different start day is specified in the registration filed pursuant to § 24-109
of the Administrative Code.
(Added City Record 8/17/2016, eff. 9/16/2016)
§ 37-02 Requirements for Emissions Control Devices to Reduce Emissions from
Existing or New Chain-Driven Commercial Char Broilers and New Under-Fired
Commercial Char Broilers.
   (a)   No person shall operate any new or existing chain-driven commercial
char broiler to cook more than 875 pounds of meat per week unless a flameless
catalytic oxidizer or other emissions control device that has been tested and
certified in accordance with 15 RCNY §§
37-05 and
37-06 has been installed. Such emissions control device must reduce the chain-
driven commercial char broiler's baseline PM10 emissions, including condensable
PM, at a reduction rate of 75% or greater.
   (b)   No person shall operate any new under-fired commercial char broiler
used to cook more than 875 pounds of meat per week unless an ESP or other
emissions control device that has been tested and certified in accordance with
15 RCNY §§
37-05 and
37-06 has been installed. Such emissions control device must reduce the under-
fired commercial char broiler's baseline PM10 emissions, including condensable
PM, at a reduction rate of 75% or greater.
   (c)   Where a facility uses more than one commercial char broiler to cook
meat, the amount of meat cooked per week must be calculated based on the total
amount of meat cooked on all commercial char broilers at the same facility, and
the emissions reduction required by subdivisions (a) and (b) of this section
must be calculated per commercial char broiler.
(Added City Record 8/17/2016, eff. 9/16/2016)
§ 37-03 Emissions Control Device Maintenance.
   (a)   Any emissions control device installed and/or operated under this
chapter shall be operated, cleaned, and maintained in accordance with the
manufacturer's specifications.
   (b)   Notwithstanding subdivision (a) of this section every emissions
control device installed and/or operated pursuant to this chapter must comply
with Section FC 609.4.1 of the New York City Fire Code. Systems must be cleaned
by a person holding a FDNY Certificate of Fitness P-64 Commercial Kitchen
Exhaust & Precipitator Cleaning Technician.
(Added City Record 8/17/2016, eff. 9/16/2016)
§ 37-04 Records.
   (a)   Recordkeeping. 
      (i)   Effective May 6, 2016, any person operating a new under-fired
commercial char broiler or an existing or new chain-driven commercial char
broiler used to cook 875 pounds or less of meat per week, must maintain records
showing the amount of meat purchased per month.
      (ii)   Effective May 6, 2016, any person operating a new under-fired
commercial char broiler or an existing or new chain-driven commercial char
broiler used to cook more than 875 pounds of meat per week must maintain
records regarding the date of installation, replacement and maintenance of any
emissions control device installed to abate emissions from the char broiler.
      (iii)   For purposes of this subdivision, maintenance includes, but is
not limited to, preventative maintenance, breakdown repair, and cleaning
performed on the emissions control device. The records must include the date,
time, and a brief description of the work.
   (b)   Retention of Records. All records required by this section must be
retained for at least one year and must be made available to the department
upon request.
(Added City Record 8/17/2016, eff. 9/16/2016)
§ 37-05 Certification of Emissions Control Devices.
   The manufacturer or owner of an emissions control device may seek department
certification by submitting documentation from an independent testing
laboratory that tests in accordance with an EPA accredited laboratory testing
method that the emissions control device has been tested in accordance with the
applicable procedures set forth in 15 RCNY §
37-06 and that such device meets the requirements of 15 RCNY §
37-02. Such documentation must be submitted in accordance with the requirements
of 15 RCNY §
37-06(c). The department will maintain a list of approved certified emissions
control devices for use with particular models of commercial char broilers on
the department's website and will update the list periodically as necessary.
(Added City Record 8/17/2016, eff. 9/16/2016)
§ 37-06 Protocols for Testing Emissions Control Devices.
   (a)   Protocols for Testing Emissions Control Devices on Chain-Driven
Commercial Char Broilers. 
      (i)   Laboratory testing must be performed on an emissions control device
that is installed on a chain-driven commercial char broiler per manufacturer's
specifications. ASTM International Standard Test Method F 2239-10 must be
followed using heavy load cooking tests and careful attention must be given to
the following specifications as set forth in greater detail in such test
method:
         a.   The chain-driven commercial char broiler must be positioned such
that a minimum of 6 inches is maintained between the edge of the hood and the
vertical plane of the front and sides of the appliance.
         b.   The patties must consist of 18-22% fat by weight and 58-62%
moisture. The patties must be shaped into 0.375 inch thick round patties of 5
inch diameter. The fat and moisture content of the patties must be verified in
accordance with the laboratory procedures set forth in the Association of
Official Analytical Chemists Official Actions 960.39 and 950.46B.
         c.   Patties must be loaded, cooked, and removed in accordance with
Section 10 of ASTM International Standard Test Method F 2239-10 using heavy
load conditions.
      (ii)   Emissions testing for filterable and condensable particulate
matter must be performed following EPA Method 5, Appendix A-3 to 40 C.F.R. Part
60, or EPA Method 202, Appendix M to 40 C.F.R. Part 51, or South Coast Air
Quality Management District Method 5.1. During each test, samples must be
collected from the outlet of the control.
   (b)   Protocols for Testing Emissions Control Devices on Under-Fired
Commercial Char Broilers. 
      (i)   Laboratory testing must be performed on an emissions control device
that is installed on an under-fired commercial char broiler per manufacturer's
specifications. ASTM International Standard Test Method F 1695-03 must be
followed using heavy load cooking tests and careful attention must be given to
the following specifications as set forth in greater detail in such test
method:
         a.   The exhaust hood must have the capacity to operate at a nominal
net exhaust ventilation rate of 400 cubic feet per minute (cfm) for each linear
foot of active hood length. The hood must extend over the surface of the under-
fired commercial char broiler by at least 6 inches in the front and sides.
         b.   The under-fired commercial char broiler must be warmed up for a
minimum of 30 minutes before testing and the controls must be set to operate at
a maximum temperature of 600 degrees Fahrenheit, with a cooking energy rate
established at this setting.
         c.   Pure beef, finished grind hamburgers of 0.33 lbs each must be
cooked on the under-fired commercial char broiler during testing. The patties
must be shaped into 0.625 inch thick round patties of 5 inch diameter.
         d.   The patties must consist of 18 - 22% fat by weight and 58 - 62%
moisture.
         e.   The fat and moisture content of the patties must be verified in
accordance with the laboratory procedures set forth in the Association of
Official Analytical Chemists Official Actions 960.39 and 950.46B.
         f.   Hamburger patties must be loaded, cooked, and removed in
accordance with Section 10 of ASTM International Test Method F 1695-03 using
heavy load conditions.
      (ii)   Emissions testing for filterable and condensable particulate
matter must be performed following EPA Method 5, Appendix A-3 to 40 C.F.R. Part
60, or EPA Method 202, Appendix M to 40 C.F.R. Part 51, or South Coast Air
Quality Management District Method 5.1. During each test, samples must be
collected from the outlet of the control.
   (c)   Reporting. The results of the testing required by this section must be
submitted on forms prescribed by the department available on the department's
website and must include the following information:
      a.   Name and address of the manufacturer of the commercial char broiler,
brand name, trade name, model number of the commercial char broiler, any
accoutrements installed to enhance or support the operation of the emissions
control device, the maximum air flow rate, and other relevant operating
conditions during the test, as specified by the department.
      b.   A description of the emissions control device used on the commercial
char broiler model being certified.
      c.   A statement that testing has been conducted in accordance with the
requirements of this section.
(Added City Record 8/17/2016, eff. 9/16/2016)
Chapter 38: Emissions Reduction Technologies for New Cook Stoves
§ 38-01 Definitions.
Access point means that which enables a device, appliance or equipment to be
reached by ready access or by a means that first requires the removal or
movement of a panel, door or similar obstruction.
Air filtration device means a device composed of fibrous materials which
removes solid particulates.
CFM means cubic feet per minute.
Cook stove means any wood fired or anthracite coal fired appliance used for the
preparation of food intended for onsite consumption or retail purchase.
Discharge point means the point at which particulate matter is released from a
stack into the open air.
Electrostatic Precipitator (ESP) means a filtration device that removes fine
particles, like dust and smoke, from a flowing gas using the force of an
induced electrostatic charge minimally impeding the flow of gases through the
unit. An ESP is a type of emissions control device.
Emissions control device means equipment that is installed on a cook stove to
reduce particulate matter emissions.
Existing means installed before May 6, 2016.
New means installed on or after May 6, 2016. NFPA means National Fire
Prevention Association.
Optical particle counter means an instrument based on the principle of light
scattering from particles. It is a real time instrument that is used to measure
particles above 0.05 micrometers in diameter.
Particulate matter or PM means any air or gas-borne material, except water,
that exists as a liquid or solid.
Peak load means the addition of twenty percent to the amount of solid fuel that
is normally used for cooking in the cook stove.
RH correction function means a function related to relative humidity
correction. When this function is enabled, the particle growth effect due to
high humidity is corrected by computing the mass concentration based on the
original dry environment particle population.
Smoke means small gas borne and airborne particulate matter arising from a
process of combustion in sufficient quantity to be visible.
Stack means any duct, control equipment exhaust or similar apparatus, which
vents gases and/or particulate matter into the open air.
Test port plate means a template cover that is designed to prevent any of the
air stream from escaping when the existing access plate is removed and which
has an opening for the test probe to fit securely.
Total suspended particulates (TSP) means small airborne particles with
diameters measuring less than 100 micrometers.
Treated firewood shall have the same meaning as set forth in Subdivision 13 of
Section 192.5 of Title 6 of the New York Code Rules and Regulations.
UL means Underwriters Laboratories. Wet scrubber system means any emission
control device that mixes an aqueous stream or slurry with the exhaust gases
from an indirect heat exchanger to control emissions of particulate matter
(PM).
(Added City Record 4/24/2017, eff. 5/24/2017; amended City Record 10/27/2023,
eff. 4/27/2024)
§ 38-02 Control Devices to Reduce Emissions from New Cook Stoves.
   (a)   No person shall install a new cook stove without installing an
emissions control device that is either a wet scrubber, electrostatic
precipitator, or air filtration device as follows:
      (1)   The emission control device must reduce total PM by 75 percent or
greater.
      (2)   Wet scrubbers and air filtration devices must comply with UL 1978
and be correctly sized for the cooking appliance as specified by the
manufacturer of the cook stove.
      (3)   Electrostatic precipitators must comply with UL 867 or 710, must
have a certificate of approval from the Fire Department, and must be correctly
sized for the cooking appliance as specified by the manufacturer.
   (b)   Compliance Requirements. 
      (1)   Cook stoves must comply with all applicable laws and rules,
including applicable provisions in the New York City Construction Codes, New
York City Fire Code and Fire Department rules.
      (2)   Only treated firewood, as defined in this rule, shall be used in
any new cook stove where the fuel source for the cook stove is wood.
   (c)   Testing Requirements for Emissions Control Devices. Testing that meets
the requirements of this subdivision must be performed on an emissions control
device that is installed on a cook stove. Testing may be performed in the field
using the procedures specified in paragraph 1 of this subdivision or may be
performed by a laboratory as specified in paragraph 2 of this subdivision.
      (1)   Field Testing. 
         i.   Emissions reduction standard. Field test data must show that the
emissions control device has reduced the cook stove's total PM emissions by 75
percent or more.
         ii.   General Requirements. Field testing shall be performed during
peak load, using an Optical Particle Counter for Total Suspended Particulates
(TSP). Peak load assumes that unburnt wood is introduced at the start of the
testing and that the same composition of unburnt wood and embers is maintained
during the testing. Sampling shall be performed with the emissions control
device on and off.
         iii.   Air Filtration Devices and ESPs. 
            A.   For air filtration devices and ESPs, readings must be taken
from within the clean out access point downstream of the device, or at the
discharge point when the unit is on. When taking samples while the unit is off,
samples may be taken upstream or downstream of the emissions control device.
            B.   Remove the access plate and replace with a test port plate and
place the sampling probe inside a precut hole, or place the sampling probe
directly within the discharge point.
            C.   Samples must be taken using the Optical Particle Counter
(OPC), and shall be taken for ten minutes at 2 liters per minute pump speed,
twice with the unit on and twice with the unit off. If the OPC is equipped with
a filter assembly, a new glass or PVC fiber filter shall be used for each test.
If the OPC is equipped with RH correction function, it should be enabled when
the humidity is expected to exceed 50 percent.
         iv.   Wet Scrubbers. 
            A.   For wet scrubbers, samples must be taken from within the clean
out access point or discharge point.
            B.   Remove the access plate and replace with a test port plate and
place the sampling probe inside through a precut hole, or place the sampling
probe directly within the discharge point.
            C.   A minimum 20 liter sample shall be drawn into a 37mm glass or
PVC fiber filter. The sample should be drawn for at least ten minutes at 2
liters per minute pump speed, twice with the unit on and twice with the unit
off. Filters should be changed for each test.
            D.   Except as otherwise expressly provided in this subparagraph
(iv), samples shall be taken in accordance with the following Sections of NIOSH
Method 0500, Issue 2, August 15, 1994: "Equipment" Section (except that a 37mm
glass or PVC fiber filter should be used), "Preparation of Filters" Section,
"Sampling" Section (except that the total sample volume shall be 20 liters),
and "Sample Preparation" Section.
            E.   The filters must then be collected and the weight of the
filters shall be determined by an Industrial Hygienist in an Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) accredited laboratory.
      (2)   Laboratory Testing. Laboratory testing shall be performed in a
National Environmental Laboratory Accreditation Conference (NELAC) or New York
State Department of Health Environmental Laboratory Approval Program (ELAP)
certified laboratory and shall follow EPA Method 5, Appendix A-3 to 40 C.F.R.
Part 60, or EPA Method 202, Appendix M to 40 C.F.R. Part 51, for particulate
matter. During each test, samples must be collected from the outlet of the
control device. Laboratory test data must show that the emissions control
device has reduced the cook stove's total PM emissions by 75 percent or more.
   (d)   Reporting Requirements. 
      (1)   The results of the testing required by this Section must be
submitted on forms prescribed by the department available on the department's
website and must include the following information:
         i.   Name and address of the manufacturer of the cook stove, brand
name, trade name, model number of the cook stove, any additional equipment
installed to enhance or support the operation of the emissions control device,
the maximum air flow rate, and other relevant operating conditions during the
test, as specified by the department.
         ii.   A description of the emissions control device used on the cook
stove model being certified.
         iii.   A statement that testing has been conducted in accordance with
the requirements of this section.
      (2)   Additional reporting requirements for field testing conducted in
accordance with paragraph one of subdivision c of this section. For air
filtration devices and ESPs, the installer of the emissions control device must
submit a print out to the Department with the readings of Total Suspended
Particulates (TSP), and also submit pictures of the filter with the unit on and
off. For wet scrubbers, complete laboratory results shall be submitted to the
Department to document the reduction in PM.
(Added City Record 4/24/2017, eff. 5/24/2017; amended City Record 10/27/2023,
eff. 4/27/2024)
§ 38-03 Emissions Control Device Maintenance.
   (a)   Any emissions control device installed or operated under this chapter
shall be operated, cleaned, and maintained in accordance with the
manufacturer's specifications.
   (b)   Notwithstanding subdivision (a) of this section, every emissions
control device installed or operated pursuant to this chapter must comply with
Section FC 609.4.1 of the New York City Fire Code. Emissions control devices
must be cleaned by a person holding a FDNY Certificate of Fitness for
commercial cooking system and precipitator cleaning.
   (c)   Notwithstanding subdivision (a) of this section, the cooking exhaust
system shall be cleaned in accordance with the rules of the Fire Department and
as frequently as necessary to maintain the system free of grease accumulations
in accordance with NFPA 96 Chapter 14.
(Added City Record 4/24/2017, eff. 5/24/2017)
§ 38-04 Emissions Control Device Certification.
   (a)   The manufacturer of an emissions control device may seek department
certification by submitting documentation that field testing has been conducted
in accordance with the applicable procedures in 15 RCNY §
38-02(c)(1) and that such device meets the requirements of 15 RCNY §
38-02. Such documentation must be submitted in accordance with the requirements
of 15 RCNY §
38-02(d).
   (b)   Additionally, the manufacturer or owner of an emissions control device
may seek department certification by submitting documentation from an
independent testing laboratory that tests in accordance with an EPA accredited
laboratory testing method that the emissions control device has been tested in
accordance with the applicable procedures set forth in 15 RCNY §
38-02(c)(2) and that such device meets the requirements of 15 RCNY §
38-02. Such documentation must be submitted in accordance with the requirements
of 15 RCNY §
38-02(d).
   (c)   The department will maintain a list of approved certified emissions
control devices for use with particular models of cook stoves on the
department's website and will update the list periodically as necessary.
(Added City Record 4/24/2017, eff. 5/24/2017)
§ 38-05 Records.
   (a)   Recordkeeping. 
      (1)   On or after the effective date of this section, any person who owns
or operates a new cook stove must maintain records showing all maintenance work
performed on the emissions control device, including the date, time, and a
brief description of maintenance work performed.
      (2)   On or after the effective date of this section, any person who owns
or operates a new cook stove must maintain records regarding the date of
installation and replacement of any emissions control device installed.
      (3)   For purposes of this subdivision, maintenance includes, but is not
limited to, preventative maintenance, breakdown repair, and cleaning performed
on the emissions control device
   (b)   Retention of Records. All records required by this section must be
retained for at least one year and must be made available to the Department
upon request.
(Added City Record 4/24/2017, eff. 5/24/2017)
Chapter 39: Engine Idling
(Title amended City Record 7/15/2021, eff. 8/14/2021) [
§ 39-01 Definitions.
Legally authorized emergency motor vehicle. For purposes of § 24-163 of the
Administrative Code, the term "legally authorized emergency motor vehicle"
shall mean: [
   (1)   a motor vehicle that is an authorized emergency vehicle as defined by
§ 101 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law; or [
   (2)   any bus being operated as a cooling center by, or pursuant to a
contract with, the city of New York. [
Marginal Street. "Marginal street" shall have the meaning set forth in 34 RCNY
§
4-01.
Processing Device. For purposes of § 24-163 of the Administrative Code, the
term "processing device" shall mean: [
   (1)   a device that accomplishes the function for which the vehicle or
equipment was designed, other than transporting goods or people, via a
mechanical connection to the engine, including but not limited to operating a
lift, crane, pump, drill, hoist, or mixer; or [
   (2)   a system that controls the environment of temperature-sensitive cargo
or substances, including but not limited to food, provided that such cargo or
substances are being transported in a vehicle designed for the transportation
of such cargo or substances. [
The term "processing device" shall not include a heater or air conditioner
operated for cabin comfort. [
Street. "Street" shall have the meaning set forth in subdivision 13 of § 1-112
of the Administrative Code of the City of New York, except that for the
purposes of this rule "street" shall include "marginal streets".
(Amended City Record 7/15/2021, eff. 8/14/2021; amended City Record 5/23/2022,
eff. 6/22/2022; amended City Record 1/18/2023, eff. 2/17/2023) [
§ 39-02 Adjacent to Any Public or Non-Public School or Any Park Under the
Jurisdiction of the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation.
   (a)   Adjacent. A motor vehicle is adjacent to any public or non-public
school or any park under the jurisdiction of the New York city department of
parks and recreation when such vehicle is parked, stopped, or standing within a
lane of traffic on a block face on which a school or park is located, unless
the vehicle is separated from the school or park by a median. [
      (1)   A lane of traffic includes traffic lanes, bus lanes, all forms of
bike lanes, turning bays, parking areas, and shoulders. [
      (2)   A block face consists of both sides of a city street between two
intersections. [
      (3)   Where one street meets another without crossing it, dividing one
side of the street into two blocks but not dividing the opposite side (forming
a T shape), the side that is not divided by the intersecting street is deemed
to be divided into two corresponding block faces as if the intersecting street
extended to the other side. However, where a school or park is located on the
side of the street that is not divided by the intersecting street, the side
that is not divided by the intersecting street is divided into two
corresponding block faces as if the curb furthest from the school or park
extends to the other side of the street. The below example illustrates this
definition. [
      (4)   A median is a raised area that separates lanes of traffic. [
   (b)   Example. [
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-19240.jpg]
In the diagram above, the numbered vehicles are: [
   1 - ADJACENT to SP1 because it is parked on the same side of the line
running from the opposite curb furthest from SP1. [
   2 - ADJACENT to SP2 and SP3 as it is parked on the same block face. [
   3 - ADJACENT to SP1 as it is parked on the same block face. [
   4 - NOT ADJACENT as it is parked on a block face with no school/park. [
   5 - NOT ADJACENT as it is parked on a block face that is separated from SP3
by a raised median. [
   6 - ADJACENT to SP2 and SP3 as it is parked on the same block face. [
Curbs where parked vehicles would be adjacent are in BOLD. [
(Amended City Record 8/27/2024, eff. 9/26/2024) [
Chapter 40: Rules Concerning the Registration of Emergency Generators
[Repealed]
§ 40-01 Definitions. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/14/2016, eff. 10/14/2016) [
§ 40-02 Filing and Recordkeeping Requirements. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/14/2016, eff. 10/14/2016) [
Chapter 41: Community Right-to-Know Regulations
§ 41-01 Scope and Application.
   (a)   The following rules apply to a responsible party involved in the
processing, storage, handling, or use of hazardous substances, extremely
hazardous substances, and regulated toxic substances as defined herein.
   (b)   A responsible party of a facility where a hazardous substance is
present at or above the threshold reporting quantity for such substance shall
file a facility inventory form with the Department in accordance with 15 RCNY §
41-05.
   (c)   A responsible party of a facility where an extremely hazardous
substance or regulated toxic substance is present at or above the threshold
planning quantity for such substance shall file a risk management plan with the
Department in accordance with 15 RCNY §§
41-08 through
41-12.
§ 41-02 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public from the dangers
associated with hazardous substances, extremely hazardous substances and
regulated toxic substances by mitigating the harm posed by the release of such
substances. This purpose is achieved by requiring that hazardous substances be
reported to the Department and by requiring that risk management plans to be
filed with the Department when extremely hazardous substances or regulated
toxics at or above federal threshold planning quantities are present at a
facility.
§ 41-03 Definitions.
Base Flood Elevation. "Base Flood Elevation" means the elevation of the base
flood, including wave height, as specified on Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) 360497 or as determined in
accordance with Section G103.3 of Appendix G of the New York City Building
Code. In areas designated as ZONE AO, the base flood elevation shall be the
elevation of the highest existing grade of a building's perimeter plus the
depth number (in feet) specified on FEMA FIRM 360497 or as determined in
accordance with Section G103.3 of Appendix G of the New York City Building
Code.
Carcinogen. "Carcinogen" shall mean any substance which meets any of the
following criteria: it has been evaluated by the International Agency for
Research Against Cancer (IARC), and found to be a carcinogen or potential
carcinogen; or it is listed as a carcinogen or potential carcinogen in the
latest edition of the Annual Report on Carcinogens published by the National
Toxicology Program; or it is cited or regulated as a carcinogen by any federal
agency such as the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Occupational Safety
and Health Administration (OSHA), National Cancer Institute (NCI), National
Institute for Environmental Health Services (NIEHS), National Institute for
Occupational Health and Safety (NIOSH), Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
Agency for Toxic Substances and Diseases Registry (ASTDR), or Center for
Diseases Control (CDC).
Combustible. "Combustible" means any liquid with a flashpoint at or above 100
degrees F (37.8 degrees C) and below 300 degrees F (148 degrees C).
Commissioner. "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of the New York City
Department of Environmental Protection.
Compressed gas. "Compressed gas" means a gas or mixture of gases having, in a
container, an absolute pressure exceeding 40 psi at 70 degrees F (21.1 degrees
C); or a gas mixture of gases having, in a container, an absolute pressure
exceeding 140 psi at 130 degrees F (or 54.4 degrees C) regardless of the
pressure at 70 degrees (21.1 degrees C); or a liquid having a vapor pressure
exceeding 40 psi at 100 degrees F (37.8 degrees C) as determined by ASTM D 323-
72.
Container. "Container" means a device used to store, transport, treat, dispose
of or otherwise handle a hazardous substance.
Corrosive. "Corrosive" means any liquid or solid that causes visible
destruction or irreversible alterations in human skin tissue at the site of
contact; or any aqueous solution with a pH less than or equal to 2, or greater
than or equal to 12.5, as determined by a pH meter, or equivalent methods; or
any liquid that corrodes steel (SAE 1020) at a rate greater than 5.35 mm (0.25
inch) per year at a test temperature of 130 degrees F (55 degrees C).
Covered process. "Covered process" means any process in which there is an EHS
or regulated toxic substance present in an amount at or above the TPQ for that
substance.
Department. "Department" means the New York City Department of Environmental
Protection.
Emergency response personnel or responders. "Emergency response personnel" or
"responders" means any member of the departments of fire, police, environmental
protection, health, transportation and sanitation, the division of emergency
services of health and hospitals corporation and any other government agency
participating in response measures undertaken in connection with a fire, or a
spill, or release or threatened release of a hazardous substance into the
environment. The term "response measures" shall include actions taken by a city
agency within the meaning of subdivision (f) of § 24-603 of the New York City
Administrative Code.
Equipment. "Equipment" means equipment whose failure or improper operation
could directly or indirectly result in a release of an extremely hazardous
substance and/ or regulated toxic substance from a covered process.
Explosive. "Explosive" means a substance that causes a sudden, almost
instantaneous release of pressure, gas, and heat when subjected to sudden
shock, pressure, or high temperature.
Extreme weather watch. "Extreme weather watch" means any watch, advisory or
warning for high wind, inland or coastal flooding, hurricane, or a tropical
storm issued by the National Weather Service (NWS). The NWS watch, advisory or
warning can be issued up to 48 hours in advance of an extreme weather event.
Extremely hazardous substance (EHS). "Extremely hazardous substance (EHS)"
means a hazardous substance listed by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency as an extremely hazardous substance pursuant to 42 U.S.C. §
11002(a) of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act, as
contained in 40 C.F.R. Part 355 Appendix A.
Facility. "Facility" means all buildings, equipment, structures, and other
stationary items that are located on a single site or on contiguous or adjacent
sites and that are owned, leased or operated by the same person, or by any
person which controls, or is controlled by or under common control with, such
person, including any building, structure, installation or area involved in the
processing, storage, handling, treatment, placement, disposal or use of any
hazardous substance.
Facility inventory form (FIF). "Facility inventory form (FIF)" means a standard
written form, developed by the Department for completion by a responsible party
at each privately or publicly owned facility in the City of New York.
Flammable. "Flammable" means any liquid having a flashpoint below 100 degrees F
(37.8 degrees C).
Flashpoint. "Flashpoint" means the minimum temperature at which a liquid gives
off vapor in a test vessel of sufficient concentration to form an ignitable
mixture with air near the surface of the liquid. Such temperature shall be
determined: by a Pensky-Martens Closed Cup Tester using the test method
specified in ASTM Standard D 93-79 or D 93-80; or by a Setaflash Closed Cup
Tester using the test method specified in ASTM Standard D 3278-78; or by a Tag
Closed Cup Tester using the test method specified in ASTM D 56-79. 
Flooding. "Flooding" means the covering, overflowing, or submerging of any
portion of a facility or storage area with water.
Hazard analysis. "Hazard analysis" means the step-by-step systematic analysis
of covered processes and procedures for handling EHS's and regulated toxic
substances to identify the potential mishaps which may occur and their
consequences.
Hazardous substance. "Hazardous substance" means any chemical which is a
physical hazard or a health hazard and which is listed on the hazardous
substance list. The term "hazardous substance" excludes:
   (1)   any food, food additive, color additive, drug, or cosmetic regulated
by the Federal Food and Drug Administration;
   (2)   any substance present as a solid in any manufactured item to the
extent exposure to the substance does not occur under normal conditions of use;
   (3)   any substance to the extent it is used for personal, family, or
household purposes, or is present in the same form and concentration as a
product packaged for distribution and use by the general public;
   (4)   any substance to the extent it is used in routine agricultural
operations or is a fertilizer held for sale by a retailer to the ultimate
consumer;
   (5)   any hazardous waste as such term is defined by the Solid Waste
Disposal Act, as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976,
as amended (42 U.S.C. §§ 6901, et seq.);
   (6)   tobacco or tobacco products;
   (7)   wood or wood products;
   (8)   articles, which for purposes of this definition means manufactured
items which
      (i)   are formed to a specific shape or design during manufacture;
      (ii)   which have an end use function or functions dependent in whole or
in part upon their shape or design during end use; and
      (iii)   which do not release, or otherwise result in exposure to, a
hazardous substance, under normal conditions of use;
   (9)   food, drugs, cosmetics, or alcoholic beverages in a retail
establishment which are packaged for sale to consumers;
   (10)   foods, drugs, or cosmetics intended for personal consumption by
employees while in the workplace;
   (11)   any consumer product or hazardous substance, as those terms are
defined in the Consumer Product Safety Act (15 U.S.C. §§ 2051, et seq.) and
Federal Hazardous Substances Act (15 U.S.C. §§ 1261, et seq.) respectively,
where the employer can demonstrate it is used in the workplace in the same
manner as normal consumer use, and which use results in a duration and
frequency of exposure which is not greater than exposures experienced by
consumers;
   (12)   any drug, as that term is defined in the Federal Food, Drug and
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301, et seq.), when it is in solid, final form for
direct administration to a patient.
Hazardous substance list. "Hazardous substance list" means a list of hazardous
substances established pursuant to 15 RCNY §
41-04.
Health hazard. "Health hazard" means a chemical for which there is
statistically significant evidence based on at least one study conducted in
accordance with established scientific principles that acute or chronic health
effects may occur in exposed persons. The term "health hazard" includes
chemicals which are carcinogens, toxic or highly toxic agents, reproductive
toxins, irritants, corrosives, sensitizers, hepatotoxins, nephrotoxins,
neurotoxins, agents which act on the hematopoietic system, and agents which
damage the lungs, skin, eyes, or mucous membranes.
Heptatoxin. "Heptatoxin" means a substance that causes liver damage.
Highly toxic agent. "Highly toxic agent" means any substance which has any of
the following properties: an LD50 (lethal dose) of less than 50 mg/kg (oral
dose in rats); or an LD50 of less than 200 mg / kg (24-hour rabbit skin
contact); or an LC50 (lethal concentration) of less than 200 ppm (one-hour
inhalation in rats).
Ignitable. "Ignitable" means any substance which has any of the following
properties: it is a solid which is capable under standard temperature and
pressure of causing fire through friction, absorption of moisture, or
spontaneous chemical changes; and which, when ignited, burns so vigorously and
persistently that it creates a hazard; or it is flammable compressed gas, as
defined in 49 C.F.R. § 173.300, and as determined by the test methods described
in that regulation; or it is an oxidizer as defined in 49 C.F.R. § 173.151.
Incompatible substances. "Incompatible substances" means those substances,
which if allowed to come in contact with each other, are likely to create an
adverse environmental impact such as releasing a toxic gas or vapor, causing or
intensifying a fire, causing an explosion, or causing any other adverse
reaction which may threaten human health or the environment.
Irritant. "Irritant" means a substance which is not corrosive but which causes
a reversible inflammatory effect on living tissue by chemical action at the
site of contact. A substance is a skin irritant if, when tested on the skin of
Albino rabbits by methods 16 C.F.R. § 1500.41 for four hours exposure or by
other appropriate techniques, it results in an empirical score of five or more.
A substance is an eye irritant if so determined under the procedure listed in
16 C.F.R. § 1500.42 or other appropriate techniques.
Mixture. "Mixture" means a combination of two or more substances not involving
a chemical reaction.
Mutagen. "Mutagen" means a substance that causes mutations and meets the
criteria established by any of the following agencies: the International Agency
for Research Against Cancer (IARC), or the National Toxicology Program (NTP),
or the National Cancer Institute (NCI), or the National Institute for
Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), or the National Institute for
Occupational Health and Safety (NIOSH), or the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA), or the Occupational Safety and Health Ad-ministration (OSHA), or the
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), or the Agency for Toxic Substances and
Diseases Registry (ASTDR), or the Center for Diseases Control CDC).
Nephrotoxin. "Nephrotoxin" means a substance that causes kidney damage.
Neurotoxin. "Neurotoxin" means a substance that produces toxic effects on the
nervous system.
Off-site area. "Off-site area" means the area beyond the property line of a
facility or areas within the property line of a facility to which the public
has unrestricted access.
One tenth of one percent substances list. "One tenth of one percent substances
list" shall mean a list of hazardous substances compiled pursuant to § 24-703
of the New York City Administrative Code.
Organic peroxide. "Organic peroxide" means any substance having the bivalent -
0-0- structure and which many be considered to be a structural derivative of
hydrogen peroxide where one or both of the hydrogen atoms has been replaced by
an organic radical.
Oxidizer. "Oxidizer" means a substance other than a blasting agent or explosive
as defined in OSHA § 1910.109(a) that initiates or promotes combustion in other
materials, thereby causing fire either of itself or through the release of
oxygen or other gases.
Physical hazard. "Physical hazard" means a chemical for which there is
scientifically valid evidence that it is combustible liquid, a compressed gas,
explosive, flammable, an organic peroxide, an oxidizer, pyrophoric, unstable
(reactive) or water-reactive.
Process. "Process" means any activity involving an EHS or a regulated toxic
substance, including any use, storage, manufacturing, handling, or on-site
movement of any such substance, or any combination of the foregoing activities.
For the purposes of this definition, any group of vessels that are
interconnected, or separate vessels that are located in such close proximity to
each other at a facility that a fire, explosion, or other catastrophic accident
or event could result in a release of an EHS or regulated toxic substance from
all such vessels, shall be considered a single process.
Pyrophoric. "Pyrophoric" means a substance that will ignite spontaneously in
air at a temperature of 130 degrees F (54.4 degrees C) or below.
Radioactive substance or device. "Radioactive substance or device" means any
substance, material or device emitting any particulate or electromagnetic
radiations. For purposes of this regulation the term "radioactive substance or
device" include any substance or device that is the subject of reporting to any
of the following agencies:
   (1)   New York City Health Department, Bureau of Radiation Control,
   (2)   New York State Department of Environmental Conservation, Division of
Environmental Remediation,
   (3)   New York State Department of Labor, Radiological Health Unit, or
   (4)   U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
For purposes of this Regulation the term "radioactive substance or device"
excludes a substance, material or device:
   (1)   used as a fixed source for diagnostic or therapeutic purposes,
   (2)   any consumer product or hazardous substance, as those terms are
defined in the Consumer Product Safety Act (15 U.S.C. §§ 2051, et seq.) and
Federal Hazardous Substances Act (15 U.S.C. §§ 1261, et seq.) respectively,
where the facility operator can demonstrate it is used in the same manner as a
normal consumer use, and which use results in a duration and frequency of
exposure which is not greater than exposures experienced by consumers.
Reactive. "Reactive" means any substance which has any of the following
properties:
   (1)   is normally unstable and readily undergoes violent change without
detonating; or
   (2)   reacts violently with water; or it forms potentially explosive
mixtures with water; or
   (3)   is a cyanide or sulfur bearing substance which, when exposed to pH
conditions between 2 and 12.5, can generate gases, vapors or fumes in a
quantity sufficient to present a danger for human health or the environment; or
   (4)   is capable of detonation or explosive decomposition or reaction at
standard temperature and pressure; or
   (5)   is a forbidden explosive as defined in 49 C.F.R. § 173.54.
Regulated toxic substance. "Regulated toxic substance" means any substance
listed by the United States Environmental Protection Agency as a regulated
toxic substance pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 7412(r) of the Clean Air Act, as
contained in 40 C.F.R. Part 68.
Release. "Release" means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting,
emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing into
the environment, or the abandonment of a container or containers containing
hazardous substance or substances.
Reproductive toxin. "Reproductive toxin" means substances which affect the re-
productive capabilities including chromosomal damage (mutations), effects on
fetuses (teratogenesis) and other adverse effects on reproductive functions.
Responsible party. "Responsible party" means an owner, operator, manager, or
corporate officer of the person who owns, leases or operates a facility,
provided that if such facility is leased, the responsible party shall be the
lessee of the facility or his or her representative.
Risk management plan. "Risk management plan" means a plan for a facility where
an EHS and / or regulated toxic substance is present at or above the TPQ for
such substance, prepared in accordance with this chapter and filed with the
Department by a responsible party of such facility.
Safety Data Sheet (SDS). "Safety data sheet (SDS)" means written or printed
material concerning a hazardous substance which is identical in form and
content to the data sheet described at 29 C.F.R. Part 1910.1200 and required
under subdivision (a) of § 311 of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-
to-Know Act of 1986 (42 U.S.C. §§ 11001, et seq.)
Sanitized. "Sanitized" means a version of a document from which information
claimed as trade secret or confidential has been omitted or withheld.
Sensitizer. "Sensitizer" means any substance that causes a substantial
proportion of exposed people or animals to develop an allergic reaction in
normal tissue after repeated exposure to the substance.
Significant accidental release. "Significant accidental release" s any
accidental release of an EHS and/or regulated toxic substance from a covered
process that has caused or has the potential to cause adverse effects to human
health or the environment in an offsite area or to cause the public to shelter-
in-place or be evacuated to avoid such consequences.
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). "Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA)" means the
land in the flood plain delineated as subject to a one percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year. Such areas are designated on the FEMA
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as A-Zones or V-Zones. Such areas are also
known as the base flood plain or one hundred year flood plain.
Special health hazard. "Special health hazard" means any carcinogen, mutagen,
teratogen, radioactive substance or device, or other reproductive hazards as
such terms are defined in this Section. Substances presenting a special health
hazard must be reported when present in any amount pursuant to § 24-704(a) of
the Administrative Code.
Special physical hazard. "Special physical hazard" means any water reactive,
flammable, organic peroxide, oxidizer, pyrophoric, or ignitable as defined in
this section.
Specific chemical identity. "Specific chemical identity" means the chemical
name, Chemical Abstracts Service (CAS) Registry Number, or any other
information that reveals the precise chemical designation of the substance.
Spillage. "Spillage" means any escape of a substance from a container employed
in the course of storage, transfer, processing or use.
Storage vessel. "Storage vessel" means any vessel that contains or is
designated to contain an EHS or regulated toxic substance.
Teratogen. "Teratogen' means any substance which affects the development of the
fetus.
Threshold Planning Quantity (TPQ). "Threshold Planning Quantity" (TPQ) means
the amount of an EHS and/or regulated toxic substance above which a responsible
party of a facility where such substance is present must submit a risk
management plan to the Department.
   (1)   The TPQ's for EHS's are set forth in federal regulations contained in
40 C.F.R. Part 355 Appendix A. The TPQ's for an EHS should be determined in
accordance with the provisions of such Appendix.
   (2)   The TPQ's for regulated toxic substances are set forth in federal
regulations contained in 40 C.F.R. Part 68. The TPQ for a regulated toxic
substance should be determined in accordance with the provisions of such part.
   (3)   Where a substance is classified as both an EHS and a regulated toxic
substance and different TPQ's have been established, the lower TPQ applies.
Threshold reporting quantities. "Threshold reporting quantities" means the
amount of a substance above which this substance must be reported when it is
present in pure form or in a mixture.
Toxic agent. "Toxic agent" means any substance which has any of the following
properties:
   (1)   an LD50 between 50 mg/kg and 500 mg/kg (oral dose in rats); or
   (2)   an LD50 between 200 mg/kg and 1,000 mg/kg (24-hour rabbit skin
contact); or
   (3)   an LC50 (lethal concentration) between 200 ppm and 2,000 ppm (one-hour
inhalation in rats).
Trade secret. "Trade secret" means any confidential formula, pattern, process,
device, information or compilation of information that is used in a submitter's
business, and that gives the submitter an opportunity to obtain an advantage
over competitors who do not know or use it.
Unstable substance. "Unstable substance" means any substance which in the pure
state, or as produced or transported, will vigorously polymerize, decompose,
condense or become half-reactive under conditions of shock, pressure, or high
temperature. Unusual physical hazard. "Unusual physical hazard" means any
explosive or unstable substance as such terms are defined in this section.
Worst-case release. "Worst-case release" means the instantaneous release of the
entire quantity of an EHS and/or regulated toxic substance from a covered
process.
(Amended City Record 1/5/2018, eff. 2/4/2018; amended City Record 10/2/2018,
eff. 11/1/2018; amended City Record 2/6/2019, eff. 3/8/2019)
§ 41-04 Hazardous Substance List.
   (a)   The following Hazardous Substance List is established pursuant to and
in compliance with §§ 24-702(j) and 24-703 of the New York City Administrative
Code.
   (b)   Substances on the following list (including mixtures containing such
substances) shall be reported pursuant to §§ 24-703 and 24-706 of the New York
City Administrative Code, except that a substance need not be reported if:
      (1)   it is not a hazardous substance as defined in 15 RCNY §
41-01, or
      (2)   it is a fossil fuel, petroleum product or combustible or flammable
chemical or material, the manufacture, transportation, or storage of which is
subject to the jurisdiction of the Fire Department pursuant to Title 27 of the
New York City Administrative Code.
   (c)   The New York City Community Right-to-Know Hazardous Substance List,
the list of synonyms, and One Percent (%) Substances List, as published in the
City Record on November 7, 1988 and December 15, 1988 are repealed. They are
replaced by the following New York City Community Right-to-Know Hazardous
Substance List.
TRQ CAS Common or Chemical Name
TRQ CAS       Common or Chemical Name
500 83329     ACENAPHTHENE
500 208968    ACENAPHTHYLENE
10  105577    ACETAL
0   75070     ACETALDEHYDE
100 75398     ACETALDEHYDE AMMONIA
0   107200    ACETALDEHYDE, CHLORO
10  107299    ACETALDEHYDE, OXIME
100 75876     ACETALDEHYDE, TRICHLORO
10  107299    ACETALDOXIME
0   60355     ACETAMIDE
0   56757     ACETAMIDE, 2,2-DICHLORO-N- 2-HYDROXY-1-(HYDROXYMETHYL)-2-(4-
              NITROPHENYL)ETHYL
0   127195    ACETAMIDE, N,N-DIMETHYL
0   62442     ACETAMIDE, N-(4-ETHOXYPHENYL)
0   53963     ACETAMIDE, N-9H-FLUOREN-2-YL
100 591082    ACETAMIDE, N-(AMINOTHIOXOMETHYL)
0   2832408   ACETAMIDE, N- 4- (2-HYDROXY-5-METHYLPHENYL)AZO PHENYL
0   64197     ACETIC ACID
500 631618    ACETIC ACID, AMMONIUM SALT
10  108247    ACETIC ACID, ANHYDRIDE
10  105362    ACETIC ACID, BROMO-, ETHYL ESTER
100 96322     ACETIC ACID, BROMO-, METHYL ESTER
10  123864    ACETIC ACID, BUTYL ESTER
0   543908    ACETIC ACID, CADMIUM SALT
100 79118     ACETIC ACID, CHLORO
10  2549511   ACETIC ACID, CHLORO-, ETHENYL ESTER
10  105395    ACETIC ACID, CHLORO-, ETHYL ESTER
100 96344     ACETIC ACID, CHLORO-, METHYL ESTER
10  105486    ACETIC ACID, CHLORO-, 1-METHYLETHYL ESTER
100 3926623   ACETIC ACID, CHLORO-, SODIUM SALT
0   1066304   ACETIC ACID, CHROMIUM (3+) SALT
100 142712    ACETIC ACID, COPPER(II) SALT
10  105566    ACETIC ACID, CYANO-, ETHYL ESTER
100 622457    ACETIC ACID, CYCLOHEXYL ESTER
10  79436     ACETIC ACID, DICHLORO
100 116541    ACETIC ACID, DICHLORO-, METHYL ESTER
0   94757     ACETIC ACID, (2,4-DICHLORO-PHENOXY)
10  540885    ACETIC ACID, 1,1-DIMETHYLETHYL ESTER
1   108054    ACETIC ACID ETHENYL ESTER
0   141786    ACETIC ACID ETHYL ESTER
10  144490    ACETIC ACID, FLUORO
100 23745860  ACETIC ACID, FLUORO-, POTASSIUM SALT
0   62748     ACETIC ACID, FLUORO-, SODIUM SALT
100 68111     ACETIC ACID, MERCAPTO
0   1600277   ACETIC ACID, MERCURY(2+) SALT
10  79209     ACETIC ACID, METHYL ESTER
10  108214    ACETIC ACID, 1-METHYLETHYL ESTER
10  105464    ACETIC ACID, 1-METHYLPROPYL ESTER
10  110190    ACETIC ACID, 2-METHYLPROPYL ESTER
10  628637    ACETIC ACID, PENTYL ESTER
10  626380    ACETIC ACID, sec-PENTYL ESTER
10  591877    ACETIC ACID, 2-PROPENYL ESTER
10  109604    ACETIC ACID, PROPYL ESTER
100 76039     ACETIC ACID, TRICHLORO
500 598992    ACETIC ACID, TRICHLORO-, METHYL ESTER
0   93765     ACETIC ACID, (2,4,5-TRICHLOROPHENOXY)
500 25168154  ACETIC ACID (2,4,5-TRICHLOROPHENOXY)-ISOOCTYL ESTER
100 93787     ACETIC ACID (2,4,5-TRICHLOROPHENOXY)-ISOPROPYL ESTER
100 76051     ACETIC ACID, TRIFLUORO
0   557346    ACETIC ACID, ZINC SALT
10  108247    ACETIC ANHYDRIDE
500 513860    ACETOIN
10  67641     ACETONE
100 75865     ACETONE CYANOHYDRIN
10            ACETONE OIL
100 1752303   ACETONE THIOSEMICARBAZIDE
0   75058     ACETONITRILE
100 5798798   ACETONITRILE, BROMOPHENYL
100 107142    ACETONITRILE, CHLORO
10  926647    ACETONITRILE, (DIMETHYLAMINO)
1   107164    ACETONITRILE, HYDROXY
0   62442     ACETOPHENETIDIN
100 98862     ACETOPHENONE
1   644315    ACETOZONE
100 123546    ACETYLACETONE
10  37187227  ACETYL ACETONE PEROXIDE
0   53963     2-ACETYLAMINOFLUORENE
1   644315    ACETYL BENZOYL PEROXIDE
10  506967    ACETYL BROMIDE
100 598210    ACETYL BROMIDE, BROMO
10  75365     ACETYL CHLORIDE
100 79049     ACETYL CHLORIDE, CHLORO
100 79367     ACETYL CHLORIDE, DICHLORO
100 76028     ACETYL CHLORIDE, TRICHLORO
10  3179564   ACETYL CYCLOHEXANE SULFONYL PEROXIDE
10  74862     ACETYLENE
10  540590    ACETYLENE DICHLORIDE
100 79276     ACETYLENE TETRABROMIDE
10  507028    ACETYL IODIDE
500 513860    ACETYL METHYL CARBINOL
10  110225    ACETYL PEROXIDE
0   50782     ACETYLSALICYLIC ACID
100 12788931  ACID BUTYL PHOSPHATE
10            ACID MIXTURES, NITRATING
10            ACID MIXTURES, SPENT, NITRATING
100           ACIDS, LIQUID, n.o.s.
100 64742241  ACID SLUDGE
100 260946    ACRIDINE
0   107028    ACROLEIN
0   79061     ACRYLAMIDE
1   79107     ACRYLIC ACID
0   107131    ACRYLONITRILE
100 814686    ACRYLYL CHLORIDE
0   50760     ACTINOMYCIN D
10            ADHESIVES, CONTAINING FLAMMABLE LIQUID
100 124049    ADIPIC ACID
100 111693    ADIPONITRILE
0   23214928  ADRIAMYCIN
0   7220817   AFLATOXIN B2
0   1165395   AFLATOXIN G1
1             AGENTS, BLASTING
500           AIR, COMPRESSED
500           AIR, REFRIGERATED LIQUID
10            ALCOHOL, DENATURED
0   64175     ALCOHOL (ETHYL)
10            ALCOHOL, n.o.s.
100 75398     ALDEHYDE AMMONIA
100           ALDEHYDES, n.o.s.
100           ALDEHYDE, TOXIC, n.o.s.
0   116063    ALDICARB
100 107891    ALDOL, (3-HYDROXYBUTYRALDEHYDE)
0   555306    ALDOMET
0   309002    ALDRIN
10  8032324   ALIPHATIC NAPHTHA
10            ALKALI METAL ALLOYS, LIQUID
10            ALKALI METAL AMALGAM, n.o.s.
10            ALKALI METAL AMIDES, n.o.s.
10            ALKALI METAL DISPERSIONS, n.o.s. or ALKALI EARTH
10            ALKALINE BOILER or WATER TREATMENT COMPOUND
100           ALKALINE CORROSIVE LIQUID, n.o.s.
10            ALKALINE EARTH METAL ALLOYS, n.o.s.
10            ALKALINE EARTH METAL AMALGAMS, n.o.s.
10            ALKALINE EARTH METAL DISPERSIONS, n.o.s.
10            ALKALOID, SALTS, n.o.s., POISONOUS
10            ALKALOIDS, n.o.s. or ALKALOID SALTS, n.o.s., POISONOUS
100 75752     ALKANE SULFONIC ACID
10            ALKYLAMINES or POLYALKYLAMINES, n.o.s., CORROSIVE flash point
              above 23C and boiling point above 3 5C but no more than 200C
10            ALKYLAMINES or POLYALKYLAMINES, n.o.s., flash point above 23C and
              boiling point above 3 5C but no more than 200C
10            ALKYLAMINES or POLYALKYLAMINES, n.o.s., flash point below 23C and
              boiling point above 35C but no more than 200C
10            ALKYL, ARYL, or TOLUENE SULFONIC ACID, LIQUID containing more
              than 5% free sulfuric acid
10            ALKYL, ARYL, or TOLUENE SULFONIC ACID, LIQUID containing not more
              than 5% free sulfuric acid
10            ALKYL, ARYL, or TOLUENE SULFONIC ACID, SOLID containing more than
              5% free sulfuric acid
10            ALKYL, ARYL, or TOLUENE SULFONIC ACID, SOLID containing not more
              than 5% free sulfuric acid
10            ALKYL PHENOL, n.o.s.
0   584792    ALLETHRIN
10  591877    ALLYL ACETATE
0   107186    ALLYL ALCOHOL
500 107119    ALLYL AMINE
10  106956    ALLYL BROMIDE
0   107051    ALLYL CHLORIDE
10  2937500   ALLYL CHLOROCARBONATE
10  557404    ALLYL ETHER
1   557313    ALLYL ETHYL ETHER
10  1838591   ALLYL FORMATE
0   106923    ALLYL GLYCIDYL ETHER
10  556569    ALLYL IODIDE
0   57067     ALLYL ISOTHIOCYANATE
100 2179591   ALLYL PROPYL DISULFIDE
10  107379    ALLYL TRICHLOROSILANE
0   28981977  ALPRAZOLAM
10  16853853  ALUMINATE(1-), TETRAHYDRO-, LITHIUM, (T-4)
10  13770962  ALUMINATE(1-), TETRAHYDRO-, SODIUM, (T-4)
10            ALUMINUM ALKYL
10            ALUMINUM ALKYL CHLORIDE
10            ALUMINUM ALKYL HALIDE
10            ALUMINUM ALKYL HALIDES, IN SOLUTION
10            ALUMINUM ALKYL HALIDES, PURE
10            ALUMINUM ALKYLS
10  16962075  ALUMINUM BOROHYDRIDE
10  7727153   ALUMINUM BROMIDE
10  12656438  ALUMINUM CARBIDE
0   7446700   ALUMINUM CHLORIDE
10  96106     ALUMINUM, CHLORODIETHYL
10  563439    ALUMINUM, DICHLOROETHYL
10  12003417  ALUMINUM FERROSILICON
100 7784181   ALUMINUM FLUORIDE
1   7429905   ALUMINUM (fume and dust)
10  7784216   ALUMINUM HYDRIDE
10  12003417  ALUMINUM IRON SILICIDE
10  16853853  ALUMINUM LITHIUM HYDRIDE
10  13473900  ALUMINUM NITRATE
100 1344281   ALUMINUM OXIDE
100 7784307   ALUMINUM PHOSPHATE
10  20859738  ALUMINUM PHOSPHIDE
100           ALUMINUM PHOSPHIDE PESTICIDE
10            ALUMINUM POWDER, COATED
10            ALUMINUM POWDER, UNCOATED, NON-PYROPHORIC
10  61789659  ALUMINUM RESINATE
10  12042556  ALUMINUM SILICIDE
10  50810258  ALUMINUM SILICIDE
10  57485311  ALUMINUM SILICIDE
10  12042556  ALUMINUM SILICON
10  50810258  ALUMINUM SILICON
10  57485311  ALUMINUM SILICON
500 10043013  ALUMINUM SULFATE
10  1116707   ALUMINUM, TRIBUTYL
10  12075682  ALUMINUM, TRICHLOROTRIETHYLDI
10  12542857  ALUMINUM, TRICHLOROTRIMETHYLDI
10  97938     ALUMINUM, TRIETHYL
10  75241     ALUMINUM, TRIMETHYL
10  102670    ALUMINUM, TRIPROPYL
10  100992    ALUMINUM, TRIS(2-METHYLPROPYL)
0             2,4,5-T AMINE
0   117793    2-AMINOANTHRAQUINONE
0   60093     4-AMINOAZOBENZENE
10  69910     alpha-AMINO-BENZENEACETIC ACID
0   92671     4-AMINOBIPHENYL
100 95852     2-AMINO-4-CHLOROPHENOL
10  140807    2-AMINO-5-DIETHYL AMINOPENTANE
0   92671     4-AMINODIPHENYL
100 929066    2-(2-AMINOETHOXY)ETHANOL
100 111411    AMINOETHYLETHANOLAMINE
100 140318    N-AMINOETHYLPIPERAZINE
0   82280     1-AMINO-2-METHYLANTHRAQUINONE
500 551166    6-AMINO-PENICILLANIC ACID
0   27598852  AMINOPHENOLS
100 4985857   AMINOPROPYLDIETHANOLAMINE
100 123002    AMINOPROPYLMORPHOLINE
0   54626     AMINOPTERIN
100 504290    2-AMINOPYRIDINE
100 462088    3-AMINOPYRIDINE
100 504245    4-AMINOPYRIDINE
0   61825     AMINOTRIAZOLE
100 78535     AMITON
100 3734972   AMITON OXALATE
0   61825     AMITROL
100 7664417   AMMONIA
500 631618    AMMONIUM ACETATE
0   7784443   AMMONIUM ARSENATE
500 1863634   AMMONIUM BENZOATE
500 1066337   AMMONIUM BICARBONATE
10  7789095   AMMONIUM BICHROMATE
100 1341497   AMMONIUM BIFLUORIDE
100 7803636   AMMONIUM BISULFATE
100 10192300  AMMONIUM BISULFITE
500 1111780   AMMONIUM CARBAMATE
500 506876    AMMONIUM CARBONATE
100 12125029  AMMONIUM CHLORIDE
1   16919587  AMMONIUM CHLOROPLATINATE
1   7788989   AMMONIUM CHROMATE
100 3012655   AMMONIUM CITRATE DIBASIC
10  7789095   AMMONIUM DICHROMATE
10  2980645   AMMONIUM DINITRO-o-CRESOLATE
              AMMONIUM, ETHYL(4-p-(ETHYL(m-SULFOBENZYL)AMINO)-alpha-(o-
10  2650182   SULFOPHENYL) BENZYLIDENE)-2,5-CYCLOHEXADIEN-1-YLIDENE)(m-
              SULFOBENZYL-,HYDROXIDE, INNER SALT, DIAMMONIUM SALT
              AMMONIUM, ETHYL(4-p-(ETHYL(m-SULFOBENZYL)AMINO)-alpha-(o-
10  3844459   SULFOPHENYL) BENZYLIDENE)-2,5-CYCLOHEXADIEN-1-YLIDENEXltl-
              SULFOBENZYL-,HYDROXIDE, INNER SALT, DIAMMONIUM SALT
100 1185575   AMMONIUM FERRIC CITRATE
10  55488874  AMMONIUM FERRIC OXALATE
100 2944674   AMMONIUM FERRIC OXALATE
100 14221477  AMMONIUM FERRIC OXALATE
100 10045893  AMMONIUM FERROUS SULFATE
100 12125018  AMMONIUM FLUORIDE
100 1341497   AMMONIUM FLUORIDE
100 13826830  AMMONIUM FLUOROBORATE
100 1309326   AMMONIUM FLUOSILICATE
100 7803636   AMMONIUM HYDROGEN SULFATE
100 12124991  AMMONIUM HYDROSULFIDE SOLUTION
100 1336216   AMMONIUM HYDROXIDE
100 7803556   AMMONIUM METAVANADATE
100 13106768  AMMONIUM MOLYBDATE
100 15699180  AMMONIUM NICKEL SULFATE
10  6484522   AMMONIUM NITRATE
10            AMMONIUM NITRATE FERTILIZER
10            AMMONIUM NITRATE FERTILIZER, less than 45% AMMONIUM NITRATE
10            AMMONIUM NITRATE FERTILIZER (NITROGEN/POTASH or PHOSPHATE)
10            AMMONIUM NITRATE FERTILIZER, n.O.S.
10            AMMONIUM NITRATE FERTILIZER, with CALCIUM CARBONATE
10            AMMONIUM NITRATE FERTILIZER, with less than 0.2% COMBUSTIBLE
1             AMMONIUM NITRATE-FUEL OIL MIXTURES
10  57608409  AMMONIUM NITRATE PHOSPHATE
10            AMMONIUM NITRATE- SULFATE MIXTURE
10  14258492  AMMONIUM OXALATE
100 1113388   AMMONIUM OXALATE
10  5972736   AMMONIUM OXALATE
100 6009707   AMMONIUM OXALATE
1   7790989   AMMONIUM PERCHLORATE
10  13446101  AMMONIUM PERMANGANATE
10  7727540   AMMONIUM PEROXYDISULFATE
10  7727540   AMMONIUM PERSULFATE
1   131748    AMMONIUM PICRATE
100 13820412  AMMONIUM PLATINIC CHLORIDE
1   16919587  AMMONIUM PLATINIC CHLORIDE
100 12259926  AMMONIUM POLYSULFIDE
10            AMMONIUM POLYVANADATE
100 16919190  AMMONIUM SILICOFLUORIDE, solid
1   7773060   AMMONIUM SULFAMATE
100 7783202   AMMONIUM SULFATE, solution
10  12135761  AMMONIUM SULFIDE
100 12259926  AMMONIUM SULFIDE
100 10196040  AMMONIUM SULFITE
100 3164292   AMMONIUM TARTRATE
100 14307438  AMMONIUM TARTRATE
100 13820412  AMMONIUM TETRACHLOROPLATINATE
100 1762954   AMMONIUM THIOCYANATE
100 7783188   AMMONIUM THIOSULFATE
100 7803556   AMMONIUM VANADATE
100           AMMUNITION, TEAR PRODUCING, NON-EXPLOSIVE
10  300629    AMPHETAMINE
100 69534     AMPICILLIN
10  137882    AMPROLIUM HYDROCHLORIDE
10  628637    n-AMYL ACETATE
10  626380    sec-AMYL ACETATE
10  625161    tert-AMYL ACETATE
100 12789467  AMYL ACID PHOSPHATE
10  71410     AMYL ALCOHOL
10  110587    AMYL AMINE
10  9000924   AMYLASE
10  29756385  n-AMYL BROMIDE
500 540181    AMYL BUTYRATE
10  543599    AMYL CHLORIDE
10  26760645  AMYLENE
10  25377724  AMYLENE, normal
10  638493    AMYL FORMATE
10  110667    AMYL MERCAPTAN
10  1002160   AMYL NITRATE
1   110463    AMYL NITRITE
10  107722    AMYL TRICHLOROSILANE
0   434071    ANDROSTAN-3-ONE, 17-HYDROXY-2-(HYDROXYMETHYLENE)-17- METHYL-,
              (5alpha, 17beta)
0   58220     ANDROST-4-EN-5-ONE, 17-HYDROXY
0   62533     ANILINE
0   142041    ANILINE HYDROCHLORIDE
0   492808    ANILINE, 4,4'-(IMIDOCARBONYL)BIS(N,N-DIMETHYL)
0   101611    ANILINE, 4,4'-METHYLENEBIS (N,N-DIMETHYL)
100 88051     ANILINE, 2,4,6-TRIMETHYL
0   90040     o-ANISIDINE
100 104949    p-ANISIDINE
0   134292    o-ANISIDINE HYDROCHLORIDE
100 100663    ANISOLE
1   1300647   ANISOYL CHLORIDE
100 120127    ANTHRACENE
0   117793    9,1O-ANTHRACENEDIONE, 2-AMINO
0   82280     9,10-ANTHRACENEDIONE, 1-AMINO-2-METHYL
500 84651     ANTHRAQUINONE
10            ANTI-FREEZE
100 28300745  ANTIMONATE(2-), BIS .ltiu.-2,3-DIHYDROXYBUTANEDIOATO(4-)-O1, 02:
              03,04 DI-DIPOTASSIUM, TRIHYDRATE, stereoisomer
100 7440360   ANTIMONY
100 7647189   ANTIMONY CHLORIDE
10            ANTIMONY compounds
100 7783702   ANTIMONY FLUORIDE
100 58164888  ANTIMONY LACTATE
500 1309644   ANTIMONY OXIDE
100 7647189   ANTIMONY PENTACHLORIDE
100 7783702   ANTIMONY PENTAFLUORIDE
100 28300745  ANTIMONY POTASSIUM TARTRATE
10  7789619   ANTIMONY TRIBROMIDE
10  10025919  ANTIMONY TRICHLORIDE
100 7783564   ANTIMONY TRIFLUORIDE
500 1309644   ANTIMONY TRIOXIDE
100 1397940   ANTIMYCIN
0   86884     ANTU
100 8007565   AQUA REGIA
0   140578    ARAMITE
500 7440371   ARGON
0             AROCLOR
0   10031137  ARSENENOUS ACID, LEAD(2+) SALT
0   7784465   ARSENENOUS ACID, SODIUM SALT
0   7440382   ARSENIC
0   1327522   ARSENIC ACID
0   7778394   ARSENIC ACID
0   7778441   ARSENIC ACID, CALCIUM SALT
0   10290127  ARSENIC ACID, COPPER (2+) SALT (1:1)
0   7784443   ARSENIC ACID, DIAMMONIUM SALT
0   7784409   ARSENIC ACID, LEAD SALT
0   10102495  ARSENIC ACID, IRON(III) SALT (1:1)
0   10102508  ARSENIC ACID, IRON(II) SALT (2:3)
0   10103501  ARSENIC ACID, MAGNESIUM SALT
0   7784374   ARSENIC ACID, MERCURY(2+) SALT (1:1)
0   7784410   ARSENIC ACID, MONOPOTASSIUM SALT
0   10124502  ARSENIC ACID, POTASSIUM SALT
0   7631892   ARSENIC ACID, SODIUM SALT
10            ARSENICAL DUST or FLUE DUST
10            ARSENIC compounds
10            ARSENICAL PESTICIDE, FLAMMABLE LIQUID, n.o.s., flash point below
              23C
0             ARSENICAL PESTICIDE, FLAMMABLE LIQUID, n.o.s., flash point
              between 23C and 61C
10            ARSENICAL PESTICIDE, LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
10            ARSENICAL PESTICIDE, SOLID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
0   7784330   ARSENIC BROMIDE
0   37226496  ARSENIC CHLORIDE
0   56320220  ARSENIC DISULFIDE
0   7784454   ARSENIC IODIDE
0   1327533   ARSENIC OXIDE
0   1303282   ARSENIC OXIDE
0   1303282   ARSENIC PENTOXIDE
0   56320220  ARSENIC SULFIDE
0   1303339   ARSENIC SULFIDE
0   60646368  ARSENIC TRICHLORIDE
0   7784341   ARSENIC TRICHLORIDE
0   1327533   ARSENIC TRIOXIDE
0   1303339   ARSENIC TRISULFIDE
0   10326246  ARSENIOUS ACID, ZINC SALT
0   7784089   ARSENOUS ACID, TRISILVER(1+) SALT
0   1327533   ARSENOUS OXIDE
0   7784330   ARSENOUS TRIBROMIDE
0   7784341   ARSENOUS TRICHLORIDE
0   60646368  ARSENOUS TRICHLORIDE
0   7784454   ARSENOUS TRIIODIDE
0   7784421   ARSINE
10  692422    ARSINE, DIETHYL
0   75605     ARSINIC ACID, DIMETHYL
100 124652    ARSINIC ACID, DIMETHYL-, SODIUM SALT
100 712481    ARSINOUS CHLORIDE, DIPHENYL
100 127855    ARSONIC ACID AMINO PHENYL MONOSODIUM SALT
0   52740166  ARSONIC ACID, CALCIUM SALT
10  598141    ARSONOUS DICHLORIDE, ETHYL
100 593895    ARSONOUS DICHLORIDE, METHYL
100 696286    ARSONOUS DICHLORIDE, PHENYL
0   12172735  ASBESTOS, AMOSITE
0   77536675  ASBESTOS, ANTHOPHYLLITE
0   12001284  ASBESTOS, BLUE
0   12001295  ASBESTOS, CHRYSOTILE
0   12001284  ASBESTOS, CROCIDOLITE
0   1332214   ASBESTOS (friable)
0   12172735  ASBESTOS, GRUNERITE
0   1332214   ASBESTOS, TREMOLITE
0   12001295  ASBESTOS, WHITE
500 105679    AS-m-XYLENOL
100 9015683   ASPARAGINASE
500 8052424   ASPHALT FUMES
500 8052424   ASPHALT (PETROLEUM DERIVED)
0   1912249   ATRAZINE
0   492808    AURAMINE
100 504245    AVITROL
0   115026    AZASERINE
0   446866    AZATHIOPRINE
100 105602    AZEPIN-2-ONE, HEXAHYDRO
100 2642719   AZINPHOS-ETHYL
0   86500     AZINPHOS-METHYL
0   151564    AZIRIDINE
0   75558     AZIRIDINE METHYL
0   52244     AZIRIDINE, ''-PHOSPHINOTHIOYLIDYNETRIS
0   545551    AZIRIDINE, 1,1'l'-PHOSPHINYLIDYNETRIS
0   545551    AZIRIDINYL PHOSPHINE OXIDE (TRIS)
              AZIRINO (2',3':3,4) PYRROLO (1,2-A) INDOLE-4,7-DIONE, 6-AMINO-B-
0   50077     a (((AMINOCARBONYL)OXY)METHYL)-1,1A,2,8,8A,8B-HEXAHYDRO-8-
              A METHOXY-5-METHYL-, (las-(1a alpha, 8 beta, 8a alpha, 8b alpha))
1   15545978  2,2'-AZODI-(2,4-DIMETHYL-4-METHOXYVALERONITRILE)
1   28604913  2,2'-AZODI-(2,4-DIMETHYLVALERONITRILE)
10  25551148  AZODI-(1,1'-HEXAHYDROBENZONITRILE)
1   78671     AZODIISOBUTYRONITRILE
10            AZODI (2-METHYLBUTYRONITRILE)
100 1395217   BACILLUS SUBTILIS BPN
500 1405874   BACITRACIN
10  7440393   BARIUM
10            BARIUM ALLOYS, NON-PYROPHORIC
10            BARIUM ALLOYS, PYROPHORIC
1   18810587  BARIUM AZIDE
1   13967903  BARIUM BROMATE
10  13477004  BARIUM CHLORATE
10            BARIUM COMPOUND
100 542621    BARIUM CYANIDE
10  13477106  BARIUM HYPOCHLORITE
10  7440393   BARIUM METAL, NON-PYROPHORIC
10  10022318  BARIUM NITRATE
10  1304285   BARIUM OXIDE
10  13465957  BARIUM PERCHLORATE
10  7787362   BARIUM PERMANGANATE
10  1304296   BARIUM PEROXIDE
10            BARIUM SELENATE
10            BARIUM SELENITE
0   64093794  BASIC CHROMIUM SULFATE
100           BATTERY FLUID, ACID
100           BATTERY FLUID, ALKALI
100 22781233  BENDIOCARB
0   17804352  BENOMYL
0   56495     BENZ(j)ACEANTHRYLENE, 1,2-DIHYDRO-3-METHYL
0   205992    BENZ(e)ACETPHENATHRYLENE
0   225514    BENZ(c)ACRIDINE
0   98873     BENZAL CHLORIDE
100 100527    BENZALDEHYDE
0   55210     BENZAMIDE
0   23950585  BENZAMIDE, 3,5-DICHLORO-n-(1,1-DIMETHYL-2-PROPYNYL)
0   148016    BENZAMIDE, 2-METHYL-3,5-DINITRO
0   366701    BENZAMIDE, N-(1-METHYLETHYL)-4- (2-METHYLHYDRAZINO)METHYL-,
              MONOHYDRO CHLORIDE
0   56553     BENZ(a)ANTHRACENE
0   57976     BENZ(a)ANTHRACENE, 7,12-DIMETHYL-
0   62533     BENZENAMINE
500 27134276  BENZENAMINE, AR,AR-DICHLORO-
100 1300738   BENZENAMINE, AR,AR-DIMETHYL-
500 1321319   BENZENAMINE, AR-ETHOXY-
100 27134265  BENZENAMINE, CHLORO-
100 29027176  BENZENAMINE, 2-CHLORO, 3-METHYL-
100 615656    BENZENAMINE, 2-CHLORO, 4-METHYL-
100 95818     BENZENAMINE, 2-CHLORO, 5-METHYL-
100 87638     BENZENAMINE, 2-CHLORO, 6-METHYL-
100 87605     BENZENAMINE, 3-CHLORO, 2-METHYL-
100 95749     BENZENAMINE, 3-CHLORO, 4-METHYL-
100 7149759   BENZENAMINE, 4-CHLORO, 3-METHYL-
500 95794     BENZENAMINE, 5-CHLORO, 2-METHYL-
100 3165933   BENZENAMINE, 4-CHLORO-2-METHYL-, HYDROCHLORIDE
10  41587364  BENZENAMINE, CHLORONITRO-
1   26471567  BENZENAMINE, DINITRO-
100 1582098   BENZENAMINE, 2,6-DINITRO-N,N-DIPROPYL-4-(TRIFLUOROMETHYL)
0   1836755   BENZENAMINE, 4-ETHOXY-N- (5-NITRO-2-FURANYL)METHYLENE-
100 578541    BENZENAMINE, 2-ETHYL-
0   142041    BENZENAMINE, HYDROCHLORIDE
0   90040     BENZENAMINE, 2-METHOXY-
0   120718    BENZENAMINE, 2-METHOXY-5-METHYL-
0   99592     BENZENAMINE, 2-METHOXY-5-NITRO
0   95534     BENZENAMINE, 2-METHYL-
10  108441    BENZENAMINE, 3-METHYL-
0   106490    BENZENAMINE, 4-METHYL-
0   101779    BENZENAMINE, 4,4'-METHYLENEBIS
0   101144    BENZENAMINE, 4,4'-METHYLENEBIS 2-CHLORO-
0   636215    BENZENAMINE, 2-METHYL-, HYDROCHLORIDE
0   97563     BENZENAMINE, 2-METHYL-4- (2-METHYLPHENYL)AZO-
0   99558     BENZENAMINE, 2-METHYL-5-NITRO-
100 1126789   BENZENAMINE, N-BUTYL
100 103695    BENZENAMINE, N-ETHYL
0   135206    BENZENAMINE, N-HYDROXY-N-NITROSO-, AMMONIUM SALT
500 88744     BENZENAMINE, 2-NITRO-
0   100016    BENZENAMINE, 4-NITRO-
0   156105    BENZENAMINE, 4-NITROSO-N-PHENYL-
100 100618    BENZENAMINE, N-METHYL-N,2,4,6-TETRANITRO
500 643287    BENZENAMINE, N-(1-METHYLETHYL)
1   479458    BENZENAMINE, N-METHYL-N,2,4,6-TETRANITRO-
100 91667     BENZENAMINE, N,N-DIETHYL-
100 121697    BENZENAMINE, N,N-DIMETHYL-
0   138896    BENZENAMINE, N,N-DIMETHYL-4-NITROSO-
0   60117     BENZENAMINE, N,N-DIMETHYL-4-(PHENYLAZO)-
500 603349    BENZENAMINE, N,N-DIPHENYL-
0   86306     BENZENAMINE, N-NITROSO-N-PHENYL-
100 122394    BENZENAMINE, N-PHENYL
1   35860312  BENZENAMINE, N-PHENYL-, HEXANITRO derivative
0   101804    BENZENAMINE, 4,4'-OXYBIS-
0   60093     BENZENAMINE, 4-(PHENYLAZO)
1   53014372  BENZENAMINE, TETRANITRO-
0   139651    BENZENAMINE, 4,4'-THIOBIS-
10  88175     BENZENAMINE, 2-(TRIFLUOROMETHYL)-
100 98168     BENZENAMINE, 3-(TRIFLUOROMETHYL)-
1   26952421  BENZENAMINE, TRINITRO-
100 85449     BENZENDICARBOXYLIC ACID ANHYDRIDE
0   71432     BENZENE
100 140294    BENZENEACETONITRILE
100 103800    BENZENEACETYL CHLORIDE
10  93505     BENZENEAMINE, 4-CHLORO-2-METHOXY-
10  98055     BENZENEARSONIC ACID
100 108861    BENZENE, BROMO-
100 100390    BENZENE, BROMOMETHYL-
100 776749    BENZENE, 1,1'-(BROMOMETHYLENE)BIS-
10  586787    BENZENE, 1-BROMO-4-NITRO
10  101553    BENZENE, 1-BROMO-4-PHENOXY
0   305033    BENZENEBUTANOIC ACID, 4- BIS(2-CHLOROETHYL)AMINO-
500 104518    BENZENE, BUTYL-
10  937144    BENZENECARBOPEROXOIC ACID, 3-CHLORO
10  614459    BENZENECARBOPEROXOIC ACID, 1,1-DIMETHYLETHYL ESTER
10  2618771   BENZENECARBOPEROXOIC ACID, 1,1,4,4-TETRAMETHYL-1,4
0   108907    BENZENE, CHLORO
10  104836    BENZENE, 1-CHLORO-4-(CHLOROMETHYL)-
0   25567673  BENZENE, CHLORODINITRO-
100 1331288   BENZENE, CHLOROETHENYL-
500 28479223  BENZENE, 2-CHLORO-4-ISOCYANATO-1-METHYL-
0   100447    BENZENE, CHLOROMETHYL-
100 25168052  BENZENE, CHLOROMETHYL-
500 95498     BENZENE, 1-CHLORO-2-METHYL-
10  25567684  BENZENE, CHLOROMETHYLNITRO-
0   100141    BENZENE, 1-(CHLOROMETHYL)-4-NITRO-
0   100005    BENZENE, 1-CHLORO-4-NITRO
0   25167935  BENZENE, CHLORONITRO-
100 121175    BENZENE, CHLORO-, NITRO-, (TRIFLUOROMETHYL)-
100 121175    BENZENE, 1-CHLORO, 2-NITRO-, 4-(TRIFLUOROMETHYL)-
10  777377    BENZENE, 1-CHLORO, 4-NITRO-, 2-(TRIFLUOROMETHYL)-
10  39974351  BENZENE, 2-CHLORO, 1-NITRO-, 3-(TRIFLUOROMETHYL)-
10  118832    BENZENE, 4-CHLORO, 1-NITRO-, 2-(TRIFLUOROMETHYL)-
10  25889387  BENZENE, 4-CHLORO, 2-NITRO-, 1-(TRIFLUOROMETHYL)-
10  52181518  BENZENE, CHLORO (TRIFLUOROMETHYL)-
1   28260619  BENZENE, CHLOROTRINITRO-
0   95545     1,2-BENZENEDIAMINE
0   108452    1,3-BENZENEDIAMINE
0   106503    1,4-BENZENEDIAMINE
0   615054    1,3-BENZENEDIAMINE, 4-METHOXY
0   25376458  BENZENEDIAMINE, METHYL
0   95807     1,3-BENZENEDIAMINE, 4-METHYL
0   25376458  BENZENEDIAMINE, AR-METHYL
100 140567    BENZENEDIAZOSULFONIC ACID, p-(DIMETHYLAMINO)-,SODIUM SALT
500 26249127  BENZENE, DIBROMO
100 626175    1,3-BENZENEDICARBONITRILE
100 1897456   1,3-BENZENEDICARBONITRILE, 2,4,5,6-TETRACHLORO
0   117817    1,2-BENZENEDICARBOXYLIC ACID, BIS(2-ETHYLHEXYL) ESTER
0   84742     1,2-BENZENEDICARBOXYLIC ACID, DIBUTYL ESTER
100 84662     1,2-BENZENEDICARBOXYLIC ACID, DIETHYL ESTER
0   131113    1,2-BENZENEDICARBOXYLIC ACID, DIMETHYL ESTER
100 117840    1,2-BENZENEDICARBOXYLIC ACID, DIOCTYL ESTER
100 95501     BENZENE, 1,2-DICHLORO-
500 541731    BENZENE, 1,3-DICHLORO-
0   106467    BENZENE, 1,4-DICHLORO-
100 72548     BENZENE, 1,1'-(2,2-DICHLOROETHYLIDENE)BIS 4-CHLORO-
100 41195908  BENZENE, 1,2-DICHLORO-3-ISOCYANATO-
100 102363    BENZENE, 1,2-DICHLORO-4-ISOCYANATO-
100 39920371  BENZENE, 1,3-DICHLORO-2-ISOCYANATO-
10  34893920  BENZENE, 1,3-DICHLORO-5-ISOCYANATO-
100 5392825   BENZENE, 1,4-DICHLORO-2-ISOCYANATO-
100 2612579   BENZENE, 2,4-DICHLORO-1-ISOCYANATO-
0   98873     BENZENE, DICHLORO METHYL-
100 108576    BENZENE, 1,3-DIETHENYL-
100 25340174  BENZENE, DIETHYL-
0   91087     BENZENE, 1,3-DIISOCYANATO-2-METHYL-
0   584849    BENZENE, 2,4-DIISOCYANATO-1-METHYL-
100 1477550   1,3-BENZENEDIMETHANAMINE
100 98511     BENZENE, 1-(1,1-DIMETHYLETHYL)-4-METHYL-
500 25168041  BENZENE, DIMETHYLNITRO-
100 25154545  BENZENE, DINITRO-
10  25550554  BENZENE, DINITROSO-
0   120809    1,2-BENZENEDIOL
0   108463    1,3-BENZENEDIOL
0   123319    1,4-BENZENEDIOL
1   35860516  1,3-BENZENEDIOL, DINITRO-
0   51434     1,2-BENZENEDIOL, 4-(1-HYDROXY-2-(METHYLAMINO)ETHYL)-
1   63918978  1,3-BENZENEDIOL, TRINITRO-, LEAD SALT
10  20062220  BENZENE, 1,1'-(1,2-ETHENEDIYL)-BIS 2,4,6-TRINITRO-
0   25013154  BENZENE, ETHENYLMETHYL-
10  4732143   BENZENE, 2-ETHOXY-1,3,5-TRINITRO-
0   100414    BENZENE, ETHYL-
10  462066    BENZENE, FLUORO-
10  25496086  BENZENE, FLUOROMETHYL-
0   118741    BENZENE, HEXACHLORO-
10  110827    BENZENE, HEXAHYDRO-
100 620053    BENZENE, IODOMETHYL-
100 103719    BENZENE, ISOCYANATO
500 71121363  BENZENE, ISOCYANATO (TRIFLUOROMETHYL)-
0   108383    BENZENE, m-DIMETHYL-
100 119948    BENZENEMETHANAMINE, N-ETHYL-N-(3-METHYL-PHENYL)-
500 92591     BENZENEMETHANAMINE, N-ETHYL-N-PHENYL-
100 103833    BENZENEMETHANAMINE, N,N-DIMETHYL-
100 98851     BENZENEMETHANOL, alpha-METHYL-
500 115322    BENZENEMETHANOL,4-CHLORO-alpha-(4-CHLOROPHENYL)-alpha-
              (TRICHLOROMETHYL)-
100 100663    BENZENE, METHOXY-
0   100174    BENZENE, 1-METHOXY-4-NITRO-
1   606359    BENZENE, 2-METHOXY-1,3,5-TRINITRO-
0   108883    BENZENE, METHYL-
0   606202    BENZENE, 1-METHYL-2,6-DINITRO-
0   121142    BENZENE, 1-METHYL-2,4-DINITRO-
0   606202    BENZENE, 2-METHYL-I,3-DINITRO-
0   94597     BENZENE, 1,2-METHYLENEDIOXY-4-ALLYL-
100 120581    BENZENE, 1,2-METHYLENEDIOXY-4-PROPENYL-
0   94586     BENZENE, 1,2-METHYLENEDIOXY-4-PROPYL-
10  98839     BENZENE, (1-METHYLETHENYL)-
100 98828     BENZENE, (1-METHYLETHYL)-
500 25155151  BENZENE, METHYL(1-METHYLETHYL)-
1   1321126   BENZENE, METHYLNITRO-
0   118967    BENZENE, 2-METHYL-1,3,5-TRINITRO-
100 98953     BENZENE, NITRO-
0   95476     BENZENE, o-DIMETHYL-
100 101848    BENZENE, 1,1'-OXYBIS-
500 55720995  BENZENE, 1,1'-OXYBIS CHLORO-
500 1163195   BENZENE, 1,1'-OXYBIS 2,3,4,5,6-PENTABROMO-
0   106423    BENZENE, p-DIMETHYL-
500 608935    BENZENE, PENTACHLORO-
100 82688     BENZENE, PENTACHLORONITRO-
10  644973    BENZENE PHOSPHOROUS DICHLORIDE
10  14684254  BENZENE PHOSPHOROUS THIODICHLORIDE
10  103651    BENZENE, PROPYL-
500 723466    BENZENESULFONAMIDE, 4-AMINO-N-(5-METHYL-3-(ISOXAZOLYL)-
0   72140     BENZENESULFONAMIDE, 4-AMINO-N-2-THIAZOLYL-
100 98113     BENZENESULFONIC ACID
100 27176870  BENZENESULFONIC ACID, DODECYL-
10  26264062  BENZENESULFONIC ACID, DODECYL-, CALCIUM SALT
10  54590522  BENZENESULFONIC ACID, 4-DODECYL-, compound with 1-AMINO-2-
100 25155300  BENZENESULFONIC ACID, DODECYL-, SODIUM SALT
100 127822    BENZENESULFONIC ACID, 4-HYDROXY-, ZINC SALT (2:1)
100 25231463  BENZENESULFONIC ACID, METHYL-
100 31212289  BENZENESULFONIC ACID, NITRO- PROPANOL (1:1)
10  2508192   BENZENESULFONIC ACID, 2,4,6-TRINITRO-
1   98099     BENZENE SULFONYL CHLORIDE
1   2217063   BENZENE, 1,1'-THIOBIS 2,4,6-TRINITRO-
10  108985    BENZENETHIOL
10  12002481  BENZENE, TRICHLORO-
10  87616     BENZENE, 1,2,3-TRICHLORO-
100 120821    BENZENE, 1,2,4-TRICHLORO-
0   72435     BENZENE, 1,1'-(2,2,2-TRICHLOROETHYLIDENE)BIS 4-METHOXY-
0   98077     BENZENE, TRICHLOROMETHYL-
10  98088     BENZENE, TRIFLUOROMETHYL-
100 25551137  BENZENE, TRIMETHYL
0   99354     BENZENE, 1,3,5-TRINITRO-
0   92875     BENZIDINE
100 510156    BENZILIC ACID, 4,4'-DICHLORO-, ETHYL ESTER
0   98873     BENZILIDEN CHLORIDE
100 3615212   BENZIMIDAZOLE, 4,5-DICHLORO-2-(TRIFLUOROMETHYL)
500 50317     BENZIOC ACID, 2,3,6-TRICHLORO-
0   81072     1,2-BENZISOTHIAZOL-3(2H)-ONE, 1,1-DIOXIDE
0   57109907  1H-1,4-BENZODIAZEPINE-3-CARBOXYLIC ACID, 7-CHLORO-2, 3-HYDRO-2-
              OXO-5 PHENYL,MONOPOTASSIUMN SALT
0   58253     3H-1,4-BENZODIAZEPINE, 7-CHLORO-2-(METHYLAMINO)-5-PHENYL-, 4-
              oxide
100 846504    2H-1,4-BENZODIAZEPIN-2-ONE, 7-CHLORO-1,3-DIHYDRO-3-HYDROXY-1-
              METHYL-5 PHENYL-
0   604751    2H-1,4-BENZODIAZEPIN-2-ONE, 7-CHLORO-1,3-DIHYDRO-3-HYDROXY-5-
              PHENYL-
0   439145    2H-1,4-BENZODIAZEPIN-2-ONE, 7-CHLORO-1,3-DIHYDRO-1-METHYL-5-
              PHENYL-
100 846491    2H-1,4-BENZODIAZEPIN-2-ONE, 7-CHLORO-5-(o-CHLOROPHENYL)-1,3-
              DIHYDRO 3-HYDROXY-
0   2955386   2H-1,4-BENZODIAZEPIN-2-ONE, 1,3-DIHYDRO-7-CHLORO-1-
              (CYCLOPROPYLMETHYL)-PHENYL-
0   17617231  2H-1,4-BENZODIAZEPIN-2-ONE, 1,3-DIHYDRO-7-CHLORO-1-(2-
              (DIETHYLAMINO) ETHYL)-5- (0-FLUOROPHENYL)
10  23092173  2H-1,4-BENZODIAZEPIN-2-ONE, 1,3-DIHYDRO-7-CHLORO-5-PHENYL-1-
              (2,2-TRI FLUOROETHYL)
100 120581    1,3-BENZODIOXOLE, 5-(1-PROPENYL)
0   94597     1,3-BENZODIOXOLE, 5-(2-PROPENYL)
0   94586     1,3-BENZODIOXOLE, 5-PROPYL
100 22781233  1,3-BENZODIOXOL-4-OL, 2,2-DIMETHYL-, METHYLCARBAMATE
0   205992    BENZO(b)FLUORANTHENE
0   205823    BENZO(j)FLUORANTHENE
0   206440    BENZO(jk)FLUORANTHENE
0   207089    BENZO(k)FLUORANTHENE
0   1563662   7-BENZOFURANOL, 2,3-DIHYDRO-2,2-DIMETHYL-, METHYLCARBAMATE
0   65850     BENZOIC ACID
0   50782     BENZOIC ACID, 2-(ACETYLOXY)-
              BENZOIC ACID, 2- 2-AMINO-6- 4'- (3-CARBOXY-4-HYDROXYPHENYL)AZO-
10  6739624   3,3' DIMETHOXY 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-5-HYDROXY-7-SULFO-1- 1-
              NAPHTHALENYL
0   133904    AENZOIC ACOD, 3rASODOuM,5-LICHLORO-
              BENZOIC ACID, 5- 4'- 8-AMINO-1-HYDROXY-7- (4-NITROPHENYL)AZO-
10  5422173   3,6- DISULFO-2-NAPHTHALENYL AZO 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-
              2 HYDROXY-, TRISODIUM
10  25180476  BENZOIC ACID, 5- 4'- 8-AMINO-1-HYDROXY-7- (4-NITROPHENYL)AZO-
              3,6- DISULFO-2-NAPHTHALENYL AZO 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-2-HYDROXY
10  25188243  BENZOIC ACID, 5- 4'- (2-AMINO-8-HYDROXY-6-SULFO-1-NAPHTHALENYL)
              AZO 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-2- HYDROXY-,
0   25255065  BENZOIC ACID, 5- 4'- (7-AMINO-1-HYDROXY-3-SULFO-2-NAPHTHALENYL)
              AZO 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-2-HYDROXY
0   2429825   BENZOIC ACID, 5- 4'- (7-AMINO-1-HYDROXY-3-SULFO-2-
              NAPHTHALENYL)AZO 1,1' BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-2-HYDROXY-, DISODIUM SALT
0   2429847   BENZOIC ACID, 5- 4'- (2-AMINO-8-HYDROXY-6-SULFO-1-
              NAPHTHALENYL)AZO 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-2-HYDROXY-, DISODIUM SALT
500 1863634   BENZOIC ACID, AMMONIUM SALT
              BENZOIC ACID, 5- 4'- 2,6-DIAMINO-3- 8-HYDROXY-3,6-DISULFO-7 (4-
0   25180410  SULFO-1-NAPHTHALENYL)AZO-2-NAPHTHALENYL AZO-5- METHYLPHENYL AZO
              1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-2-HYDROXY-
              BENZOIC ACID, 5- 4'- 2,6-DIAMINO-3- 8-HYDROXY-3,6-DISULFO-7-(4-
0   2429814   SULFO-1 NAPHTHALENYl)aZO-2-NAPHTHALENYL AZO-5-METHYLPHENYL AZO
              1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-2-HYDROXY-, TETRASODIUM SALT
10  6637883   BENZOIC ACID, 5- 4'- (2,6-DIAMINO-3-METHYL-5-SULFOPHENYL)AZO-
              3,3'- DIMETHYL 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-2-HYDROXY-, DISODIUM SALT
              BENZOIC ACID, 5- 4'- 2,6-DIAMINO-3-METHYL-5- (4-SULFOPHENYL)AZO
0   6360549   PHENYL AZO 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-2-HYDROXY-3-METHYL-, DISODIUM
              SALT
0   3811710   BENZOIC ACID, 5- 4'- 2,4-DIAMINO-5- (4-SULFOPHENYL)AZO PHENYL AZO
              1,1' BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-2-HYDROXY-, DISODIUM SALT
0   1918009   BENZOIC ACID, 3,6-DICHLORO-2-METHOXY-
10  2893803   BENZOIC ACID, 5- 4'- 2,4-DIHYDROXY-3- (4-SULFOPHENYL) AZO PHENYL
              AZO 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-2- HYDROXY-, DISODIUM SALT
10  25180396  BENZOIC ACID, 5- 4'- 2,4-DIHYDROXY-3- (4-SULFOPHENYL)AZO PHENYL
              AZO 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-2- HYDROXY-
              BENZOIC ACID, 3,3'- (3,7-DISULFO-1,5-NAPHTHALENEDIYL)BIS AZO(6
10  8014913   HYDROXY-3,1-PHENYLENE)AZO 6(OR 7)-SULFO-4,1-NAPHTHALENEDIYL AZO
              1,1'-BIPHENYL-4,4'-DIYLAZO BIS 6-HYDROXY-, HEXASODIUM SALT
100 29790521  BENZOIC ACID, 2-HYDROXY-, compound with (S)-3-(1-METHYL-2-
              PYRROLIDINYL) PYRIDINE (1:1)
10  6247514   BENZOIC ACID, 2-HYDROXY-5- 4'- 1-HYDROXY-7-(PHENYLAMINO)-3-
              SULFO-2 NAPHTHALENYL AZO 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-,
              BENZOIC ACID, 2-HYDROXY-5- 4'- 1-HYDROXY-7-(PHENYLAMINO)-3-
0   3476902   SULFO-2 NAPHTHALENYL AZO 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-, NAPHTHALENYL
              AZO 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO- DISODIUM SALT
100 93583     BENZOIC ACID, METHYL ESTER
1   129668    BENZOIC ACID, 2,4,6-TRINITRO-
10            BENZOIC DERIVATIVE PESTICIDES, FLAMMABLE LIQUID, n.o.s., flash
              point less than 23C
10            BENZOIC DERIVATIVE PESTICIDES, FLAMMABLE LIQUID, n.o.s., flash
              point between 23C and 61C
100           BENZOIC DERIVATIVE PESTICIDES, LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
100           BENZOIC DERIVATIVE PESTICIDES, SOLID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
0   98077     BENZOIC TRICHLORIDES
100 100470    BENZONITRILE
500 1194656   BENZONITRILE, 2,6-DICHLORO-
0   189559    BENZO (rst) PENTAPHENE
500 191242    BENZO(ghi)PERYLENE
              (1) BENZOPYRANO (3,4-B) FURO (2,3-H) (1) BENZOPYRAN-6(6AH)-ONE,
100 83794     1,2,12,12A-TETRAHYDRO-8,9-DIMETHOXY-2-(1-METHYLETHENYL)-,2R-
              2 alpha, 6A alpha,12A alpha)-
0   81812     2H-1-BENZOPYRAN-2-ONE, 4-HYDROXY-3-(3-OXO-1-PHENYLBUTYL)-
0   50328     BENZO(a)PYRENE
0   106514    p-BENZOQUINONE
0   106514    BENZOQUINONE
0   68768     p-BENZOQUINONE, 2,3,5-TRIS(1-AZIRIDINYL)
1   2338127   1H-BENZOTRIAZOLE, 5-NITRO
0   98077     BENZOTRICHLORIDE
10  98088     BENZOTRIFLUORIDE
1   87310     1,2,3-BENZOXDIAZOLE, 5,7-DINITRO
10  98884     BENZOYL CHLORIDE
1   1300647   BENZOYL CHLORIDE, METHOXY
0   94360     BENZOYL PEROXIDE
100 100390    BENZYL BROMIDE
0   100447    BENZYL CHLORIDE
100 501531    BENZYL CHLOROFORMATE
100 140294    BENZYL CYANIDE
100 103833    BENZYL DIMETHYLAMINE
10            4-(BENZYL(ETHYL)AMINO)-3-ETHOXYBENZENEDIAZONIUM ZINC CHLORIDE
100 620053    BENZYL IODIDE
10            4-(BENZYL(METHYL)AMINO)-3-ETHOXYBENZENEDIAZONIUM ZINC CHLORIDE
0   61336     BENZYLPENICILLIN
0   7440417   BERYLLIUM
0   7787475   BERYLLIUM CHLORIDE
0             BERYLLIUM compounds
0   7787497   BERYLLIUM FLUORIDE
10  13597994  BERYLLIUM NITRATE
0   1304569   BERYLLIUM OXIDE
0   58899     gamma-BHC
500 319868    delta-BHC
0   319857    beta-BHC
0   319846    atpha-BHC
10            BHUSA
              BICYCLO(2.2.1.)HEPTANE-2-CARBONITRILE, 5-CHLORO-6- ((
100 15271417  (METHYLAMINO) CARBONYL)OXY)IMINO)-,(12-(1-alpha, 2 beta,4-
              alpha,5alpha,6E))
10  79925     BICYCLO (2.2.1) HEPTANE, 2,2-DIMETHYL-3-METHYLENE-
10  1330161   BICYCLO 3.1.1 HEPTANE, 2,6,6-TRIMETHYL-, DIDEHYDRO derivative
10  507700    BICYCLO 2.2.1 HEPTAN-2-OL, 1,7,7-TRIMETHYL-, ENDO-
10  76222     BICYCLO 2.2.1 HEPTAN-2-ONE, 1,7,7-TRIMETHYL-
100 16219753  BICYCLO 2.2.1 HEPT-2-ENE, 5-ETHYLIDENE-
10  80568     BICYCLO 3.1.1 HEPT-2-ENE, 2,6,6-TRIMETHYL-
100 18130740  BIFLUORIDE, n.o.s.
0   1464535   2,2'-BIOXIRANE
100 92524     BIPHENYL
0   92671     1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-AMINE
100 92524     1,1'-BIPHENYL
0   92875     1,1'-BIPHENYL-4,4'-DIAMINE
0   91941     1,1'-BIPHENYL-4,4'-DIAMINE, 3,3'-DICHLORO-
0   119904    1,1'-BIPHENYL-4,4'-DIAMINE, 3,3'-DIMETHOXY-
0   119937    1,1'-BIPHENYL-4,4'-DIAMINE, 3,3'-DIMETHYL-
0   92933     BIPHENYL, 4-NITRO-
0   90437     1,1'-BIPHENYL-2-OL PHOSPHINE, PHENYL-
10            BIPYRIDILIUM PESTICIDES, FLAMMABLE LIQUID, n.o.s., flash point
              between 23C and 61C
10            BIPYRIDILIUM PESTICIDES, FLAMMABLE LIQUID, n.o.s., flash point
              less than 23C
100           BIPYRIDILIUM PESTICIDES, LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
100           BIPYRIDILIUM PESTICIDES, SOLID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
0   1910425   4,4'-BIPYRIDINIUM, 1,1'-DIMETHYL-, DICHLORIDE
100 56188     BIS(AMINOPROPYL)AMINE
100 7209383   BIS(AMINOPROPYL)PIPERAZINE
100 111911    BIS (2-CHLOROETHOXY) METHANE
0   66751     5-(BIS(2-CHLOROETHYL)AMINO) URACIL
0   111444    BIS (2-CHLOROETHYL) ETHER
0   154938    BISCHLOROETHYL NITROSOUREA
100 108601    BIS(2-CHLOROISOPROPYL)ETHER
0   542881    BIS (2-CHLOROMETHYL) ETHER
100 108601    BIS(2-CHLORO-1-METHYLETHYL)ETHER
0   534076    BIS(CHLOROMETHYL)KETONE
100 110189    1,2-BIS-(DIMETHYLAMINO)-ETHANE
100 103231    BIS (2-ETHYLHEXYL) ADIPATE
0   117817    BIS (2-ETHYLHEXYL) PHTHALATE
10  3034795   BIS(2-METHYLBENZOYL) PEROXIDE
10  1304821   BISMUTH TELLURIDE
10            BISULFITES, INORGANIC, AQUEOUS SOLUTION, n.o.s.
100 4044659   BITOSCANATE
0   21725462  BLADEX
1             BLASTING AGENTS, n.o.s.
1   7778543   BLEACHING POWDER
0   12001284  BLUE ASBESTOS
100           BOMBS, SMOKE, CONTAINING CORROSIVE LIQUID, NON-EXPLOSIVE without
              iniating devices
10  10294334  BORANE, TRIBROMO-
10  10294345  BORANE, TRICHLORO-
10  7637072   BORANE, TRIFLUORO-
100 753537    BORANE, TRIFLUORO-compound with ACETIC ACID (1:1)
10  13319750  BORANE, TRIFLUORO-, DIHYDRATE
10            BORATE AND CHLORATE mixtures
100 13826830  BORATE(1-), TETRAFLUORO-, AMMONIUM
100 16872110  BORATE(1-), TETRAFLUORO-, HYDROGEN
0   13814965  BORATE(1-), TETRAFLUORO-, LEAD(2+)
10  16949158  BORATE(1-), TETRAHYDRO-, LITHIUM
10  13762511  BORATE(1-), TETRAHYDRO-, POTASSIUM
500 1303964   BORATE, TETRASODIUM SALT
500 1303964   BORATE, TETRASODIUM SALTS
500 1303964   BORAX
100           BORDEAUX ARSENITE, liquid or solid
500 1693716   BORIC ACID (H3B03), TRI-2-PROPENYL ESTER
10  5419556   BORIC ACID (H3BO3), TRIS(1-METHYLETHYL) ESTER
10  34099735  BORIC ACID, MONOETHYL ESTER
10  121437    BORIC ACID, TRIMETHYL ESTER
100 1332076   BORIC ACID, ZINC SALT
100 1303862   BORIC ANHYDRIDE
10  507700    BORNEOL
10  28324529  BORNYL CHLORIDE
100 1303862   BORON OXIDE
10  10294334  BORON TRIBROMIDE
10  10294345  BORON TRICHLORIDE
10  7637072   BORON TRIFLUORIDE
100 753537    BORON TRIFLUORIDE ACETIC ACID complex
10  353424    BORON TRIFLUORIDE compound with METHYL ETHER (1:1)
10  109637    BORON TRIFLUORIDE DIETHYL ETHERATE
10  13319750  BORON TRIFLUORIDE DIHYDRATE
10  353424    BORON TRIFLUORIDE DIMETHYL ETHERATE
10  109637    BORON, TRIFLUORO 1,1'-OXYBIS ETHANE-, (T-4)
10  353424    BORON, TRIFLUORO OXYBIS METHANE-, (T-4)
1   9004700   BOX TOE GUM
10            BRAKE FLUID, HYDRAULIC
0   314409    BROMACIL
100 28772567  BROMADIOLONE
100           BROMATES, INORGANICS, n.o.s.
1   13967903  BROMIC ACID, BARIUM SALT
10  7789368   BROMIC ACID, MAGNESIUM SALT
10  7758012   BROMIC ACID, POTASSIUM SALT
10  7789380   BROMIC ACID, SODIUM SALT
10  7726956   BROMINE
10  7726956   BROMINE, and solutions
10  13863417  BROMINE CHLORIDE
10  7787715   BROMINE FLUORIDE
10  7789302   BROMINE FLUORIDE
10  7789302   BROMINE PENTAFLUORIDE
10  7787715   BROMINE TRIFLUORIDE
100 79083     BROMOACETIC ACID, solid or solution
100 598312    BROMOACETONE
100 598210    BROMOACETYL BROMIDE
100 108861    BROMOBENZENE
100 5798798   BROMOBENZYL CYANIDE
10  78762     2-BROMOBUTANE
10  592552    BROMOETHYL ETHYL ETHER
0   75252     BROMOFORM
0   74839     BROMOMETHANE
10  107824    BROMOMETHYLBUTANE
10  507197    2-BROMO-2-METHYLPROPANE
10  78773     1-BROMO-2-METHYLPROPANE
10  29756385  BROMOPENTANE
10  26446775  BROMOPROPANE
1   106967    3-BROMOPROPYNE
10  598732    BROMOTRIFLUOROETHYLENE
500 357573    BRUCINE
0   55981     BUSULFAN
0   106990    1,3-BUTADIENE
0   126998    1,3-BUTADIENE, 2-CHLORO-
10  86783     1,3-BUTADIENE, 1,1,2,3,4,4-HEXACHLORO-
10  78795     1,3-BUTADIENE, 2-METHYL-
10  123728    BUTANAL
10  97961     BUTANAL, 2-ETHYL
100 107891    BUTANAL, 3-HYDROXY-
500 110690    BUTANAL OXIME
10  91963     BUTANAMIDE, N,N'-(3,3'-DIMETHYL 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4,4'-DIYL)BIS 3-
              0X0-
10  109739    1-BUTANAMINE
100 111922    1-BUTANAMINE, N-BUTYL-
0   924163    1-BUTANAMINE, N-BUTYL-N-NITROSO-
100 102829    1-BUTANAMINE, N,N-DIBUTYL-
10  110689    1-BUTANAMINE, n-METHYL-
10  106978    BUTANE
10  109659    BUTANE, 1-BROMO-
10  78762     BUTANE, 2-BROMO-
10  107824    BUTANE, 1-BROMO-3-METHYL
10  25154421  BUTANE, CHLORO-
10  109693    BUTANE, 1-CHLORO-
10  75832     BUTANE, 2,2-DIMETHYL-
10  79298     BUTANE, 2,3-DIMETHYL-
100 110612    BUTANEDINITRILE
100 3333526   BUTANEDINITRILE, TETRAMETHYL-
500 815827    BUTANEDIOIC ACID, 2,3-DIHYDROXY-, COPPER SALT
100 3164292   BUTANEDIOIC ACID, 2,3-DIHYDROXY-, DIAMMONIUM SALT
0   121755    BUTANEDIOIC ACID, (DIMETHOXYPHOSPHINOTHIOYL)THIO-, DIETHYL ESTER
0   55981     1,4-BUTANEDIOL, DIMETHANESULFONATE
10  431038    2,3-BUTANEDIONE
10  431038    BUTANEDIONE
10            BUTANEDIYL ESTER
1   111342    BUTANE, 1-(ETHENYLOXY)-
10  628819    BUTANE, 1-ETHOXY-
10  513484    BUTANE, 2-IODO-
10  111364    BUTANE, 1-ISOCYANATO-
10  78784     BUTANE, 2-METHYL-
10  109740    BUTANENITRILE
10  142961    BUTANE, 1,1'-OXYBIS-
0   299752    1,2,3,4-BUTANETETROL, 1,4-DIMETHANESULFONATE, S-(R*,R*)-
10  109795    1-BUTANETHIOL
100 107926    BUTANOIC ACID
500 106310    BUTANOIC ACID, ANHYDRIDE
10  123239    BUTANOIC ACID, 4,4'-DIOXYBIS 4-0X0-
10  123206    BUTANOIC ACID, ETHENYL ESTER
10  105544    BUTANOIC ACID, ETHYL ESTER
100 503742    BUTANOIC ACID, 3-METHYL-
10  623427    BUTANOIC ACID, METHYL ESTER
10  638119    BUTANOIC ACID, 1-METHYLETHYL ESTER
10  556241    BUTANOIC ACID, 3-METHYL-, METHYL ESTER
500 540181    BUTANOIC ACID, PENTYL ESTER
10  78922     2-BUTANOL
10  71363     1-BUTANOL
100 97950     1-BUTANOL, 2-ETHYL
10  4435534   1-BUTANOL, 3-METHOXY-, ACETATE
100 123513    1-BUTANOL, 3-METHYL-
10  123922    1-BUTANOL, 3-METHYL-, ACETATE
10  78933     2-BUTANONE
500 513860    2-BUTANONE, 3-HYDROXY-
10  563804    2-BUTANONE, 3-METHYL-
1   1338234   2-BUTANONE PEROXIDE
10  141753    BUTANOYL CHLORIDE
0   123739    2-BUTENAL
10  25167673  BUTENE
10  11069195  BUTENE, DICHLORO-
0   764410    2-BUTENE, 1,4-DICHLORO-
100 110167    2-BUTENEDIOIC ACID
100 110178    2-BUTENEDIOIC ACID (E)-
10  627634    2-BUTENEDIOYL DICHLORIDE, (E)-
10  26760645  BUTENE, 2-METHYL-
500 360894    2-BUTENE, 1,1,1,2,3,4,4,4-OCTAFLUORO-
10  23474911  2-BUTENEPEROXOIC ACID, 1,1-DIMETHYLETHYL ESTER
10  51023224  BUTENE, TRICHLORO-
100 3724650   2-BUTENOIC ACID
500 7786347   2-BUTENOIC ACID, 3- (DIMETHOXYPHOSPHINYL)OXY-, METHYL ESTER
10  623701    2-BUTENOIC ACID, ETHYL ESTER
              2-BUTENOIC ACID, 2-METHYL-, 7- 2,3-DIHYDROXY-2-(1-METHOXYETHYL)-
0   303344    3 METHYL-1-OXOBUTOXY METHYL-2,3,5,7A-TETRAHYDRO-1H-PYROLIZIN -1-
              YL ESTER, 1S- lalpha(Z),7(2S*,3R*),7Aalpha
0   78944     3-BUTEN-2-ONE
10  111762    2-BUTOXY ETHANOL
10  4435534   BUTOXYL
10  123864    n-BUTYL ACETATE
10  105464    sec-BUTYL ACETATE
10  540885    tert-BUTYL ACETATE
100 12788931  BUTYL ACID PHOSPHATE
100 141322    BUTYL ACRYLATE
10  78922     sec-BUTYL ALCOHOL
10  71363     n-BUTYL ALCOHOL
0   75650     tert-BUTYL ALCOHOL
500 110690    BUTYL ALDEHYDE OXIME
10  109739    BUTYLAMINE
10  13952846  sec-BUTYLAMINE
10  513495    sec-BUTYLAMINE
10  75649     tert-BUTYLAMINE
100 1126789   BUTYLANILINE
0   128370    BUTYLATED HYDROXYTOLUENE
500 104518    BUTYL BENZENE
500 85687     BUTYL BENZYL PHTHALATE
10  109659    BUTYL BROMIDE
10  78762     sec-BUTYL BROMIDE
10  507197    tert-BUTYL BROMIDE
10  111762    BUTYL CELLOSOLVE
10  109693    BUTYL CHLORIDE
10  592347    BUTYLCHLOROFORMATE
10  1189851   tert-BUTYL CHROMATE
10  3457612   tert-BUTYL CUMENE PEROXIDE
10  3457612   tert-BUTYL CUMYL PEROXIDE
10  70042589  BUTYLCYCLOHEXYLCHLOROFORMATE
10  70042589  tert-BUTYLCYCLOHEXYLCHLOROFORMATE
10  995335    N-BUTYL-4,4-DI(tert-BUTYL-PEROXY) VALERATE (maximum 52% solution)
10  995335    N-BUTYL-4,4-DI(tert-BUTYL-PEROXY) VALERATE (stock pure)
10  25167673  BUTYLENE
0   106887    1,2-BUTYLENE OXIDE
10  142961    BUTYL ETHER
10  592847    BUTYL FORMATE
0   2426086   n-BUTYL GLYCIDYL ETHER
0   75912     tert-BUTYL HYDROPEROXIDE
10  4316421   n-n-BUTYL-IMIDAZOLE
10  1609865   tert-BUTYLISOCYANATE
10  111364    n-BUTYLISOCYANATE
10  30026927  tert-BUTYL ISOPROPYL BENZENE HYDROPEROXIDE
100 109193    BUTYL ISOVALERATE
100 138227    BUTYL LACTATE
100 138227    n-BUTYL LACTATE
10  109728    BUTYL LITHIUM
10  109795    BUTYL MERCAPTAN
100 97881     BUTYL METHACRYLATE
10  1931620   tert-BUTYL MONOPEROXYMALEATE
10  544161    BUTYL NITRITE
10  107711    tert-BUTYL PEROXYACETATE
10  614459    BUTYL PEROXYBENZOATE
10  614459    tert-BUTYL PEROXYBENZOATE
10  23474911  BUTYL PEROXYCROTONATE
10  23474911  tert-BUTYL PEROXYCROTONATE
10  16215499  BUTYL PEROXYDICARBONATE
10  2550336   tert-BUTYL PEROXYDIETHYL-ACETATE, technical pure
10  3006824   tert-BUTYL PEROXY(2-ETHYL)-HEXANOATE
10  109137    tert-BUTYL PEROXYISOBUTYRATE
10  2372216   tert-BUTYL PEROXYISOPROPYL CARBONATE
10  26748414  tert-BUTYL PEROXYNEODECANOATE
10  25251518  3-tert-BUTYL PEROXY-3-PHENYLPHTHALIDE
10  927071    tert-BUTYL PEROXYPIVALATE
10  13122184  tert-BUTYL PEROXY-3,5,5-TRIMETHYLHEXANOATE
100 28805869  BUTYL PHENOL
100 89725     o-sec-BUTYLPHENOL
100 12788931  BUTYL PHOSPHORIC ACID
0   84742     N-BUTYL PHTHALATE
10  590012    BUTYL PROPIONATE
100 98511     p-tert-BUTYLTOLUENE
10  7521804   BUTYL TRICHLOROSILANE
1   111342    BUTYL VINYL ETHER
1   107006    1-BUTYNE
10  503173    2-BUTYNE
100 110656    1,4-BUTYNEDIOL
100 110656    2-BUTYNE-1, 4-DIOL
10  123728    BUTYRALDEHYDE
500 110690    BUTYRALDOXIME
100 107926    BUTYRIC ACID
500 106310    BUTYRIC ANHYDRIDE
10  109740    BUTYRONITRILE
10  141753    BUTYRYL CHLORIDE
0   75605     CACODYLIC ACID
0   7440439   CADMIUM
0   543908    CADMIUM ACETATE
0   7789426   CADMIUM BROMIDE
0   10108642  CADMIUM CHLORIDE
0             CADMIUM compounds
0   1306190   CADIUM OXIDE
0   2223930   CADIUM STEARATE
10  7440702   CALCIUM
0   7778441   CALCIUM ARSENATE
0   52740166  CALCIUM ARSENITE
100 13780035  CALCIUM BISULFIDE
10  75207     CALCIUM CARBIDE
10  10137743  CALCIUM CHLORATE
10  14674727  CALCIUM CHLORITE
0   13765190  CALCIUM CHROMATE
10  156627    CALCIUM CYANAMIDE
10  592018    CALCIUM CYANIDE
10            CALCIUM DITHIONITE
10  26264062  CALCIUM DODECYLBENZENE SULFONATE
100 7789755   CALCIUM FLUORIDE
10  57308108  CALCIUM HYDRIDE
100 13780035  CALCIUM HYDROGEN SULFITE
10            CALCIUM HYDROSULFITE
100 1305620   CALCIUM HYDROXIDE
1   7778543   CALCIUM HYPOCHLORITE
10            CALCIUM MANGANESE SILICON
1   10124375  CALCIUM NITRATE
10  1305788   CALCIUM OXIDE
10  13477366  CALCIUM PERCHLORATE
10  10118760  CALCIUM PERMANGANATE
10  1305799   CALCIUM PEROXIDE
10  1305993   CALCIUM PHOSPHIDE
10  9007130   CALCIUM RESINATE
10  14019911  CALCIUM SELENATE
10  12737187  CALCIUM SILICIDE
10  12013568  CALCIUM SILICON
0   8001352   CAMPHECHLOR
10  79925     CAMPHENE
10  76222     CAMPHOR
10  76222     CAMPHOR, natural or synthetic
100 8008513   CAMPHOR OIL
100 56257     CANTHARIDIN
0   142621    CAPROIC ACID
10  66251     CAPROIC ALDEHYDE
100 105602    CAPROLACTAM
10  7530076   CAPRYLYL PEROXIDE (N-OCTANOYL PEROXIDE)
0   2425061   CAPTAFOL
0   133062    CAPTAN
100 51832     CARBACHOL CHLORIDE
10            CARBAMATE PESTICIDES, FLAMMABLE, LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s., flash
              point between 23C and 61C
10            CARBAMATE PESTICIDES, FLAMMABLE, LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s., flash
              point Less than 23C
100           CARBAMATE PESTICIDES, LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
100           CARBAMATE PESTICIDES, SOLID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
0   17804352  CARBAMIC ACID, 1-(BUTYLAMINO)CARBONYL-1H-BENZIMIDAZOL-2-
              YL-,METHYL ESTER
0   23103982  CARBAMIC ACID,DIMETHYL-,2,(DIMETHYLAMINO)-5,6-DIMETHYL-4-
              PYRIMIDYL ESTER
0   51796     CARBAMIC ACID, ETHYL ESTER
0   615532    CARBAMIC ACID, METHYL NITROSO-ETHYL ESTER
100 26419738  CARBAMIC ACID, METHYL-, 0 (((2,4-DIMETHYL-1,3-DITHIOLAN-2-YL)
              METHYLENE) AMINO)
500 1111780   CARBAMIC ACID, MONOAMMONIUM SALT
10  88108     CARBAMIC CHLORIDE, DIETHYL-
0   79447     CARBAMIC CHLORIDE, DIMETHYL-
0   759739    CARBAMIDE, N-ETHYL-NITROSOUREA
0   684935    CARBAMIDE, N-METHYL-NITROSOUREA
0   62566     CARBAMIDE, THIO-
100 630104    CARBAMIMIDOSELENOIC ACID
0   95067     CARBAMODITHIOIC ACID, DIETHYL-, 2-CHLORO-2-PROPENYL ESTER
0   2303164   CARBAMOTHIOIC ACID, BIS(1-METHYLETHYL)-S-(2,3-DICHLORO-2-
              PROPENYL) ESTER
0   79447     CARBAMOYL CHLORIDE, DIMETHYL-
0   63252     CARBARYL
100 501531    CARBOBENZOXY CHLORIDE
0   1563662   CARBOFURAN
500 124389    CARBON DIOXIDE
0   75150     CARBON DISULFIDE
500 506876    CARBONIC ACID, AMMONIUM SALT
0   105588    CARBONIC ACID, DIETHYL ESTER
0   554132    CARBONIC ACID, DILITHIUM SALT
10  616386    CARBONIC ACID, DIMETHYL ESTER
10  15630894  CARBONIC ACID DISODIUM SALT, compound with HYDROGEN PEROXIDE
500 1066337   CARBONIC ACID, MONOAMMONIUM SALT
100 3486359   CARBONIC ACID, ZINC SALT (1:1)
10  75445     CARBONIC DICHLORIDE
100 353504    CARBONIC DIFLUORIDE
100 622446    CARBONIMIDIC DICHLORIDE, PHENYL
0   630080    CARBON MONOXIDE
10  592347    CARBONOCHLORIDIC ACID, BUTYL ESTER
100 22128627  CARBONOCHLORIDIC ACID, CHLOROMETHYL ESTER
100 81228877  CARBONOCHLORIDIC ACID, CYCLOBUTYL ESTER
10  70042589  CARBONOCHLORIDIC ACID, (1,1-DIMETHYLETHYL)CYCLOHEXYL ESTER
10  541413    CARBONOCHLORIDIC ACID, ETHYL ESTER
10  24468131  CARBONOCHLORIDIC ACID, 2-ETHYLHEXYL ESTER
10  79221     CARBONOCHLORIDIC ACID, METHYL ESTER
1   108236    CARBONOCHLORIDIC ACID, 1-METHYLETHYL ESTER
100 1885149   CARBONOCHLORIDIC ACID, PHENYL ESTER
100 501531    CARBONOCHLORIDIC ACID, PHENYLMETHYL ESTER
10  2937500   CARBONOCHLORIDIC ACID, 2-PROPENYL ESTER
100 109615    CARBONOCHLORIDIC ACID, PROPYL ESTER
100 2812739   CARBONOCHLORIDOTHIOIC ACID, 0-ETHYL ESTER
10  4452588   CARBONOPEROXOIC ACID, DISODIUM SALT
10  2372216   CARBONOPEROXOIC ACID, 00-(1,1-DIMETHYLETHYL) O-(1- METHYLETHYL)
              ESTER
100 463718    CARBONOTHIOIC DICHLORIDE
10  463581    CARBON OXIDE SULFIDE (COS)
100 353504    CARBON OXYFLUORIDE
10            CARBON REMOVER, LIQUID
100 558134    CARBON TETRABROMIDE
0   56235     CARBON TETRACHLORIDE
500 75730     CARBON TETRAFLUORIDE
100 353504    CARBONYL FLUORIDE
10  463581    CARBONYL SULFIDE
100 786196    CARBOPHENOTHION
0   154938    CARMUSTINE
100 2244168   CARVONE
10            CASINGHEAD GASOLINE
100           CASTOR BEAN POMACE
100 535897    CASTRIX
0   120809    CATECHOL
100           CAUSTIC ALKALI LIQUIDS, n.o.s.
100 1310732   CAUSTIC SODA, DRY, SOLID
100 1310732   CAUSTIC SODA, SOLUTION
0   95067     CDEC
0   111159    CELLOSOLVE ACETATE
10            CELLULOID, IN BLOCKS, RODS, ROLLS, SHEETS, TUBES, etc.
1             CELLULOID SCRAP
1   9004700   CELLULOSE, NITRATE
10            CEMENT, LIQUID, n.o.s.
500 7440451   CERIUM
10  7440462   CESIUM
100 21351791  CESIUM HYDROXIDE
10  7789186   CESIUM NITRATE
100           CHEMICAL AMMUNITION, NON-EXPLOSIVE, with IRRITANT
100           CHEMICAL AMMUNITION, NON-EXPLOSIVE, with POISONOUS MATERIAL
100 75876     CHLORAL
0   133904    CHLORAMBEN
0   305033    CHLORAMBUCIL
0   10599903  CHLORAMIDE
0   10599903  CHLORAMINE
0   56757     CHLORAMPHENICOL
10            CHLORATE and BORATE MIXTURES
1             CHLORATE and MAGNESIUM CHLORIDE MIXTURES
10  3811049   CHLORATE OF POTASH
1             CHLORATES, INORGANIC, n.o.s.
0   7775099   CHLORATE OF SODA
0   57749     CHLORDANE
0   143500    CHLORDECONE
0   58253     CHLORDIAZEPOXIDE
0   438415    CHLORDIAZEPOXIDE HYDROCHLORIDE
100 470906    CHLORFENVINPHOS
10  7790934   CHLORIC ACID
10  13477004  CHLORIC ACID, BARIUM SALT
10  26506478  CHLORIC ACID, COPPER SALT
10  10326213  CHLORIC ACID, MAGNESIUM SALT
10  3811049   CHLORIC ACID, POTASSIUM SALT
0   7775099   CHLORIC ACID, SODIUM SALT
10  7791108   CHLORIC ACID, STRONTIUM SALT
10  10361952  CHLORIC ACID, ZINC SALT
10            CHLORINATED BENZENES
500 55720995  CHLORINATED DIPHENYL OXIDE
10            CHLORINATED ETHANES
100 76131     CHLORINATED FLUOROCARBON
100           CHLORINATED NAPHTHALENE
10            CHLORINATED PHENOLS
0   7782505   CHLORINE
10  506774    CHLORINE CYANIDE
1   10049044  CHLORINE DIOXIDE
10  7790934   CHLORINE DIOXIDE HYDRATE, FROZEN
10  13637633  CHLORINE FLUORIDE
10  7790912   CHLORINE FLUORIDE
1   10049044  CHLORINE OXIDE
10  13637633  CHLORINE PENTAFLUORIDE
10  7790912   CHLORINE TRIFLUORIDE
10            CHLORITE, INORGANIC, n.o.s.
100 24934916  CHLORMEPHOS
10  999815    CHLORMEQUAT CHLORIDE
0   494031    CHLORNAPHAZINE
0   107200    CHLOROACETALDEHYDE
100 79118     CHLOROACETIC ACID
100 78955     CHLOROACETONE
100 107142    CHLOROACETONITRILE
100 532274    CHLOROACETOPHENONE
100 532274    alpha-CHLOROACETOPHENONE
100 532274    2-CHLOROACETOPHENONE
100 79049     CHLOROACETYL CHLORIDE
10            CHLOROALKYL ETHERS
0   106478    p-CHLOROANILINE
100 27134265  CHLOROANILINES
10  93505     p-CHLORO-o-ANISIDINE
0   108907    CHLOROBENZENE
100 510156    CHLOROBENZILATE
10  52181518  CHLOROBENZOTRIFLUORIDE
1   94177     p-CHLOROBENZOYL PEROXIDE
10  104836    p-CHLOROBENZYL CHLORIDE
0   2698411   o-CHLOROBENZYLIDENE MALONONITRILE
500 74975     CHLOROBROMOMETHANE
500 109706    1-CHLORO-3-BROMOPROPANE
10  25154421  CHLOROBUTANE
500 59507     4-CHLORO-m-CRESOL
500 1321104   CHLOROCRESOLS
0   124481    CHLORODIBROMOMETHANE
10            3-CHLORO-4-DIETHYLAMINO-BENZENEDIAZONIUM ZINC CHLORIDE
0   353593    CHLORODIFLUOROBROMOMETHANE
10  75683     CHLORODIFLUOROETHANE
10  25497294  CHLORODIFLUOROETHANES
500 75456     CHLORODIFLUOROMETHANE
500 55720995  CHLORODIPHENYL OXIDE
10  75003     CHLOROETHANE
0   107073    CHLOROETHANOL
100 627112    CHLOROETH L CHLOROFORMATE
0   13010474  1-(2-CHLOROETHYL)-3-CYCLOHEXYL-1-NITROSOUREA
10  110758    2-CHLOROETHYL VINYL ETHER
0   67663     CHLOROFORM
10            CHLOROFORMATE, n.o.s., flash point equals 73F
0   74873     CHLOROMETHANE
100 29027176  2-CHLORO-3-METHYL ANILINE
100 615656    2-CHLORO-4-METHYL ANILINE
100 95818     2-CHLORO-5-METHYL ANULINE
100 87605     3-CHLORO-2-METHYL ANILINE
100 95749     3-CHLORO-4-METHYL ANILINE
100 7149759   4-CHLORO-3-METHYL ANILINE
500 95794     5-CHLORO-2-METHYL ANILINE
100 87638     6-CHLORO-2-METHYL ANILINE
100 22128627  CHLOROMETHYLCHLOROFORMATE
0   542881    CHLOROMETHYL ETHER
10  3188134   CHLOROMETHYL ETHYL ETHER
0   107302    CHLOROMETHYL METHYL ETHER
500 28479223  3-CHLORO-4-METHYLPHENYL ISOCYANATE
500 91587     beta-CHLORONAPHTHALENE
10  41587364  CHLORONITROANILINE
0   25167935  CHLORONITROBENZENE
100 600259    1-CHLORO-1-NITROPROPANE
10  25567684  CHLORONITROTOLUENE
500 76153     CHLOROPENTAFLUOROETHANE
10  937144    3-CHLOROPEROXYBENZOIC ACID
100 3691358   CHLOROPHACINONE
0   95578     2-CHLOROPHENOL
100 106489    4-CHLOROPHENOL
100 108430    3-CHLOROPHENOL
10  7005723   4-CHLOROPHENYL PHENYL ETHER
10  26571799  CHLOROPHENYL TRICHLOROSILANE
100 76062     CHLOROPICRIN
100 16941121  CHLOROPLATINIC ACID
0   126998    CHLOROPRENE
10  75296     2-CHLOROPROPANE
10  627305    3-CHLOROPROPANOL
10  557982    2-CHLOROPROPENE
100 28554009  CHLOROPROPIONIC ACID
100 542767    3-CHLOROPROPIONITRILE
100 109091    2-CHLOROPYRIDINE
0   54057     CHLOROQUINE
10            CHLOROSILANE, FLAMMABLE, CORROSIVE, n.o.s.
100           CHLOROSILANE, n.o.s., CORROSIVE
10            CHLOROSILANE, n.o.s., emits FLAMMABLE GAS when WET, CORROSIVE
100 1331288   o-CHLOROSTYRENE
10  7790945   CHLOROSULFURIC ACID
10  7790945   CHLOROSULPHONIC ACID
500 63938103  CHLOROTETRAFLUOROETHANE
100 1897456   CHLOROTHALONIL
500 95498     o-CHLOROTOLUENE
100 25168052  CHLOROTOLUENES
100 3165933   4-CHLORO-o-TOLUIDINE HYDROCHLORIDE
500 75729     CHLOROTRIFLUOROMETHANE
10  14674727  CHLOROUS ACID, CALCIUM SALT
1   7758192   CHLOROUS ACID, SODIUM SALT
100 1982474   CHLOROXURON
0   2921882   CHLORPYRIFOS
100 21923239  CHLORTHIOPHOS
0   56495     CHOLANTHRENE, 3-METHYL
0   11103869  CHROMATE (1-),HYDROXYOCTAOXODIZINCATEDI-, POTASSIUM
0   1066304   CHROMIC ACETATE
10  7738945   CHROMIC ACID
10  11115745  CHROMIC ACID
10  1189851   CHROMIC ACID, BIS(1,1-DIMETHYLETHYL)- ESTER
0   13765190  CHROMIC ACID, CALCIUM SALT
10  7789095   CHROMIC ACID, DIAMMONIUM SALT
1   7788989   CHROMIC ACID, DIAMMONIUM SALT
10  14307358  CHROMIC ACID, DILITHIUM SALT
0   7778509   CHROMIC ACID, DIPOTASSIUM SALT
0   7789006   CHROMIC ACID, DIPOTASSIUM SALT
0   10588019  CHROMIC ACID, DISODIUM SALT
0   7758976   CHROMIC ACID, LEAD SALT
0   7789062   CHROMIC ACID, STRONTIUM SALT (1:1)
0   13530659  CHROMIC ACID, ZINC SALT (1:1)
0   10025737  CHROMIC CHLORIDE
100 7788978   CHROMIC FLUORIDE
0   10101538  CHROMIC SULFATE
0   7440473   CHROMIUM
100 22541793  CHROMIUM (II)
0             CHROMIUM compounds
10  14977618  CHROMIUM, DICHLORODIOXO
100 7788978   CHROMIUM FLUORIDE
100 22541793  CHROMIUM, ion
1   13 548384 CHROMIUM NITRATE
0   1333820   CHROMIUM OXIDE
0   1308389   CHROMIUM(III) OXIDE(2:3)
10  14977618  CHROMIUM OXYCHLORIDE
0   7775113   CHROMIUM SODIUM OXIDE
0   64093794  CHROMOSULFURIC ACID
100 14489259  CHROMOSULFURIC ACID
100 10049055  CHROMOUS CHLORIDE
10  14977618  CHROMYL CHLORIDE
0   218019    CHRYSENE
10  2650182   C.I. ACID BLUE 9, DIAMMONIUM SALT
10  3844459   C.I. ACID BLUE 9, DISODIUM SALT
500 4680788   C.I. ACID GREEN 3
0   2429803   C.I. ACID ORANGE 45
0   3567655   C.I. ACID RED 85
10  6459945   C.I. ACID RED 114, DISODIUM SALT
10  91929     C.I. AZOIC COUPLING COMPONENT
10  91963     C.I. AZOIC COUPLING COMPONENT 5
100 633034    C.I. BASIC GREEN 1
100 569642    C.I. BASIC GREEN 4
0   989388    C.I. BASIC RED 1
0   2465272   C.I. BASIC YELLOW 2, MONOHYDROCHLORIDE
0   25156494  C.I. DIRECT BLACK 4
0   2429836   C.I. DIRECT BLACK 4
0   1937377   C.I. DIRECT BLACK 38
10  61703057  C.I. DIRECT BLACK 114
10  6739624   C.I. DIRECT BLACK 91, TRISODIUM SALT
0   2610051   C.I. DIRECT BLUE 1
0   2429734   C.I. DIRECT BLUE 2
10  2429745   C.I. DIRECT BLUE 15
0   2602462   C.I. DIRECT BLUE 6
0   25180192  C.I. DIRECT BLUE 2
10  2150541   C.I. DIRECT BLUE 2 5
10  25180272  C.I. DIRECT BLUE 2 5
10  2429712   C.I. DIRECT BLUE 8, DISODIUM SALT
10  2586574   C.I. DIRECT BLUE 22, DISODIUM SALT
0   72571     C.I. DIRECT BLUE 14, TETRASODIUM SALT
0   3811710   C.I. DIRECT BROWN 1
0   2429825   C.I. DIRECT BROWN 2
0   25255065  C.I. DIRECT BROWN 2
10  25180396  C.I. DIRECT BROWN 6
10  2893803   C.I. DIRECT BROWN 6
0   2429814   C.I. DIRECT BROWN 31
0   25180410  C.I. DIRECT BROWN 31
0   3476902   C.I. DIRECT BROWN 59
10  6247514   C.I. DIRECT BROWN 59
10  8014913   C.I. DIRECT BROWN 74
0   16071866  C.I. DIRECT BROWN 95
10  12222207  C.I. DIRECT BROWN 111
0   6360549   C.I. DIRECT BROWN 154
0   25180454  C.I. DIRECT GREEN 1
0   3626286   C.I. DIRECT GREEN 1
10  4335095   C.I. DIRECT GREEN 6
0   25180465  C.I. DIRECT GREEN 6
10  5422173   C.I. DIRECT GREEN 8
10  25180476  C.I. DIRECT GREEN 8
0   54579281  C.I. DIRECT ORANGE 1
10  64083596  C.I. DIRECT ORANGE 8
10  6637883   C.I. DIRECT ORANGE 6, DISODIUM SALT
10  25188243  C.I. DIRECT RED 1
0   2429847   C.I. DIRECT RED 1
10  25188298  C.I. DIRECT RED 10
10  2429701   C.I. DIRECT RED 10
10  1937355   C.I. DIRECT RED 13
10  25188301  C.I. DIRECT RED 13
0   573580    C.I. DIRECT RED 28
0   3530196   C.I. DIRECT RED 37
10  992596    C.I. DIRECT RED 2, DISODIUM SALT
10  6358298   C.I. DIRECT RED 39, DISODIUM SALT
10  2586609   C.I. DIRECT VIOLET 1
0   25188447  C.I. DIRECT VIOLET 1
10  6426671   C.I. DIRECT VIOLET 22
10  25329822  C.I. DIRECT VIOLET 22
10  6426626   C.I. DIRECT YELLOW 20
0   2832408   C.I. DISPERSE YELLOW 3
10  3761533   C.I. FOOD RED 5
0   81889     C.I. FOOD RED 15
10  3118976   C.I. SOLVENT ORANGE 7
0   60093     C.I. SOLVENT YELLOW 1
0   97563     C.I. SOLVENT YELLOW 3
0   842079    C.I. SOLVENT YELLOW 14
0   15663271  CISPLATIN
10  6358538   CITRUS RED NO. 2
10  128665    C.I. VAT YELLOW 4
100           CLEANING COMPOUND, LIQUID, CORROSIVE
0   50419     CLOMIPHENE CITRATE
500 2971906   CLOPIDOL
0   57109907  CLORAZEPATE DIPOTASSIUM
10            COAL GAS
0   8007452   COAL TAR (COAL TAR PITCH)
0   8001589   COAL TAR CREOSOTE
100 65996921  COAL TAR DISTILLATE, COMBUSTIBLE, LIQUID
100 65996921  COAL TAR DISTILLATE, FLAMMABLE, LIQUID
100 65996794  COAL TAR NAPHTHA
10  7440484   COBALT
500 7789437   COBALT BROMIDE
10  10210681  COBALT CARBONYL
10            COBALT compounds
10  10210681  COBALT, DI-ltiu-CARBONYLHEXACARBONYLDI-,
100 62207765  COBALT, ((2,2'-(1,2-ETHANEDIYLBIS (NITRILOMETHYLIDYNE))BIS(6-
              FLUORO PHENALOTO)X2-)-N,N',O,O')
10  16842038  COBALT HYDROCARBONYL
10  61789513  COBALT NAPHTHENATE
500 7789437   COBALTOUS BROMIDE
100 544183    COBALTOUS FORMATE
10  14017415  COBALTOUS SULFAMATE
10            COBALT RESINATE, precipitated
10  16842038  COBALT, TETRACARBONYLHYDRO
100 124878    COCCULUS
10  8001318   COCONUT OIL
0             COKE OVEN EMISSIONS
0   64868     COLCHICINE
10  9004700   COLLODION
0   64175     COLOGNE SPIRITS
10  67561     COLUMBIAN SPIRITS
500           COMBUSTIBLE LIQUID, n.o.s.
10            COMPOUND, PAINT, etc., REMOVING, REDUCING, or THINNING
10            COMPOUND, TREE or WEED KILLING, LIQUID, COMBUSTIBLE or FLAMMABLE
100           COMPOUND, TREE or WEED KILLING, LIQUID, CORROSIVE
10            COMPRESSED or LIQUEFIED GASES, FLAMMABLE, NON-TOXIC, n.o.s.
10            COMPRESSED or LIQUEFIED GASES, FLAMMABLE, TOXIC, n.o.s.
500           COMPRESSED or LIQUEFIED GASES, NON-FLAMMABLE, NON-TOXIC, n.o.s.
100           COMPRESSED or LIQUEFIED GASES, NON-FLAMMABLE, TOXIC, n.o.s
100 7440508   COPPER
100 12002038  COPPER ACETOARSENITE
0   10290127  COPPER ARSENITE
10            COPPER-BASED PESTICIDE, FLAMMABLE, LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s., flash
              point less than 23C
10            COPPER-BASED PESTICIDE, FLAMMABLE, LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s., flash
              point between 23C and 61C
10            COPPER-BASED PESTICIDE, LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
10            COPPER-BASED PESTICIDE, SOLID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
100 12002038  COPPER, BIS(ACETO)HEXAMETA-ARSENITOTETRA
100 13426910  COPPER, BIS(1,2-ETHANEDIAMINE-N,N')
10  26506478  COPPER CHLORATE
0   1344678   COPPER CHLORIDE
10            COPPER compounds
100 14763770  COPPER CYANIDE
100 544923    COPPER CYANIDE
10  15123690  COPPER SELENATE
10  10214401  COPPER SELENITE
10  8001318   COPRA
10            CORROSIVE LIQUIDS, FLAMMABLE, n.o.s.
100           CORROSIVE LIQUIDS, n.o.s.
100           CORROSIVE LIQUIDS, POISONOUS, n.o.s.
10            CORROSIVE SOLIDS, FLAMMABLE, n.o.s.
100           CORROSIVE SOLIDS, n.o.s.
100           CORROSIVE SOLIDS, POISONOUS, n.o.s.
0   129066    COUMADIN SODIUM
100 117522    COUMAFURYL
100 56724     COUMAPHOS
100 117522    COUMARIN, 3-(ALPHA-ACETONYLFURFURYL)-4-HYDROXY
10            COUMARIN DERIVATIVE PESTICIDE, FLAMMABLE, LIQUID, n.o.s.
10            COUMARIN DERIVATIVE PESTICIDE, LIQUID, n.o.s.
10            COUMARIN DERIVATIVE PESTICIDE, SOLID, n.o.s.
100 5836293   COUMATETRALYL
0   8001589   CREOSOTE
10            CREOSOTE SALTS
0   120718    p-CRESIDINE
0   120718    CRESIDINE
100 108394    m-CRESOL
100 95487     o-CRESOL
100 106445    p-CRESOL
10  2980645   o-CRESOL, 4,6-DINITRO-, AMMONIUM SALT
1   2312767   o-CRESOL, 4,6-DINITRO-, SODIUM SALT
100 1319773   CRESOLS, mixed isomers
500 96695     m-CRESOL, 4,4'-THIOBIS (6-tert-BUTYL)
100 1319773   CRESYLIC ACID
100 95487     o-CRESYLIC ACID
100 535897    CRIMIDINE
0   123739    CROTONALDEHYDE
0   4170303   CROTONALDEHYDE, inhibited
100 3724650   CROTONIC ACID
10  503173    CROTONYLENE
100 299865    CRUFOMATE
100 15096523  CRYOLITE
100 1309326   CRYPTOHALITE
100 98828     CUMENE
0   80159     CUMENE HYDROPEROXIDE
10  26748470  CUMYL PEROXYNEODECANOATE
10            CUMYL PEROXYPIVALATE
0   135206    CUPFERRON
              CUPRATE(2-), 5- 4'- 2,6-DIHYDROXY-3- (2-HYDROXY-5-
0   16071866  SULFOPHENYL)AZO PHENYL AZO 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-2-
              HYDROXYBENZOATO(4-)-, DISODIUM
100 142712    CUPRIC ACETATE
100 12002038  CUPRIC ACETOARSENITE
0   10290127  CUPRIC ARSENITE
10  26506478  CUPRIC CHLORATE
0   1344678   CUPRIC CHLORIDE
10  3251238   CUPRIC NITRATE
100 814915    CUPRIC OXALATE
0   7758987   CUPRIC SULFATE
100 10380297  CUPRIC SULFATE, AMMONIATED
500 815827    CUPRIC TARTRATE
100 13426910  CUPRIETHYLENEDIAMINE
500 8052424   CUT-BACKS
10  420042    CYANAMIDE
10  156627    CYANAMIDE, CALCIUM SALT (1:1)
100 57125     CYANIDE
10            CYANIDE, all inorganic compounds
10            CYANIDE compounds
100 100470    CYANOBENZENE
10  460195    CYANOGEN
100 506683    CYANOGEN BROMIDE
10  506774    CYANOGEN CHLORIDE
100 506785    CYANOGEN IODIDE
100 2636262   CYANOPHOS
100 675149    CYANURIC FLUORIDE
10  108770    CYANURIC TRICHLORIDE
0   14901087  CYCASIN
10  287230    CYCLOBUTANE
500 115253    CYCLOBUTANE, OCTAFLUORO
100 81228877  CYCLOBUTYLCHLOROFORMATE
100 4904614   1,5,9-CYCLODODECATRIENE
500 583608    CYCLOHEAXANONE, METHYL
10  291645    CYCLOHEPTANE
10  544252    CYCLOHEPTATRIENE
10  544252    1,3,5-CYCLOHEPTATRIENE
10  628922    CYCLOHEPTENE
0   106514    2,5-CYCLOHEXADIENE-1,4-DIONE
0   68768     2,5-CYCLOHEXADIENE-1,4-DIONE, 2,3,5-TRIS(1-AZIRIDINYL)
100 101837    CYCLOHEXANAMINE, N-CYCLOHEXYL-
10  3882062   CYCLOHEXANAMINE, N-CYCLOHEXYL-, NITRATE
100 98942     CYCLOHEXANAMINE, N,N-DIMETHYL
10  110827    CYCLOHEXANE
10  25551148  CYCLOHEXANECARBONITRILE, AZOBIS-
10  589902    CYCLOHEXANE, 1,4-DIMETHYL-
10  58899     CYCLOHEXANE, 1,2,3,4,5,6-HEXACHLORO-, (lalpha, 2alpha, 3beta,
              4aLpha, 5alpha, 6beta)-
0   319846    CYCLOHEXANE, 1,2,3,4,5,6-HEXACHLORO-, alpha-isomer
0   319857    CYCLOHEXANE, 1,2,3,4,5,6-HEXACHLORO-, beta-isomer
10  3173533   CYCLOHEXANE, ISOCYANATO-
100 4098719   CYCLOHEXANE, 5-ISOCYANATO-1-(ISOCYANATOMETHYL)-1,3,3- TRIMETHYL-
100 2855132   CYCLOHEXANEMETHANAMINE, 5-AMINO-1,3,3-TRIMETHYL-
10  108872    CYCLOHEXANE, METHYL-
100 5124301   CYCLOHEXANE, 1,1'-METHYLENEBIS 4-ISOCYANATO-
100 1569693   CYCLOHEXANETHIOL
0   108930    CYCLOHEXANOL
500 25639423  CYCLOHEXANOL, METHYL
0   108941    CYCLOHEXANONE
10  12262587  CYCLOHEXANONE PEROXIDE
10  110838    CYCLOHEXENE
100 1321160   CYCLOHEXENECARBOXALDEHYDE
100 138863    CYCLOHEXENE, 1-METHYL-4-(1-METHYLETHENYL)-
500 586629    CYCLOHEXENE, 1-METHYL-4- (1-METHYLETHYLIDENE)-
0   78591     2-CYCLOHEXEN-1-ONE, 3,5,5-TRIMETHYL-
10  10137696  CYCLOHEXENYL TRICHLOROSILANE
0   66819     CYCLOHEXIMIDE
100 622457    CYCLOHEXYL ACETATE
0   108918    CYCLOHEXYLAMINE
10  34216347  CYCLOHEXYLAMINE, TRIMETHYL-
10  3173533   CYCLOHEXYL ISOCYANATE
100 1569693   CYCLOHEXYL MERCAPTAN
10  98124     CYCLOHEXYL TRICHLOROSILANE
1   121824    CYCLONITE
500 29965977  CYCLOOCTADIENE
10            CYCLOOCTADIENE PHOSPHINE
10  629209    CYCLOOCTATETRAENE
10  629209    1,3,5,7-CYCLOOCTATETRAENE
0   7220817   CYCLOPENTA(C)FURO(3',2':4,5)FURO(2,3-H)(1)BENZOPYRAN-1,11-DIONE,
              2,3,6A-alpha,8,9,9A-alpha-HEXAHYDRO-4-METHOXY-
10  542927    CYCLOPENTADIENE
10  542927    1,3-CYCLOPENTADIENE
100 77474     1,3-CYCLOPENTADIENE, 1,2,3,4,5,5-HEXACHLORO
10  287923    CYCLOPENTANE
0   96377     CYCLOPENTANE, METHYL
500 96413     CYCLOPENTANOL
10  120923    CYCLOPENTANONE
10  142290    CYCLOPENTENE
0   50180     CYCLOPHOSPHAMIDE
10  75194     CYCLOPROPANE
1   2691410   CYCLOTETRAMETHYLENETETRANITRAMINE
100 131217051 CYHEXATIN
500 25155151  CYMENE
0   147944    CYSTOSINE ARABINOSIDE
0   147944    CYTOSINE, 1-BETA-D-ARABINO-FURANOSYL
0   94757     2,4-D
10  4342034   DACARBAZINE
0   20830813  DAUNOMYCIN
0   20830813  DAUNORUBICIN
0   96128     DBCP
100 72548     DDD
0   72559     DDE
0   50293     DDT
10  17702419  DECABORANE
500 1163195   DECABROMODIPHENYL ETHER
500 1163195   DECABROMODIPHENYL OXIDE
100 91178     DECAHYDRONAPHTNALENE
100 91178     DECALIN
500 124185    DECANE
10  143102    1-DECANETHIOL
10  762129    DECANOYL PEROXIDE
0   732116    DECEMTHION
100 8065483   DEMETON
0   919868    DEMETON-S-METHYL
0   64175     DENATURATED ALCOHOL
10  7782390   DEUTERIUM
10  123422    DIACETONE ALCOHOL
10  54693468  DIACETONE ALCOHOL PEROXIDE
0   10311849  DIALIFOR
0   10311849  DIALIFOS
0   2303164   DIALLATE
100 124027    DIALLYLAMINE
10  557404    DIALLYLETHER
0   615054    2,4-DIAMINOANISOLE
0   39156417  2,4-DIAMINOANISOLE SULFATE
0   101804    4,4'-DIAMINODIPHENYL ETHER
0   101779    p,p'-DIAMINODIPHENYLMETHANE
0   823405    2,6-DIAMINOTOLUENE
0   95807     2,4-DIAMINOTOLUENE
0   496720    3,4-DIAMINOTOLUENE
0   25376458  DIAMINOTOLUENES, mixed isomers
0   15663271  CIS-DIAMMINEDICHLOROPLATINUM(II)
100 2050922   DIAMYLAMINE
0   119904    o-D IAN ISIDINE
10  9000924   DIASTASE
0   439145    DIAZEPAM
100 333415    DIAZINON
10            2-DIAZO-a-NAPHTHOL-4-SULFOCHLORIDE
1   87310     DIAZODINITROPHENOL
1   334883    DIAZOMETHANE
10            2-DIAZO-1-NAPHTHOL-5-SULFOCHLORIDE
0   226368    DIBENZ(a,h)ACRIDINE
0   224420    DIBENZ(aj)ACRIDINE
0   53703     DIBENZ(a,h)ANTHRACENE
0   194592    7H-DIBENZO(c,g)CARBAZOLE
0   189640    DIBENZO (b,def) CHRYSENE
10  128665    DIBENZO (b,def) CHRYSENE-7,14-DIONE
0   1746016   DIBENZO b,e 1,4-DIOXIN, 2,3,7,8-TETRACHLORO
10  132649    DIBENZOFURAN
0   189559    1,2:7,8-DIBENZOPYRENE
0   192654    DIBENZO(a,e)PYRENE
0   189559    DIBENZO(a,i)PYRENE
0   189640    DIBENZO(a,h)PYRENE
10  18414363  DIBENZYLDICHLOROSILANE
10  2144458   DIBENZYL PEROXYDICARBONATE
10  19287457  DIBORANE
500 26249127  DIBROMOBENZENE
100 3479865   DIBROMOBUTANONE
100 3479865   1,1-DIBROMO-2-BUTANONE
0   96128     1,2-DIBROMO-3-CHLOROPROPANE
0   106934    1,2-DIBROMOETHANE
100 111922    DIBUTYLAMINE
500 102818    2-(DIBUTYLAMINO)-ETHANOL
500 102818    2-n-DIBUTYLAMINOETHANOL
0   128370    2,6-DI-tert-BUTYL-p-CRESOL
10  15520113  DI(4-tert-BUTYLCYCLOHEXYL)-PEROXYDICARBONATE
100 4835114   N,N'-DIBUTYL HEXAMETHYLENEDIAMINE
10  110054    DI-tert-BUTYL PEROXIDE
1   2167239   2,2-DI(tert-BUTYLPEROXY)-BUTANE
10  3006868   1,1-DI(tert-BUTYLPEROXY)-CYCLOHEXANE
10  19910657  DI-sec-BUTYL PEROXY-DICARBONATE
1   2155717   DI-tert-BUTYLPEROXYPHTHALATE, maximum 55% in paste
1   2155717   DI-tert-BUTYLPEROXYPHTHALATE, maximum 55% in solution
1   2155717   DI-tert-BUTYLPEROXYPHTHALATE, technical pure
10  6731368   1,1-DI(tert-BUTYLPEROXY)-3,3,5-TRIMETHYLCYCLOHEXANE
100 107664    DIBUTYL PHOSPHATE
0   84742     DIBUTYL PHTHALATE
0   84742     DI-N-BUTYL PHTHALATE
0   1918009   DICAMBA
10  26322145  DICETYL PEROXYDICARBONATE
500 1194656   DICHLOBENIL
100 117806    DICHLONE
10  79436     DICHLOROACETIC ACID
100 79367     DICHLOROACETYL CHLORIDE
1   7572294   DICHLOROACETYLENE
500 27134276  DICHLOROANILINE
100 8023538   DICHLOROBENZALKONIUM CHLORIDE
100 95501     1,2-DICHLOROBENZENE
500 541731    1,3-DICHLOROBENZENE
0   106467    1,4-DICHLOROBENZENE
100 25321226  DICHLOROBENZENES, mixed isomers
0   91941     3,3'-DICHLOROBENZIDINE
10  133142    2,4-DICHLOROBENZOYL PEROXIDE
100 72548     1,1-DICHLORO-2,2-BIS-(p-CHLOROPHENYL)ETHANE
0   75274     DICHLOROBROMOMETHANE
10  11069195  DICHLOROBUTENE
0   764410    1,4-DICHLORO-2-BUTENE
100 110576    trans-1,4-DICHLOROBUTENE
10  27156032  DICHLORODIFLUOROETHYLENE
100 75718     DICHLORODIFLUOROMETHANE
0   118525    1,3-DICHLORO-5,5-DIMETHYL HYDANTOIN
0   23950585  3,5-DICHLORO-n-(1,1-DIMETHYL-2-PROPYNYL)BENZAMIDE
10  75785     DICHLORODIMETHYL SILANE
0   50293     DICHLORODIPHENYL TRICHLOROETHANE
10  75343     1,1-DICHLOROETHANE
0   107062    1,2-DICHLOROETHANE
10  540590    1,2-DICHLOROETHENE
0   75354     1,1-DICHLOROETHYLENE
10  540590    1,2-DICHLOROETHYLENE
10  156605    1,2-trans-DICHLOROETHYLENE
0   111444    DICHLOROETHYL ETHER
10  2782572   DICHLOROISOCYANURIC ACID
10  3188134   DICHLOROISOPROPYL ETHER
0   75092     DICHLOROMETHANE
0   542881    DICHLOROMETHYL ETHER
10  149746    DICHLOROMETHYLPHENYL SILANE
100 594729    1,1-DICHLORO-1-NITROETHANE
10  30586108  DICHLOROPENTANE
0   120832    2,4-DICHLOROPHENOL
100 87650     2,6-DICHLOROPHENOL
10  28165711  2,6-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID ESTER
10  1928387   2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ESTER
    94111     2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ESTER
0   25168267  2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ESTER
10  1928616   2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ESTER
0   94791     2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ESTER
0   94804     2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ESTER
10  2971382   2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ESTER
10  53467111  2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ESTER
10  1320189   2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ESTER
10  1929733   2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ESTER
100 41195908  1,2-DICHLORO-3-PHENYL ISOCYANATE
100 102363    1,2-DICHLORO-4-PHENYL ISOCYANATE
100 39920371  1,3-DICHLORO-2-PHENYL ISOCYANATE
10  34893920  1,3-DICHLORO-5-PHENYL ISOCYANATE
100 5392825   1,4-DICHLORO-2-PHENYL ISOCYANATE
100 2612579   2,4-DICHLORO-1-PHENYL ISOCYANATE
10  27137855  DICHLOROPHENYL TRICHLOROSILANE
10  26638197  DICHLOROPROPANE
10  78999     1,1-DICHLOROPROPANE
0   78875     1,2-DICHLOROPROPANE
0   142289    1,3-DICHLOROPROPANE
0   8003198   1,2-DICHLOROPROPANE- 1,3-DICHLOROPENE mixture
0   96231     1,3-DICHLOROPROPANOL
0   534076    DICHLOROPROPANONE
10  26952238  DICHLOROPROPENE
0   542756    1,3-DICHLOROPROPENE
0   78886     2,3-DICHLOROPROPENE
100 75990     2,2-DICHLOROPROPIONIC ACID
0   542756    1,3-DICHLOROPROPYLENE
10  4109960   DICHLOROSILANE
500 76142     DICHLOROTETRAFLUOROETHANE
10            DICHLOROTRIAZINETRIONE and its salts
0   62737     DICHLORVOS
500 115322    DICOFOL
0   141662    DICROTOPHOS
10  80433     DICUMYL PEROXIDE
10            DICYCLOHEPTADIENE
100 101837    DICYCLOHEXYLAMINE
10  3882062   DICYCLOHEXYLAMMONIUM NITRATE
10  1758618   DICYCLOHEXYL PEROXIDE
10  1561495   DICYCLOHEXYL PEROXY-DICARBONATE
100 77736     DICYCLOPENTADIENE
0   102545    DICYCLOPENTADIENYL IRON
10  762129    DIDECANOYL PEROXIDE, technical pure
10            DI-2,4-DICHLOROBENZOYL PEROXIDE, 52% as paste
10            DI-2,4-DICHLOROBENZOYL PEROXIDE, greater than 75% in water
10            DI-2,4-DICHLOROBENZOYL PEROXIDE, 52% in solution
10            1,2-DI(DIMETHYLAMINO)-ETHANE
10            2,2-DI(4,4-DI-tert-BUTYL-PEROXY CYCLOHEXYL)-PROPANE 42%
10            DIDYMIUM NITRATE
0   60571     DIELDRIN
0   84173     DIENOESTROL
0   1464535   1,2,3,4-DIEPOXYBUTANE
500           DIESEL FUEL
100 111422    DIETHANOLAMINE
10  78626     DIETHOXYDIMETHYL SILANE
10  629141    DIETHOXYLETHANE
10  462953    DIETHOXYMETHANE
10            2,5-DIETHOXY-4-MORPHO-LINOBENZENEDIAZONIUM ZINC CHLORIDE
10  3054953   3,3-DIETHOXYPROPENE
10  96106     DIETHYLALUMINUM CHLORIDE
10  109897    DIETHYLAMINE
0   302705    DIETHYLAMINE, 2,2'-DICHLORO-N-METHYL,N-OXIDE, HYDROCHLORIDE
100 100378    DIETHYLAMINOETHANOL
100 104789    3-(DIETHYLAMINO) PROPYLAMINE
100 91667     DIETHYL ANILINE
10  692422    DIETHYL ARSINE
100 25340174  DIETHYLBENZENE
100 1642542   DIETHYLCARBAMAZINE CITRATE
10  88108     DIETHYLCARBAMOYL CHLORIDE
10  584021    DIETHYLCARBINOL
0   105588    DIETHYL CARBONATE
10  629141    DIETHYL CELLOSOLVE
100 814493    DIETHYL CHLOROPHOSPHATE
10  1719535   DIETHYL DICHLOROSILANE
0   123911    1,4-DIETHYLENE DIOXIDE
1   693210    DIETHYLENEGLYCOL DINITRATE
100 111400    DIETHYLENE TRIAMINE
100 100367    N,N-DIETHYL-1,2-ETHANEDIAMINE
10  60297     DIETHYL ETHER
100 100367    DIETHYLETHYLENE DIAMINE
10  16111629  DI(2-ETHYLHEXYL) PEROXY-DICARBONATE
100 298077    DI(2-ETHYLHEXYL)PHOSPHORIC ACID
0   117817    DI(2-ETHYL HEXYL) PHTHALATE
0   1615801   1,2-DIETHYL HYDRAZINE
10  96220     DIETHYL KETONE
10  557186    DIETHYLMAGNESIUM
10  120229    DIETHYL-p-NITROSOANILINE
10  120229    N,N-DIETHYL-4-NITROSOBENZENAMINE
100 95921     DIETHYL OXALATE
1   14666785  DIETHYL PEROXYDICARBONATE
100 93050     DIETHYL-p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE
100 84662     DIETHYL PHTHALATE
0   56531     DIETHYLSTILBESTROL
0   64675     DIETHYL SULFATE
10  352932    DIETHYL SULFIDE
10  2524041   DIETHYLTHIOPHOSPHORYL CHLORIDE
10  557200    DIETHYLZINC
100 75616     DIFLUORODIBROMOMETHANE
10  75376     1,1-DIFLUOROETHANE
100 13779414  DIFLUOROPHOSPHORIC ACID
100 71636     DIGITOXIN
100 2238075   DIGLYCIDYL ETHER
0   1675543   DIGLYCIDYL ETHER OF BISPHENOL A
10  20830755  DIGOXIN
1   2614768   2,2-DIHYDROPEROXY PROPANE
10  110872    DIHYDROPYRAN
0   123331    1,2-DIHYDRO-3,6-PYRIDAZINEDIONE
0   128461    DIHYDROSTREPTOMYCIN
0   120809    1,2-DIHYDROXYBENZENE
10  1758618   DI(1-HYDROXYCYCLO-HEXYL) PEROXIDE
10  110963    DI-ISOBUTYLAMINE
10  25167708  DI-ISOBUTYLENE
1   3437841   DI-ISOBUTYRYL PEROXIDE
100 822060    1,6-DIISOCYANATO HEXANE
100 27215107  DI-ISOOCTYL ACID PHOSPHATE
10  108189    DI-ISOPROPYLAMINE
10  26762936  DI-ISOPROPYLBENZENE HYDROPEROXIDE, maximum 72% solution
100 96800     DI-ISOPROPYLETHANOLAMINE
10  108203    DIISOPROPYL ETHER
1   105646    DI-ISOPROPYL PEROXYDICARBONATE
10            DI-ISOTRIDECYL PEROXYDICARBONATE
1   674828    DIKETENE
10            DILAUROYL PEROXIDE, maximum 42% IN WATER
10  105748    DILAUROYL PEROXIDE, technical pure
100 115264    DIMEFOX
              1,4:5,8-DIMETHANONAPHTHALENE, 1,2,3,4,10,1O-HEXACHLORO-
0   309002    1,4,4A,5,8,8A HEXAHYDRO-, (1 alpha,4 alpha,4A beta,5 aLpha,8
              alpha,8A beta)
              2,7:3,6-DIMETHANONAPHTH 2,3-B OXIRENE, 3,4,5,6,9,9-HEXACHLORO
0   60571     1A,2,2A,3,6,6A,7,7A-OCTAHYDRO-, (1AaLpha, 2beta, 2Abeta, 3alpha,
              6alpha, 6Abeta, 7beta, 7Aalpha)
              2,7:3,6-DIMETHANONAPHTH 2,3-B OXIRENE, 3,4,5,6,9,9-HEXACHLORO
10  72208     1A,2,2A,3,6,6A,7,7A-OCTAHYDRO-, (1AaLpha, 2beta, 2Abeta, 3alpha,
              6alpha, 6Abeta, 7beta, 7Aalpha)
0   60515     DIMETHOATE
0   119904    3,3'-DIMETHOXYBENZIDINE
10  534156    1,1-DIMETHOXYETHANE
10  534156    DIMETHYLACETAL
0   127195    DIMETHYL ACETAMIDE
10  124403    DIMETHYLAMINE
10  926647    2-DIMETHYLAMINOACETO-NITRILE
0   60117     4-DIMETHYLAMINOAZOBENZENE
10            4-DIMETHYLAMINO-6-(2-DIMETHYLAMINOETHOXY) TOLUENE-2- DIAZONIUM
              inert inorganic solid
100 2867472   DIMETHYLAMINOETHYL METHACRYLATE
10  1738256   beta-DIMETHYLAMINOPROPIONITRILE
100 121697    DIMETHYLANILINE
0   57976     7,12-DIMETHYL-BENZ(a)ANTHRACENE
0   119937    3,3'-DIMETHYLBENZIDINE
10  3034795   DI(2-METHYLBENZOYL) PEROXIDE
0   80159     alpha.alpha-DIMETHYLBENZYLHYDROPEROXIDE
10  79298     2,3-DIMETHYLBUTANE
10  108098    1,3-DIMETHYLBUTYLAMINE
0   79447     DIMETHYLCARBAMYL CHLORIDE
10  616386    DIMETHYL CARBONATE
100 2524030   DIMETHYL CHLOROTHIOPHOSPHATE
10  589902    1,4-DIMETHYLCYCLOHEXANE
100 98942     DIMETHYLCYCLOHEXYL AMINE
10  2618771   2,5-DIMETHYL-2,5-DI-(BENZOYLPEROXY)HEXANE
0   300765    DIMETHYL 1,2-DIBROMO-2,2-DICHLOROETHYL PHOSPHATE
10  78637     2,5-DIMETHYL-2,5-DI(tert-BUTYLPEROXY)HEXANE
10  1068275   2,5-DIMETHYL-2,5-DI(tert-BUTYLPEROXY)HEXYNE-3,maximum 52% in
              inert solid
10  1068275   2,5-DIMETHYL-2,5-DI(tert-BUTYLPEROXY)HEXYNE-3, technical pure
10  75785     DIMETHYLDICHLOROSILANE
10  78626     DIMETHYLDIETHOXYSILANE
10  3025885   2,5-DIMETHYL-2,5-DIHYDRO-PEROXYHEXANE
10  25136554  DIMETHYLDIOXANE
10  624920    DIMETHYLDISULFIDE
10  115106    DIMETHYL ETHER
0   68122     DIMETHYLFORMAMIDE
100 108838    2,6-DIMETHYLHEPTANONE
0   57147     1,1-DIMETHYLHYDRAZINE
0   540738    1,2-DIMETHYLHYDRAZINE
10  2999748   DIMETHYLMAGNESIUM
0   593748    DIMETHYL MERCURY
500 99514     1,2-DIMETHYL-4-NITROBENZENE
100 122098    alpha.alpha-DIMETHYL PHENETHYLAMINE
500 105679    2,4-DIMETHYLPHENOL
10  99989     DIMETHYL-p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE
100 2524030   DIMETHYL PHOSPHOROCHLORIDOTHIOATE
0   131113    DIMETHYL PHTHALATE
10  463821    DIMETHYLPROPANE
10  926636    DIMETHYLPROPYLAMINE
0   77781     DIMETHYL SULFATE
10  75183     DIMETHYL SULFIDE
100 2524030   DIMETHYL THIOPHOSPHORYL CHLORIDE
10  544978    DIMETHYLZINC
100 644644    DIMETILAN
100 333415    DIMPYLATE
10  53220227  DIMYRISTYL PEROXYDI-CARBONATE
10            DI-N-BUTYL PEROXYDICARBONATE, between 27% and 52% solution
10            DI-N-BUTYL PEROXYDICARBONATE, less than 27% in solution
100 131895    DINEX
0   148016    DINITOLMIDE
1   26471567  DINITROANILINE
100 25154545  DINITROBENZENE
0   99650     m-DINITROBENZENE
1   528290    o-DINITROBENZENE
0   100254    p-DINITROBENZENE
0   25567673  DINITROCHLOROBENZENE
0   534521    4,6-DINITRO-o-CRESOL
100 131895    4,6-DINITRO-o-CYCLOHEXYLPHENOL
10            DINITROPHENATES ALKALI METALS, dry or wetted
1   25550587  DINITROPHENOL
10            DINITROPHENOLATES, with greater than 15% WATER
0   51285     2,4-DINITROPHENOL
500 329715    2,5-DINITROPHENOL
1   573568    2,6-DINITROPHENOL
1   35860516  DINITRORESORCINOL
10  25550554  DINITROSOBENZENE
10            DINITROSO-DIMETHYL TEREPHTHALAMIDE
0   101257    DINITROSOPENTAMETHYLENE TETRAMINE
100 25321146  DINITROTOLUENE
0   121142    2,4-DINITROTOLUENE
0   606202    2,6-DINITROTOLUENE
0   610399    3,4-DINITROTOLUENE
10  762130    DI-N-NONANOYL PEROXIDE
0   88857     DINOSEB
100 1420071   DINOTERB
10  762163    DI-N-OCTANOYL PEROXIDE
100 117840    DI-N-OCTYL PHTHALATE
0   123911    1,4-DIOXANE
10  25136554  1,4-DIOXANE, DIMETHYL
100 78342     DIOXATHION
0   1746016   DIOXIN
10  646060    DIOXOLANE
10  646060    1,3-DIOXOLANE
100 138863    DIPENTENE
10  1941793   DIPEROXYAZELAIC ACID
10  82666     DIPHACINONE
100 92524     DIPHENYL
100 122394    DIPHENYLAMINE
100 578949    DIPHENYLAMINECHLORO-ARSINE
100 712481    DIPHENYLCHLOROARSINE
100 80104     DIPHENYL DICHLOROSILANE
0   122667    1,2-DIPHENYLHYDRAZINE
100 776749    DIPHENYLMETHYL BROMIDE
0   80513     DIPHENYLOXIDE-4,4'-DI-SULFOHYDRAZIDE
100 152169    DIPHOSPHORAMIDE, OCTAMETHYL
100 107493    DIPHOSPHORIC ACID, TETRAETHYL ESTER
100 7722885   DIPHOSPHORIC ACID, TETRASODIUM SALT
1   2217063   DIPICRYL SULFIDE
1             DIPROPIONYL PEROXIDE
10  142847    DIPROPYLAMINE
10            4-DIPROPYLAMINOBENZENE-DIAZONIUM ZINC CHLORIDE
100 34590948  DIPROPYLENE GLYCOL METHYL ETHER
100 56188     DIPROPYLENE TRIAMINE
10  111433    DIPROPYL ETHER
100 123193    DIPROPYL KETONE
10  16066389  DI-N-PROPYL PEROXYDICARBONATE
100 2764729   DIPYRIDO 1,2-A:2',1'-C PYRAZINEDIIUM, 6,7-DIHYDRO-
0   85007     DIPYRIDO 1,2-A:2',1'-C PYRAZINEDIIUM, 6,7-DIHYDRO-, DIBROMIDE
0   85007     DIQUAT
100 2764729   DIQUAT
0   1937377   DIRECT BLACK 38
0   2602462   DIRECT BLUE 6
0   16071866  DIRECT BROWN 95
100           DISINFECTANTS, CORROSIVE, LIQUID, n.o.s.
100           DISINFECTANTS, n.o.s., POISONOUS, LIQUID or SOLID
10            DISPERSANT GAS, FLAMMABLE, n.o.s.
500           DISPERSANT GAS, n.o.s.
10  52326666  DISTEARYL PEROXYDI-CARBONATE
1             DISUCCINIC ACID PEROXIDE, 72% in water
10  123239    DISUCCINIC ACID PEROXIDE, technical pure
10  624920    DISULFIDE, DIMETHYL-
100 2179591   DISULFIDE, 2-PROPENYL PROPYL
0   97778     DISULFIRAM
0   298044    DISULFOTON
0   7681574   DISULFUROUS ACID, DISODIUM SALT
10            1,4-DI-(2-tert-BUTYLPEROXY ISOPROPYL)BENZENE or 1,3-DI-(2-tert-
              BUTYL PEROXY ISOPROPYL)BENZENE or mixtures
10            2,2-DI(tert-BUTYLPEROXY)PROPANE with at least 50% PHLEGMATIZER
10            2,2-DI(tert-BUTYLPEROXY)PROPANE with at least 13% PHLEGMATIZER
              and 47% ZINC CHLORIDE
100 514738    DITHIAZANINE IODIDE
100 541537    DITHIOBIURET
10            DITHIOCARBAMATE PESTICIDES, FLAMMABLE LIQUID, n.o.s., flash point
              between 23C and 61C
10            DITHIOCARBAMATE PESTICIDES, FLAMMABLE LIQUID, n.o.s., flash point
              less than 23C
10            DITHIOCARBAMATE PESTICIDES, LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
10            DITHIOCARBAMATE PESTICIDES, SOLID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
10  14293733  DITHIONOUS ACID, DIPOTASSIUM SALT
10  7775146   DITHIONOUS ACID, DISODIUM SALT
10  7779864   DITHIONOUS ACID, ZINC SALT (1:1)
10            DI(3,5,5-TRIMETHYL-1,2-DIOXOLANYL-3) PEROXIDE, paste
10            DI(3,5,5-TRIMETHYLHEXANOYL) PEROXIDE
0   330541    DIURON
100 108576    DIVINYL BENZENE
0   109933    DIVINYL ETHER
0   57976     DMBA
100 27176870  DODECYLBENZENE-SULFONIC ACID
100 4484724   DODECYL TRICHLOROSILANE
0   23214928  DOXORUBICIN
10            DRIERS, PAINT or VARNISH, LIQUID, n.o.s.
10            DRIERS, PAINT or VARNISH, SOLID, n.o.s.
500 124389    DRY ICE
10  110054    DTBP
0   2921882   DURSBAN
10            DYES, n.o.s. or DYE INTERMEDIATES, n.o.s., CORROSIVE
10            DYES, n.o.s. or DYE INTERMEDIATES, n.o.s., POISONOUS
0   60004     EDTA
500 109591    EHTANOL, 2-(1-METHYLETHOXY)
1   316427    EMETINE, DIHYDROCHLORIDE
10            ENAMELS
0   115297    ENDOSULFAN
10  949988    alpha-ENDOSULFAN
10  33213659  beta-ENDOSULFAN
0             ENDOSULFAN and METABOLITES
10  1031078   ENDOSULFAN SULFATE
100 1145733   ENDOTHALL
100 2778043   ENDOTHION
10  72208     ENDRIN
10  7421934   ENDRIN ALDEHYDE
10            ENDRIN AND METABOLITES
0   13838169  ENFLURANE
10            ENGINE STARTING FLUID, with FLAMMABLE GAS
0   3132647   EPIBROMOHYDRIN
0   106898    EPICHLOROHYDRIN
100 2104645   EPN
100 4016119   EPOXY ETHYLOXY PROPANE
0   556525    2,3-EPOXY 1-PROPANOL
10            ERADICATORS, PAINT or GREASE
0   50146     ERGOCALCIFEROL
0   379793    ERGOTAMINE TARTRATE
10  431038    ERYTHRITOL ANHYDRIDE
0             2,4,5-T ESTER
0             2,4-D ESTERS
0   50282     ESTRADIOL
0   50282     ESTRA-1,3,5(1O)-TRIENE-3,17-DIOL (17beta)-
0   53167     ESTRA-1,3,5(1O)-TRIEN-17-ONE, 3-HYDROXY-
0   53167     ESTRONE
10  75047     ETHANAMINE
0   51752     ETHANAMINE, 2-CHLORO-N-(2-CHLOROETHYL)-N-METHYL-
0   50419     ETHANAMINE, 2-(4-(2-CHLORO-1,2-DIPHENYLETHENYL)PHENOXY)-N,N-
              DIETHYL,-
10  121448    ETHANAMINE, N,N-DIETHYL-
10  109897    ETHANAMINE, N-ETHYL-
0   55185     ETHANAMINE, N-ETHYL-N-NITROSO-
10  74840     ETHANE
10  74964     ETHANE, BROMO
0   151677    ETHANE, 2-BROMO-2-CHLORO-1,1,1-TRIFLUORO
10  592552    ETHANE, 1-BROMO-2-ETHOXY
10  75003     ETHANE, CHLORO-
10  75683     ETHANE, 1-CHLORO-1,1-DIFLUORO-
10  26675467  ETHANE, 2-CHLORO-2-(DIFLUOROMETHOXY)-1,1,1-TRIFLUORO-
0   13838169  ETHANE, 2-CHLORO-1-(DIFLUOROMETHOXY)-1,1,2-TRIFLUORO-
10  3188134   ETHANE, (CHLOROMETHOXY)-
500 76153     ETHANE, CHLOROPENTAFLUORO-
500 63938103  ETHANE, CHLOROTETRAFLUORO-
10  107153    1,2-ETHANEDIAMINE
100 111400    1,2-ETHANEDIAMINE, N-(2-AMINOETHYL)-
0   112572    1,2-ETHANEDIAMINE, N-(2-AMINOETHYL)-N'- 2- (2-AMINOETHYL)AMINO
              ETHYL-
0   112243    1,2-ETHANEDIAMINE, N,N'-BIS(2-AMINOETHYL)-
0   91805     1,2-ETHANEDIAMINE, N,N-DIMETHYL-N'-2-PYRIDINYL-N'-(2-
              THIENYLMETHYL)-
100 110189    1,2-ETHANEDIAMINE, N,N,N',N'-TETRAMETHYL-
0   106934    ETHANE, 1,2-DIBROMO-
0   107062    ETHANE, 1,2-DICHLORO-
10  75343     ETHANE, 1,1-DICHLORO-
0   76380     ETHANE, 2,2-DICHLORO-1,1-DIFLUORO-1-METHOXY-
100 594729    ETHANE, 1,1-DICHLORO-1-NITRO-
500 76142     ETHANE, 1,2-DICHLORO-1,1,2,2-TETRAFLUORO
10  629141    ETHANE, 1,2-DIETHOXY
10  75376     ETHANE, 1,1-DIFLUORO
10  534156    ETHANE, 1,1-DIMETHOXY
10  460195    ETHANEDINITRILE
100 144627    ETHANEDIOIC ACID
100 814915    ETHANEDIOIC ACID, COPPER (II) SALT (1:1)
100 1113388   ETHANEDIOIC ACID, DIAMMONIUM SALT
100 95921     ETHANEDIOIC ACID, DIETHYL ESTER
0   107211    1,2-ETHANEDIOL
1   628966    1,2-ETHANEDIOL, DINITRATE
10  111546    ETHANEDIYL BISCARBAMODITHIOIC ACID
10  353366    ETHANE, FLUORO
0   67721     ETHANE, 1,1,1,2,2,2-HEXACHLORO-
0   67721     ETHANE, HEXACHLORO-
500 76164     ETHANE, HEXAFLUORO-
10  109900    ETHANE, ISOCYANATO-
10  540670    ETHANE, METHOXY-
10  462953    ETHANE, 1,1'- METHYLENEBIS(OXY) BIS-
10  122510    ETHANE, METHYLIDYNETRIS(OXY) TRIS-
10  79243     ETHANE, NITRO
10  60297     ETHANE, 1,1'-OXYBIS-
0   111444    ETHANE, 1,1'-OXYBIS 2-CHLORO-
100 76017     ETHANE, PENTACHLORO-
1   79210     ETHANEPEROXOIC ACID
10  107711    ETHANEPEROXOIC ACID, 1,1-DIMETHYLETHYL ESTER
100 1622328   ETHANESULFONYL CHLORIDE, 2-CHLORO-
100 79276     ETHANE, 1,1,2,2-TETRABROMO-
100 25167208  ETHANE, TETRABROMO-
0   79345     ETHANE, 1,1,2,2-TETRACHLORO-
500 76119     ETHANE, 1,1,1,2-TETRACHLORO-2,2-DIFLUORO-
100 76120     ETHANE, 1,1,2,2-TETRACHLORO-1,2-DIFLUORO-
0   62555     ETHANETHIOAMIDE
10  352932    ETHANE, 1,1'-THIOBIS-
0   505602    ETHANE, 1,1'-THIOBIS 2-CHLORO-
10  507095    ETHANETHIOIC ACID
10  75081     ETHANETHIOL
0   71556     ETHANE, 1,1,1-TRICHLORO-
0   79005     ETHANE, 1,1,2-TRICHLORO-
0   72435     ETHANE, 1,1,1-TRICHLORO-2,2-BIS(p-METHOXYPHENYL)
100 76131     ETHANE, 1,1,2-TRICHLORO-1,2,2-TRIFLUORO-
100 27987060  ETHANE, TRIFLUORO-
100 16752775  ETHANIMIDOTHIOIC ACID, N- (METHYLAMINO)CARBONYL OXY-, METHYL
              ESTER
0   64175     ETHANOL
100 141435    ETHANOLAMINE
100 141435    ETHANOL, 2-AMINO-
100 929066    ETHANOL, 2-(2-AMINOETHOXY)-
100 111411    ETHANOL, 2- (AMINOETHYL)ETHYL-
100 4985857   ETHANOL, 2,2'- (3-AMINOPROPYL)IMINO BIS-
100 96800     ETHANOL, 2- BIS(1-METHYLETHYL)AMINO-
10  111762    ETHANOL, 2-BUTOXY-
0   107073    ETHANOL, 2-CHLORO-
100 10140871  ETHANOL, 1,2-DICHLORO-, ACETATE
100 136787    ETHANOL, 2-(2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXY)-, HYDROGEN SULFATE, SODIUM SALT
100 100378    ETHANOL, 2-(DIETHYLAMINO)
0   110805    ETHANOL, 2-ETHOXY
0   111159    ETHANOL, 2-ETHOXY-, ACETATE
100 111422    ETHANOL, 2,2'-IMINOBIS
0   109864    ETHANOL, 2-METHOXY
100 110496    ETHANOL, 2-METHOXYACETATE
10  27323417  ETHANOL, 2-2',2 ''-NITRILOTRIS-DODECYLBENZENESULFONATE (SALT)
0   1116547   ETHANOL, 2,2'-(NITROSOIMINO)BIS-
1   693210    ETHANOL, 2,2'-OXYBIS-, DINITRATE
10  70111     ETHANONE, 2-BROMO-1-PHENYL-
100 532274    ETHANONE, 2-CHLORO-1-PHENYL-
10  74851     ETHENE
0   593602    ETHENE, BROMO-
10  598732    ETHENE, BROMOTRIFLUORO-
0   75014     ETHENE, CHLORO-
10  79389     ETHENE, CHLOROTRIFLUORO-
10  540590    ETHENE, 1,2-DICHLORO-
0   75354     ETHENE, 1,1-DICHLORO-
10  27156032  ETHENE, DICHLORODIFLUORO-
10  75387     ETHENE, 1,1-DIFLUORO-
10  109922    ETHENE, ETHOXY-
10  75025     ETHENE, FLUORO-
10  107255    ETHENE, METHOXY-
0   109933    ETHENE, 1,1'-OXYBIS-
0   127184    ETHENE, TETRACHLORO-
10  116143    ETHENE, TETRAFLUORO-
0   79016     ETHENE, TRICHLORO-
100 463514    ETHENONE
0   57636     ETHINYLOESTRADIOL
100 563122    ETHION
0   536334    ETHIONAMIDE
100 13194484  ETHOPROPHOS
0   110805    2-ETHOXYETHANOL
0   111159    2-ETHOXYETHYLACETATE
100 4016119   (ETHOXYMETHYL)-OXIRANE
0   141786    ETHYL ACETATE
10  107879    ETHYL ACETONE
1   107006    ETHYL ACETYLENE
0   140885    ETHYL ACRYLATE
0   64175     ETHYL ALCOHOL
0   75070     ETHYLALDEHYDE
10  563439    ETHYL ALUMINUM DICHLORIDE
10  12075682  ETHYL ALUMINUM SESQUICHLORIDE
10  75047     ETHYLAMINE
100 541855    ETHYL AMYL KETONE
100 103695    ETHYLANILINE
100 578541    2-ETHYLANILINE
0   100414    ETHYL BENZENE
500 92591     ETHYLBENZYLANILINE
100 119948    ETHYLBENZYLTOLUIDINE
100 538078    ETHYLBIS(2-CHLOROETHYL)AMINE
10  34099735  ETHYL BORATE
10  74964     ETHYL BROMIDE
10  105362    ETHYL BROMOACETATE
100 97950     ETHYLBUTANOL
100 123660    ETHYLBUTYL ACETATE
10  628819    ETHYLBUTYL ETHER
100 106354    ETHYL BUTYL KETONE
10  1634044   ETHYL, tert-BUTYL METHYL
10  97961     ETHYLBUTYRALDEHYDE
10  105544    ETHYL BUTYRATE
0   105588    ETHYL CARBONATE
10  75003     ETHYL CHLORIDE
10  105395    ETHYL CHLOROACETATE
10  541413    ETHYL CHLOROFORMATE
100 535137    ETHYL-2-CHLOROPROPIONATE
100 2812739   ETHYL CHLOROTHIOFORMATE
10  623701    ETHYL CROTONATE
10  105566    ETHYL CYANOACETATE
10  598141    ETHYL DICHLOROARSINE
100 510156    ETHYL-4,4'-DICHLOROBENZILATE
10  1789588   ETHYL DICHLOROSILANE
10            ETHYL-3,3-DI(tert-BUTYL-PEROXY)BUTYRATE, maximum concentration
              77% solution
10            ETHYL-3,3-DI(tert-BUTYL-PEROXY)BUTYRATE, technical pure
10            ETHYL-3,3-DI(tert-BUTYL-PEROXY)BUTYRATE with at least 50% inert
              inorganic solution
10  74851     ETHYLENE
0   107073    ETHYLENE CHLOROHYDRIN
10  107153    ETHYLENEDIAMINE
0   60004     ETHYLENEDIAMINE TETRA-ACETIC ACID
0   106934    ETHYLENE DIBROMIDE
0   107062    ETHYLENE DICHLORIDE
100 371620    ETHYLENE FLUOROHYDRIN
0   107211    ETHYLENE GLYCOL
10  629141    ETHYLENE GLYCOL DIETHYL ETHER
1   628966    ETHYLENE GLYCOL DINITRATE
0   111159    ETHYLENE GLYCOL MONOETHYL ETHER ACETATE
0   109864    ETHYLENE GLYCOL MONOMETHYL ETHER
0   151564    ETHYLENEIMINE
0   75218     ETHYLENE OXIDE
0   96457     ETHYLENE THIOUREA
10  60297     ETHYL ETHER
10            ETHYL FLUID
10  353366    ETHYL FLUORIDE
10  109944    ETHYL FORMATE
10  123057    ETHYL HEXALDEHYDE
100 104756    2-ETHYL HEXYLAMINE
10  24468131  ETHYL HEXYLCHLOROFORMATE
10  75343     ETHYLIDENE CHLORIDE
100 16219753  ETHYLIDENE NORBORNENE
10  97621     ETHYL ISOBUTYRATE
10  109900    ETHYL ISOCYANATE
500 97643     ETHYL LACTATE
10  75081     ETHYL MERCAPTAN
0   107277    ETHYLMERCURIC CHLORIDE
0   2235258   ETHYLMERCURIC PHOSPHATE
0   517168    (ETHYLMERCURIC)-p-TOLUENESULPHONANILIDE
0   517168    n-(ETHYLMERCURIC)-p-TOLUENESULPHONANILIDE
0   97632     ETHYL METHACRYLATE
10  622571    N-ETHYL-4-METHYLBENZENAMINE
10  540670    ETHYL METHYL ETHER
100 104905    ETHYL MORPHINE
10  100743    n-ETHYLMORPHOLINE
0   625581    ETHYL NITRATE
1   109955    ETHYL NITRITE
10  122510    ETHYL ORTHOFORMATE
100 95921     ETHYL OXALATE
100 1125275   ETHYL PHENYL DICHLOROSILANE
100 993431    ETHYLPHOSPHONOTHIOIC-DICHLORIDE
100 1498404   ETHYL PHOSPHONOUS DICHLORIDE
100 1498517   ETHYL PHOSPHORODICHLORIDATE
100 84662     ETHYL PHTHALATE
10  766096    1-ETHYL PIPERIDINE
10  105373    ETHYL PROPIONATE
10  628320    ETHYL PROPYL ETHER
100 78104     ETHYL SILICATE
10  352932    ETHYL SULFIDE
100 540829    ETHYL SULFURIC ACID
100 542905    ETHYL THIOCYANATE
10  622571    ETHYL TOLUIDINE
10  115219    ETHYLTRICHLOROSILANE
10  74862     ETHYNE
1   7572294   ETHYNE, DICHLORO-
500           ETIOLOGIC AGENT, n.o.s.
1             EXPLOSIVES A
1             EXPLOSIVES B
1             EXPLOSIVES C
10            FABRIC, ANIMAL OR VEGETABLE, with greater than 5% OIL, n.o.s.
100 52857     FAMPHUR
100 140567    FENAMINOSULF
10  22224926  FENAMIPHOS
0   122145    FENITROTHION
100 115902    FENSULFOTHION
100 55389     FENTHION
0   14484641  FERBAM
10  64082355  FERRATE(1-), SILANETETRAYL-, LITHIUM
100 14221477  FERRATE, TRIS ETHANEDIOATO-0,0'-, TRIAMMONIUM-
100 1185575   FERRIC AMMONIUM CITRATE
10  55488874  FERRIC AMMONIUM OXALATE
100 14221477  FERRIC AMMONIUM OXALATE
100 2944674   FERRIC AMMONIUM OXALATE
0   10102495  FERRIC ARSENATE
0   63989695  FERRIC ARSENITE
10  7705080   FERRIC CHLORIDE
0   9004664   FERRIC DEXTRAN
100 7783508   FERRIC FLUORIDE
10  10421484  FERRIC NITRATE
100 10028225  FERRIC SULFATE
0   102545    FERROCENE
10  69523064  FERROCERIUM
10  8049170   FERROSILICON
100 10045893  FERROUS AMMONIUM SULFATE
0   10102508  FERROUS ARSENATE
100 7758943   FERROUS CHLORIDE
10            FERROUS METAL BORINGS, CUTTINGS, SHAVINGS, or TURNINGS
0   7720787   FERROUS SULFATE
100 12604589  FERROVANADIUM
10            FERTILIZER AMMONIATING SOLUTION, less than 3 5% free Ammonia
10            FIBER, ANIMAL or VEGETABLE, with greater than 5% OIL, n.o.s.
10            FILLERS, LIQUID
10            FILM, MOTION PICTURE, NITROCELLULOSE BASE
10            FIRELIGHTERS, SOLID, with FLAMMABLE LIQUID
500           FISHMEAL and SCRAP, UNSTABILIZED
10            FLAMMABLE GAS, n.o.s.
10            FLAMMABLE LIQUID PREPARATIONS, n.o.s.
10            FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS, CORROSIVE, n.o.s.
10            FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS, n.o.s.
10            FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS, POISONOUS, n.o.s.
10            FLAMMABLE SOLIDS, CORROSIVE, n.o.s.
10            FLAMMABLE SOLIDS, n.o.s.
10            FLAMMABLE SOLIDS, POISONOUS, n.o.s.
10  67711904  FLUE DUST, POISONOUS
100 4301502   FLUENETIL
100 16872110  FLUOBORIC ACID
0   2164172   FLUOMETURON
500 86737     FLUORENE
10  25322149  9H-FLUOREN-9-ONE, TRINITRO-
100           FLUORIDES
10  7782414   FLUORINE
10  7783417   FLUORINE MONOXIDE
0   640197    FLUOROACETAMIDE
10  144490    FLUOROACETIC ACID
10  359068    FLUOROACETYL CHLORIDE
10  348549    2-FLUOROANILINE
10  371404    4-FLUOROANILINE
10  462066    FLUOROBENZENE
500 75467     FLUOROFORM
100 13537321  FLUOROPHOSPHORIC ACID
10            FLUOROSILICATES, n.o.s.
10  16961834  FLUOROSILICIC ACID
100 7789211   FLUOROSULFURIC ACID
100 7789211   FLUOROSULPHONIC ACID
10  25496086  FLUOROTOLUENE
0   51218     FLUOROURACIL
0   51218     5-FLUOROURACIL
10  16961834  FLUOSILICIC ACID
0   17617231  FLURAZEPAM
100 944229    FONOFOS
0   50000     FORMALDEHYDE
1   107164    FORMALDEHYDE CYANOHYDRIN
0   75127     FORMAMIDE
0   68122     FORMAMINDE, N, N-DEMETHYL-
100 23422539  FORMETANATE
100 23422539  FORMETANATE HYDROCHLORIDE
100 64186     FORMIC ACID
10  592847    FORMIC ACID, BUTYL ESTER
100 544183    FORMIC ACID, COBALT SALT
10  107313    FORMIC ACID, METHYL ESTER
10  542552    FORMIC ACID, 2-METHYLPROPYL ESTER
10  638493    FORMIC ACID, PENTYL ESTER
10  1838591   FORMIC ACID, 2-PROPENYL ESTER
10  110747    FORMIC ACID, PROPYL ESTER
100 557415    FORMIC ACID, ZINC SALT
10  109944    FORMIC ACID, ETHYL ESTER
100 2540821   FORMOTHION
100 17702577  FORMPARANATE
10  21548323  FOSTHIETAN
100 76131     FREON 113
100 3878191   FUBERIDAZOLE
10            FUEL, AVIATION, TURBINE ENGINE
500           FUEL OIL
100 8008206   FUEL OIL #1
10            FUEL, PYROPHORIC, n.o.s.
1   628864    FULMINIC ACID, MERCURY SALT
100 110178    FUMARIC ACID
100 117522    FUMARIN
10  627634    FUMARYL CHLORIDE
100           FUNGICIDE, CORROSIVE, SOLID, n.o.s.
10            FUNGICIDE, POISONOUS, n.o.s.
10  110009    FURAN
0   98011     2-FURANCARBOXYLDEHYDE
100 108316    2,5-FURANDIONE
10  617890    2-FURANMETHANAMINE
500 4795293   2-FURANMETHANAMINE, TETRAHYDRO-
100 98000     2-FURANMETHANOL
10  534225    FURAN, 2-METHYL-
10  109999    FURAN, TETRAHYDRO-
10  25265683  FURAN, TETRAHYDROMETHYL-
0   98011     FURFURAL
100 98000     FURFURYL ALCOHOL
10  617890    FURFURYLAMINE
0   1165395   1H,12H-FURO(3',2':4,5)FURO(2,3-H)PYRANO(3,4-C)(1)(BENZOPYRAN-
              1,12- DIONE, 3,4,7A,10A-TETRAHYDRO-5-METHOXY-
100 7440553   GALLIUM
0             GALLIUM ARSENIDE
500 13450903  GALLIUM TRICHLORIDE
10            GAS DRIPS, HYDROCARBON
10            GASOHOL
500 64741442  GAS OIL
10  8006619   GASOLINE
10  7782652   GERMANE
10  7782652   GERMANIUM HYDRIDE
0   14901087  beta-D-GLUCOPYRANOSIDE, (METHYL-ONN-AZOXY)METHYL)
0   18883664  D-GLUCOSE, 2-DEOXY-2- (METHYLNITROSOAMINO)CARBONYL AMINO-
100 9001370   GLUCOSE OXIDASE
100 122101    GLUTACONIC ACID, 3-HYDROXY-,DIMETHYL ESTER, DIMETHYL PHOSPHATE
0   59052     L-GLUTAMIC ACID, N- 4- (2,4-DIAMINO-6-PTERIDINYL) METHYL
              METHYLAMINO BENZOYL-
0   111308    GLUTARALDEHYDE
0   66819     GLUTARIMIDE, 3- (2-(3,5-DIMETHYL-2-OXOCYCLOHEXYL)-2-
              HYDROXYETHYL) HYDROXYETHYL)-
0   96242     GLYCEROL-alpha-MONOCHLOROHYDRIN
0   55630     GLYCERYL TRINITRATE SOLUTION
0   765344    GLYCIDALDEHYDE
0   556525    GLYCIDOL
0   765344    GLYCIDYLALDEHYDE
0   139139    GLYCINE, N,N-BIS(CARBOXYMETHYL)-
0   60004     GLYCINE, N,N'-1,2-ETHANEDIYLBIS N-(CARBOXYMETHYL)-
0   13256229  GLYCINE, N-METHYL-N-NITROSO-
10            GLYCOL ETHERS2
1   107164    GLYCOLONITRILE
100 150765    GUAIACOL
0   70257     GUANIDINE, 1-METHYL-3-NITRO-1-NITROSO-
1   506934    GUANIDINE, MONONITRATE
1   506934    GUANIDINE NITRATE
1   556887    GUANIDINE, NITRO-
0   70257     GUANIDINE, N-METHYL-N'-NITRO-N-NITROSO-
500 9000651   GUM TRAGACANTH
0   86500     GUTHION
10  900322    GUTTA-PERCHA SOLUTION
1   7440586   HAFNIUM
10  23092173  HALAZEPAM
10            HALOETHERS
100           HALOGENATED IRRITATING LIQUIDS, n.o.s.
10            HALOMETHANES
0   151677    HALOTHANE
10            HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE, n.o.s.
10            HAZARDOUS WASTE, n.o.s.
500 7440597   HELIUM
0   680319    HEMPA
0   76448     HEPTACHLOR
10            HEPTACHLOR AND METABOLITES
100 1024573   HEPTACHLOR EPOXIDE
10  142825    HEPTANE
10  142825    n-HEPTANE
10  30586186  HEPTANE, PENTAMETHYL-
500 1639094   1-HEPTANETHIOL
100 110430    2-HEPTANONE
100 106354    3-HEPTANONE
100 123193    4-HEPTANONE
100 108838    4-HEPTANONE, 2,6-DIMETHYL
10  81624046  HEPTENE
0   116165    HEXACHLOROACETONE
0   118741    HEXACHLOROBENZENE
0   87683     HEXACHLORO-1.3-BUTADIENE
0   319846    alpha-HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE
0   319857    beta- HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE
500 319868    delta-HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE
0   58899     gamma-HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE
100 77474     HEXACHLOROCYCLOPENTADIENE
0   67721     HEXACHLOROETHANE
100 1335871   HEXACHLORONAPHTHALENE
100 70304     HEXACHLOROPHENE
100 1888717   HEXACHLOROPROPENE
10  2917262   1-HEXADECANETHIOL
10  42296742  HEXADIENE
100 757584    HEXAETHYL TETRAPHOSPHATE
10  684162    HEXAFLUOROACETONE
100 10543950  HEXAFLUOROACETONE HYDRATE
500 76164     HEXAFLUOROETHANE
100 16940811  HEXAFLUOROPHOSPHORIC ACID
500 116154    HEXAFLUOROPROPYLENE
100 428591    HEXAFLUOROPROPYLENE OXIDE
500 25639423  HEXAHYDROCRESOL
10  85427     HEXAHYDRO-1.3-ISOBENZOFURANDIONE
10  66251     HEXALDEHYDE
100 124094    HEXAMETHYLENE DIAMINE
100 4835114   HEXAMETHYLENEDIAMINE, N,N'-DIBUTYL-
100 822060    HEXAMETHYLENE DI-ISOCYANATE
10  111499    HEXAMETHYLENEIMINE
10  100970    HEXAMETHYLENE TETRAMINE
0   680319    HEXAMETHYL PHOSPHORAMIDE
10            3,3,6,6,9,9-HEXAMETHYL-1,2,4,5-TETRAOXOCYCLONONANE, not more than
              52% with inert solid
10            3,3,6,6,9,9-HEXAMETHYL-1,2,4,5-TETRAOXOCYCLONONANE, not more than
              52% in solution
10  22397337  3,3,6,6,9,9-HEXAMETHYL-1,2,4,5-TETRAOXOCYCLONONANE, technical
              pure
10  100970    HEXAMINE
10  66251     HEXANAL
10  123057    HEXANAL, 2-ETHYL-
10  110543    HEXANE
10  110543    n-HEXANE
100 124094    1,6-HEXANEDIAMINE
10  25620580  1,6-HEXANEDIAMINE, TRIMETHYL-
100 822060    HEXANE, 1,6-DIISOCYANATO-
10  28679165  HEXANE, 1,6-DIISOCYANATOTRIMETHYL-
100 111693    HEXANEDINITRILE
100 124049    HEXANEDIOIC ACID
100 103231    HEXANEDIOIC ACID, BIS(2-ETHYLHEXYL) ESTER
10  3006824   HEXANEPEROXOIC ACID, 2-ETHYL-, 1,1-DIMETHYLETHYL ESTER
500 111319    1-HEXANETHIOL
1   35860312  HEXANITRODIPHENYLAMINE
10  20062220  HEXANITROSTILBENE
0   142621    HEXANOIC ACID
100 123660    HEXANOIC ACID, ETHYL ESTER
100 111273    n-HEXANOL
100 111273    1-HEXANOL
10  591786    2-HEXANONE
500 110123    2-HEXANONE, 5-METHYL
10  592416    1-HEXENE
100 108849    HEXYL ACETATE
100 108849    sec-HEXYL ACETATE
100 104756    HEXYLAMINE, 2-ETHYL-
0   107415    HEXYLENE GLYCOL
10  928654    HEXYL TRICHLOROSILANE
10  2746192   HIMIC ANHYDRIDE
0   302012    HYDRAZINE
0   1615801   HYDRAZINE, 1,2-DIETHYL-
0   57147     HYDRAZINE, 1,1-DIMETHYL-
0   122667    HYDRAZINE, 1,2-DIPHENYL-
0   60344     HYDRAZINE, METHYL-
0   100630    HYDRAZINE, PHENYL-
0   10034932  HYDRAZINE SULFATE
0   122667    HYDRAZOBENZENE
10            HYDRIDES, METAL, n.o.s.
100 10034852  HYDRIODIC ACID
10  10035106  HYDROBROMIC ACID
10            HYDROCARBON GASES, COMPRESSED, n.o.s.
10            HYDROCARBON GASES, LIQUEFIED, n.o.s.
100 7647010   HYDROCHLORIC ACID
100 74908     HYDROCYANIC ACID
0   7664393   HYDROFLUORIC ACID
10  16961834  HYDROFLUOROSILICIC ACID
10  1333740   HYDROGEN
10  10035106  HYDROGEN BROMIDE
100 7647010   HYDROGEN CHLORIDE
100 7647010   HYDROGEN CHLORIDE GAS (only)
100 74908     HYDROGEN CYANIDE
0   7664393   HYDROGEN FLUORIDE
100 10034852  HYDROGEN IODIDE, ANHYDROUS
100 10034852  HYDROGEN IODIDE SOLUTION
0   7722841   HYDROGEN PEROXIDE concentration greater than 52%
10  7783075   HYDROGEN SELENIDE
10  7783064   HYDROGEN SULFIDE
10  85427     HYDROHEXAPHTHALIC ANHYDRIDE
0   75912     HYDROPEROXIDE, 1,1-DIMETHYLETHYL
1   2614768   HYDROPEROXIDE, (1-METHYLETHYLIDENE)-BIS-
10  52061606  HYDROPEROXIDE, 4-METHYL-1-(lIMETHYLETHYL) CYCLOHEXYL
0   80159     HYDROPEROXIDE, 1-METHYL-1-PHENYLETHYL
10  771299    HYDROPEROXIDE, 1,2,3,4-TETRAHYDRO-1-NAPHTHALENYL
10  3025885   HYDROPEROXIDE, (1,1,4,4-TETRAMETHYL-1,4-BUTANEDIYL)BIS-
10  5809085   HYDROPEROXIDE, 1,1,3,3-TETRAMETHYLBUTYL
10  28324529  HYDROPEROXIDE, 2,6,6-TRIMETHYLBICYCLO 3.1.1 HEPTYL
0   123319    HYDROQUINONE
10  16961834  HYDROSILICOFLUORIC ACID
10  78182     1-HYDROXY-1'-HYDROPEROXY DICYCLOHEXYL PEROXIDE
10            1-hydroxy-1'-hydroperoxy dicyclohexyl peroxide, more than 90%
              with water
1   10039540  HYDROXYLAMINE SULFATE
0   127071    HYDROXYUREA
100           HYPOCHLORITE SOLUTIONS With leSS than 5% AVAILABLE CHLORINE
10  13477106  HYPOCHLOROUS ACID, BARIUM SALT
1   7778543   HYPOCHLOROUS ACID, CALCIUM SALT
10  13840330  HYPOCHLOROUS ACID, LITHIUM SALT
100 7778667   HYPOCHLOROUS ACID, POTASSIUM SALT
0   7681529   HYPOCHLOROUS ACID, SODIUM SALT
10            IGNITER FOR AIRCRAFT THRUST DEVICE
10  4316421   1H-IMIDAZOLE, 1-BUTYL-
10  4342034   IMIDAZOLE-4-CARBOXAMIDE, 5-(3,3-DIMETHYL-1-TRIAZENO)-
10  4342034   1H-IMIDAZOLE-4-CARBOXAMIDE, 5-(3,3-DIMETHYL-1-TRIAZENYL-
0   443481    1H-IMIDAZOLE-1-ETHANOL, 2-METHYL-5-NITRO-
0   60560     2H-IMIDAZOLE-2-THIONE, 1,3-DIHYDRO-1-METHYL-
0   118525    2,4-IMIDAZOLIDINEDIONE, 1,3-DICHLORO-5,5-DIMETHYL-
0   57410     2,4-IMIDAZOLIDINEDIONE, 5,5-DIPHENYL-
0   96457     2-IMIDAZOLIDINETHIONE
100 56188     3,3'-IMINOBISPROPYLAMINE
100 3691358   1,3-INDANDIONE,2-((p-CHLOROPHENYL)PHENYLACETYL)-
100 95136     INDENE
100 95136     1H-INDENE
100 83261     1H-INDENE-1,3(2H)-DIONE, 2-(2,2-DIMETHYL-1-OXOPROPYL)-
10  82666     1H-INDENE-1,3(2H)-DIONE, 2-(diphenylacetyl)-
0   193395    INDENO (1,2,3-cd) PYRENE
100 7440746   INDIUM
0   53861     INDOMETHACIN
500           INFECTIOUS SUBSTANCE, HUMAN, n.O.S.
10            INKS
10            INSECTICIDE, DRY, n.O.S.
10            INSECTICIDE GASES, NON-TOXIC, n.O.S.
10            INSECTICIDE GASES, TOXIC, n.O.S.
10            INSECTICIDE, LIQUID, n.O.S.
10            INSECTICIDE, LIQUID, POISONOUS, n.O.S.
100 7553562   IODINE
1   7790990   IODINE CHLORIDE (ICI)
10  7783666   IODINE FLUORIDE
1   7790990   IODINE MONOCHLORIDE
10  7783666   IODINE PENTAFLUORIDE
10  513484    2-ISDOBUTANE
0   75478     I0DOFORM
10  513382    1-IODO-2-METHYLPROPANE
500 558178    2-IODO-2-METHYLPROPANE
10  26914023  IODOPROPANE
100 10025975  IRIDIUM TETRACHLORIDE
0   63989695  IRON(III) O-ARSENITE PENTAHYDRATE
10  13463406  IRON CARBONYL
10  7705080   IRON CHLORIDE
100 7758943   IRON CHLORIDE
0   9004664   IRON DEXTRAN
0   9004664   IRON DEXTRAN COMPLEX
100 7783508   IRON FLUORIDE
100 1309371   IRON OXIDE FUME
10  13463406  IRON PENTACARBONYL
500           IRON SPONGE, SPENT
10            IRON SWARF
0   14484641  IRON, TRIS(DIMETHYLCARBAMODITHIOATO-S,S')-,
10            IRRITATING AGENT, n.o.s.
10  123922    ISOAMYL ACETATE
100 123513    ISOAMYL ALCOHOL
10  107824    ISOAMYL BROMIDE
100 297789    ISOBENZAN
100 552307    5-ISOBENZOFURANCARBOXYLIC ACID, 1,3-DIHYDRO-1,3-DIOXO-
100 85449     1,3-ISOBENZOFURANDIONE
100 85438     1,3-ISOBENZOFURANDIONE, 3A,4,7,7A-TETRAHYDRO-
10  117088    1,3-ISOBENZOFURANDIONE, 4,5,6,7-TETRACHLORO-
10  75285     ISOBUTANE
10  110190    ISOBUTYL ACETATE
10  106638    ISOBUTYL ACRYLATE
10  78831     ISOBUTYL ALCOHOL
10  78819     ISOBUTYLAMINE
10  507197    ISOBUTYL BROMIDE
10  115117    ISOBUTYLENE
10  542552    ISOBUTYL FORMATE
10  513382    ISOBUTYL IODIDE
500 97858     ISOBUTYL ISOBUTYRATE
10  1873296   ISOBUTYL ISOCYANATE
100 108838    ISOBUTYL KETONE
10  97869     ISOBUTYL METHACRYLATE
10  540421    ISOBUTYL PROPIONATE
10  78842     ISOBUTYRALDEHYDE
100 79312     ISOBUTYRIC ACID
100 97723     ISOBUTYRIC ANHYDRIDE
10  78820     ISOBUTYRONITRILE
10  79301     1SOBUTYRYLCHLORIDE
10  3170578   ISOCYANATES, n.o.s., boiling point not less than 300C
10  3170578   ISOCYANATES, solutions, n.o.s., FLAMMABLE
10  3170578   ISOCYANATES, solutions, n.o.s., flash point greater than 23C and
              boiling point less than 300C
500 71121363  ISOCYANATOBENZO-TRIFLUORIDE
100 102363    ISOCYANIC ACID, 3,4-DICHLOROPHENYL ESTER
100 101688    ISOCYANIC ACID, METHYLENE DI-p-PHENYLENE ESTER
10  31807553  ISODODECANE
100 465736    ISODRIN
100 55914     ISOFLUORPHATE
10  26675467  ISOFLURANE
10  68975473  ISOHEPTENE
10  27236460  ISOHEXENE
0   2425061   1H-ISOINDOLE-1,3(2H)-DIONE, 3A,4,7,7A-TETRAHYDRO-2- (1,1,2,2-
              TETRACHLORO ETHYL)THIO-
0   133062    1H-ISOINDOLE-1,3(2H)-DIONE, 3A,4,7,7A-TETRAHYDRO-2-
              (TRICHLOROMETHYL) THIO-
0   536334    ISONICOTINAMIDE, 2-ETHYLTHIO
10  58449379  ISONONANOYL PEROXIDE
10  540841    ISOOCTANE
100 26952216  ISOOCTANOL
100 27215107  ISOOCTANOL HYDROGEN PHOSPHATE
10  11071479  ISOOCTENE
100 26952216  ISOOCTYL ALCOHOL
10  78784     ISOPENTANE
100 503742    ISOPENTANOIC ACID
10            ISOPENTENES
100 123513    ISOPENTYL ALCOHOL
0   78591     ISOPHORONE
100 2855132   ISOPHORONEDIAMINE
500 4098719   ISOPHORONE DIISOCYANATE
10  78795     ISOPRENE
0   67630     ISOPROPANOL
10  54590522  1SOPROPANOLAMINE DODECYLBENZENESULFONATE
10  42504461  ISOPROPANOLAMINE DODECYLBENZENESULFONATE
10  108225    ISOPROPENYL ACETATE
10  98839     ISOPROPENYL BENZENE
500 109591    ISOPROPOXYETHANOL
10  108214    ISOPROPYL ACETATE
10  108101    ISOPROPYLACETONE
100 1623241   ISOPROPYL ACID PHOSPHATE
0   67630     ISOPROPYL ALCOHOL
0   67630     ISOPROPYL ALCOHOL (manufacture-strong acid process)
0   671169    n-ISOPROPYL-alpha-(2-METHYLHYDRAZINO)-p-TOLUAMIDE
10  75310     ISOPROPYLAMINE
500 643287    ISOPROPYLANILINE
500 643287    n-ISOPROPYLANILINE
10  638119    ISOPROPYL BUTYRATE
10  105486    ISOPROPYL CHLOROACETATE
1   108236    ISOPROPYL CHLOROFORMATE
10  40058875  ISOPROPYL-2-CHLOROPROPIONATE
10            ISOPROPYLCUMYL HYDROPEROXIDE
10  108203    ISOPROPYL ETHER
10  625558    ISOPROPYL FORMATE
0   4016142   ISOPROPYL GLYCIDYL ETHER
100 80057     4,4'-ISOPROPYLIDENEDIPHENOL
10  617505    ISOPROPYL ISOBUTYRATE
10  1795488   ISOPROPYL ISOCYANATE
10  75332     ISOPROPYL MERCAPTAN
100 119380    ISOPROPYLMETHYLPYRAZOLYL DIMETHYLCARBAMATE
1   1712647   ISOPROPYL NITRATE
1   105646    ISOPROPYL PEROXYDICARBONATE
10  637785    ISOPROPYL PROPIONATE
100 120581    ISOSAFROLE
0   87332     ISOSORBIDE DINITRATE MIXTURE with not less than 60% Lactose,
              mannose, starch or calcium
500 59018     KANAMYCIN
500 115322    KELTHANE
0   143500    KEPONE
100 8008206   KEROSENE
100 8008206   KEROSINE
100 463514    KETENE
10            KETONES, LIQUID, n.o.s.
500 7439909   KRYPTON
10            LACQUER
10            LACQUER BASE or LACQUER CHIPS, DRY
10            LACQUER BASE or LACQUER CHIPS, LIQUID
100 78977     LACTONITRILE
0   303344    LASIOCARPINE
500           LATEX, PAINTS
10  105748    LAUROYL PEROXIDE
0   7439921   LEAD
0   301042    LEAD ACETATE
0   7645252   LEAD ARSENATE
0   7784409   LEAD ARSENATE
0   10102484  LEAD ARSENATE
0   10031137  LEAD ARSENITE
0   13424469  LEAD AZIDE
0   7758954   LEAD CHLORIDE
0   7758976   LEAD CHROMATE
0             LEAD compounds
0   592052    LEAD CYANIDE
0   1309600   LEAD DIOXIDE
0   13814965  LEAD FLUOBORATE
0   7783462   LEAD FLUORIDE
0   10101630  LEAD IODIDE
0   10099748  LEAD NITRATE
0   1309600   LEAD OXIDE
0   13637768  LEAD PERCHLORATE
0   7446277   LEAD PHOSPHATE
0   15845520  LEAD PHOSPHITE, DIBASIC
0   1072351   LEAD STEARATE
0   7428480   LEAD STEARATE
0   56189094  LEAD STEARATE
0   52652592  LEAD STEARATE
1   63918978  LEAD STYPHNATE
0   1335326   LEAD SUBACETATE
0   1314870   LEAD SULFIDE
0   7446142   LEAD SULPHATE
0   15739807  LEAD SULPHATE
0   592870    LEAD THIOCYANATE
100 21609905  LEPTOPHOS
100 112561    LETHANE
10  541253    LEWISITE
100           LIGHTER FUELS, CIGAR or CIGARETTE
10  1305788   LIME
100 138863    LIMONENE, inactive
0   58899     LINDANE
10  68476857  LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS
10  7439932   LITHIUM
10  50475768  LITHIUM ACETYLIDE ETHYLENEDIAMINE
10  16853853  LITHIUM ALUMINUM HYDRIDE
10  7782890   LITHIUM AMIDE
10  16949158  LITHIUM BOROHYDRIDE
0   554132    LITHIUM CARBONATE
10  14307358  LITHIUM CHROMATE
10  64082355  LITHIUM FERROSILICON
10  7580678   LITHIUM HYDRIDE
100 1310663   LITHIUM HYDROXIDE MONOHYDRATE
10  13840330  LITHIUM HYPOCHLORITE
1   7790694   LITHIUM NITRATE
10  26134623  LITHIUM NITRIDE
10  12031800  LITHIUM PEROXIDE
10  68848646  LITHIUM SILICON
100 8012746   LONDON PURPLE
100 846491    LORAZEPAM
10  68476857  LPG
100 1310732   LYE SOLUTION
0   57636     LYNESTRENOL
100 532274    MACE
10  7439954   MAGNESIUM
10            MAGNESIUM ALKYL
10            MAGNESIUM ALUMINUM PHOSPHIDE
10  7803545   MAGNESIUM AMIDE
0   10103501  MAGNESIUM ARSENATE
100           MAGNESIUM BISULFITE solution
10  7789368   MAGNESIUM BROMATE
10  75161     MAGNESIUM, BROMOMETHYL-
10  10326213  MAGNESIUM CHLORATE
10  7803545   MAGNESIUM DIAMIDE
10  557186    MAGNESIUM, DIETHYL-
10  2999748   MAGNESIUM, DIMETHYL-
10  555544    MAGNESIUM DIPHENYL
10  60616742  MAGNESIUM HYDRIDE
10  10377603  MAGNESIUM NITRATE
100 1309484   MAGNESIUM OXIDE
10  10034818  MAGNESIUM PERCHLORATE
10  14452574  MAGNESIUM PEROXIDE
10  12057748  MAGNESIUM PHOSPHIDE
10  39404030  MAGNESIUM SILICIDE
100 18972560  MAGNESIUM SILICOFLUORIDE
0   121755    MALATHION
100 110167    MALEIC ACID
100 108316    MALEIC ANHYDRIDE
100 109773    MALONONITRILE
0   12427382  MANEB
10  7439965   MANGANESE
10            MANGANESE compounds
100 12079651  MANGANESE CYCLOPENTADIENYL TRICARBONYL
10  1313139   MANGANESE DIOXIDE
0   12427382  MANGANESE, (ETHYLENEBIS(DITHIOCARBAMATO))-
10  10377669  MANGANESE NITRATE
10  1313139   MANGANESE OXIDE
500 1317346   MANGANESE OXIDE
10  9008348   MANGANESE RESINATE
100 12079651  MANGANESE, TRICARBONYL(eta 5-2,4-CYCLOPENTADIEN-1-YL)--
100 12108133  MANGANESE, TRICARBONYL (1,2,3,4,5-eta)-1-METHYL-2,4-
              CYCLOPENTADIEN-1-YL-
100 12108133  MANGANESE, TRICARBONYL METHYLCYCLOPENTADIENYL
500 1317346   MANGANESE TRIOXIDE
1   15825704  MANNITOL HEXANITRATE
1   15825704  d-MANNITOL, HEXANITRATE
10            MATCHES
100 101688    MDI
0   51752     MECHLORETHAMINE
100 137053    MECRYLATE
1   1338234   MEKP
100 108781    MELAMINE
0   148823    MELPHALAN
100 25134218  MEMTETRAHYDROPHTHALIC ANHYDRIDE
100 80477     p-MENTHANE HYDROPEROXIDE
100 80477     MENTHANE-8-HYDROPEROXIDE
100 95010     MEPHOSFOLAN
0   57534     MEPROBAMATE
10            MERCAPTANS and MIXTURES, LIQUID, n.o.s.
100 2032657   MERCAPTODIMETHUR
0   2235258   MERCURATE(2-), ETHYL PHOSPHATO(3-)-O-, DIHYDROGEN
100 7783337   MERCURATE(2-), TETRAIODO-, DIPOTASSIUM
100 591899    MERCURATE(2-), TETRAKIS(CYANO-C)-, DIPOTASSIUM, (T-4)-
0   1600277   MERCURIC ACETATE
0   7784374   MERCURIC ARSENATE
0   583153    MERCURIC BENZOATE
100 7789471   MERCURIC BROMIDE
0   7487947   MERCURIC CHLORIDE
100 10124488  MERCURIC CHLORIDE, AMMONIATED
1   592041    MERCURIC CYANIDE
0   7774290   MERCURIC IODIDE
10  10045940  MERCURIC NITRATE
10  21908532  MERCURIC OXIDE
1   1335315   MERCURIC OXYCYANIDE
100 591899    MERCURIC POTASSIUM CYANIDE
100 1312034   MERCURIC SUBSULFATE
100 7783359   MERCURIC SULFATE
100 12002196  MERCUROL
0   7546307   MERCUROUS CHLORIDE
100 10112911  MERCUROUS CHLORIDE
100 7783304   MERCUROUS IODIDE
10  778267    MERCUROUS NITRATE
10  10415755  MERCUROUS NITRATE
100 15829535  MERCUROUS OXIDE
100 7783360   MERCUROUS SULFATE
100 7439976   MERCURY
0   62384     MERCURY, (ACETATO-O)PHENYL-
10  11110524  MERCURY ALLOY, BASE
100 10124488  MERCURY AMIDE CHLORIDE
100 10124488  MERCURY, AMMONIATED
100 10124488  MERCURY AMMONIUM CHLORIDE
0             MERCURY-BASED PESTICIDES, LIQUID, FLAMMABLE, TOXIC, n.o.s., flash
              point less than 23C
0             MERCURY-BASED PESTICIDES, LIQUID, FLAMMABLE, TOXIC, n.o.s., flash
              point between 23C and 61C
0             MERCURY-BASED PESTICIDES, LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
0             MERCURY-BASED PESTICIDES, SOLID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
0   583153    MERCURY (II) BENZOATE
100 7789471   MERCURY BROMIDE
100 15385587  MERCURY BROMIDE
100 15385587  MERCURY(1)BROMIDE(1:1)
100 10031182  MERCURY(1)BROMIDE(1:1)
100 10031182  MERCURY BROMIDE
0   7487947   MERCURY CHLORIDE
100 10112911  MERCURY CHLORIDE
0   7546307   MERCURY CHLORIDE
0   107277    MERCURY, CHLOROETHYL
10            MERCURY compounds
1   592041    MERCURY CYANIDE
1   1335315   MERCURY CYANIDE OXIDE
0   502396    MERCURY, (3-CYANOGUANIDINO)-METHYL
0   593748    MERCURY, DIMETHYL
0   517168    MERCURY, ETHYL (-p-TOLUENESULPHONANILIDATO)
1   628864    MERCURY FULMINATE
0   63937144  MERCURY GLUCONATE
0   5970321   MERCURY, 2-HYDROXYBENZOATO(2-)-01,02-
0   100572    MERCURY, HYDROXYPHENYL
100 7783304   MERCURY IODIDE
0   7774290   MERCURY (II) IODIDE
0   55685     MERCURY, (NITRATO-O)PHENYL
100 12002196  MERCURY NUCLEATE
0   1191806   MERCURY OLEATE
100 15829535  MERCURY OXIDE
100 1312034   MERCURY OXIDE SULFATE
100 7783337   MERCURY POTASSIUM IODIDE
0   5970321   MERCURY SALICYLATE
100 592858    MERCURY THIOCYANATE
100 108678    MESITYLENE
0   141797    MESITYL OXIDE
0   72333     MESTRANOL
10            METAL ALKYL HALIDE, n.o.s.
10            METAL ALKYL HYDRIDE, n.o.s.
10            METAL ALKYLS, n.o.s.
10            METAL ALKYL SOLUTION, n.o.s.
10  108623    METALDEHYDE
100 10476956  METHACROLEIN DIACETATE
0   78853     METHACRYLALDEHYDE
1   79414     METHACRYLIC ACID
100 760930    METHACRYLIC ANHYDRIDE
10  126987    METHACRYLONITRILE
10  920467    METHACRYLOYL CHLORIDE
100 30674807  METHACRYLOYLOXYETHYL ISOCYANATE
10  513428    METHALLYL ALCOHOL
100 10265926  METHAMIDOPHOS
10  74895     METHANAMINE
10  124403    METHANAMINE, N-METHYL
0   62759     METHANAMINE, N-METHYL-N-NITROSO
10  75503     METHANAMINE, N,N-DIMETHYL
100 569642    METHANAMINIUM, N- 4- 4-(DIMETHYLAMINO)PHENYL PHENYLMETHYLENE-2,5-
              CYCLO HEXADIEN-1-YLIDENE-N-METHYL-, CHLORIDE
100 75592     METHANAMINIUM, N,N,N-TRIMETHYL-, HYDROXIDE
10  74828     METHANE
0   74839     METHANE, BROMO-
500 74975     METHANE, BROMOCHLORO-
0   353593    METHANE, BROMOCHLORODIFLUORO-
500 75638     METHANE, BROMOTRIFLUORO-
0   74873     METHANE, CHLORO-
500 75456     METHANE, CHLORODIFLUORO-
0   107302    METHANE, CHLOROMETHOXY-
500 75729     METHANE, CHLOROTRIFLUORO
500 51809     METHANEDIAMINE, N,N,N',N'-TETRAMETHYL-
1   334883    METHANE, DIAZO-
100 74953     METHANE, DIBROMO-
100 75616     METHANE, DIBROMODIFLUORO-
0   75092     METHANE, DICHLORO-
100 75718     METHANE, DICHLORODIFLUORO-
10  109875    METHANE, DIMETHOXY-
10  593533    METHANE, FLUORO-
0   74884     METHANE, IODO-
10  624839    METHANE, ISOCYANATO-
10  6427210   METHANE, ISOCYANATOMETHOXY-
10  556616    METHANE, ISOTHIOCYANATO-
10  75525     METHANE, NITRO-
10  115106    METHANE, OXYBIS-
0   542881    METHANE, OXYBIS(CHLORO-)
100 594423    METHANESULFENYL CHLORIDE, TRICHLORO-
100 75752     METHANESULFONIC ACID
0   62500     METHANESULFONIC ACID, ETHYL ESTER
0   66273     METHANESULFONIC ACID, METHYL ESTER
100 558258    METHANESULFONYL FLUORIDE
100 558134    METHANE, TETRABROMO-
0   56235     METHANE, TETRACHLORO-
500 75730     METHANE, TETRAFLUORO-
10  509148    METHANE, TETRANITRO-
10  75183     METHANE, THIOBIS-
10  74931     METHANETHIOL
0   75252     METHANE, TRIBROMO-
0   67663     METHANE, TRICHLORO-
100 75694     METHANE, TRICHLOROFLUORO-
100 76062     METHANE, TRICHLORONITRO-
500 75467     METHANE, TRIFLUORO-
0   75478     METHANE, TRIIODO-
0   115297    6,9-METHANO-2,4,3-BENZODIOXATHIEPIN, 6,7,8,9,10,10-HEXACHLORO-1,
              5,5A,6,9,9A-HEXAHYDRO-, 3-OXIDE
100 77736     4,7-METHANO-1H-INDENE, 3A,4,7,7A-TETRAHYDRO-
0   76448     4,7-METHANO-1H-INDENE, 1,4,5,6,7,8,8,-HEPTACHLORO-3A,4,7,7A-
              TETRAHYDRO-
10  2746192   4,7-METHANOISOBENZOFURAN-1,3-DIONE, 3A,4,7,7A-TETRAHYDRO-,(3A
              alpha, 4 beta,7 beta,7A alpha)-
10  67561     METHANOL
10  124414    METHANOL, SODIUM SALT
0   90948     METHANONE-BIS, 4-(DIMETHYLAMINO) PHENYL-
0   91805     METHAPYRILENE
10  100970    METHENAMINE
0   2385855   1,3,4-METHENO-IH-CYCLOBUTA cd PENTALENE,
              1,1a,2,2,3,3a,4,5,5,5a,5b,6 DOECACHLOROOCTAHYDRO-
0   143500    1,3,4-METHENO-2H-CYCLOBUTA cd PENTALEN-2-ONE,
              1,1a,3,3a,4,5,5,5a,5b,6 DECACHLOROOCTAHYDRO-
0   950378    METHIDATHION
0   60560     METHIMAZOLE
100 2032657   METHIOCARB
100 16752775  METHOMYL
0   59052     METHOTREXATE
0   72435     METHOXYCHLOR
0   109864    2-METHOXYETHANOL
100 110496    2-METHOXYETHYL ACETATE
0   151382    METHOXYETHYLMERCURIC ACETATE
0   76380     METHOXYFLURANE
10  6427210   METHOXYMETHYL ISOCYANATE
100 107700    4-METHOXY-4-METHYLPENTAN-2-ONE
100 150765    4-METHOXYPHENOL
10  79209     METHYL ACETATE
10  74997     METHYL ACETYLENE
0   96333     METHYL ACRYLATE
10  126987    METHYLACRYLONITRILE
10  109875    METHYLAL
10  67561     METHYL ALCOHOL
0   563473    METHYL ALLYL CHLORIDE
10  12263853  METHYL ALUMINUM SESQUIBROMIDE
10  12542857  METHYL ALUMINUM SESQUICHLORIDE
10  74895     METHYLAMINE
100 108849    METHYL AMYL ACETATE
100 108112    METHYL AMYL ALCOHOL
100 100618    METHYLANILINE
100 93583     METHYLBENZOATE
100 98851     alpha-METHYLBENZYL ALCOHOL
0   74839     METHYL BROMIDE
100 96322     METHYL BROMOACETATE
10  504609    1-METHYL BUTADIENE
10  110667    2-METHYL-2-BUTANETHIOL
10  26760645  METHYLBUTENE
10  110689    n-METHYLBUTYLAMINE
10  4435534   METHYL-1,3-BUTYLENE GLYCOL ACETATE
10  623427    METHYL BUTYRATE
0   615532    METHYL CARBAMATE
0   109864    METHYL CELLOSOLVE
100 110496    METHYL CELLOSOLVE ACETATE
0   74873     METHYL CHLORIDE
100 96344     METHYL CHLOROACETATE
0   80637     METHYL-2-CHLOROACRYLATE
10  79221     METHYL CHLOROCARBONATE
0   71556     METHYL CHLOROFORM
10  79221     METHYL CHLOROFORMATE
10  17639939  METHYL-2-CHLOROPROPIONATE
100 993000    METHYL CHLOROSILANE
0   56495     3-METHYLCHOLANTHRENE
100 137053    METHYL 2-CYANOACRYLATE
10  108872    METHYLCYCLOHEXANE
500 25639423  METHYL CYCLOHEXANOL
500 583608    o-METHYLCYCLOHEXANONE
100 12108133  METHYLCYCLOPENTADIENYL MANGANESE TRICARBONYL
0   96377     METHYL CYCLOPENTANE
100 8022002   METHYL DEMETON
100 116541    METHYL DICHLOROACETATE
100 593895    METHYL DICHLOROARSINE
10  75547     METHYL DICHLOROSILANE
10  624920    METHYL DISULFIDE
0   555306    alpha-METHYLDOPA
0   101144    4,4'-METHYLENEBIS (2-CHLOROANILINE)
100 5124301   METHYLENE BIS (4-CYCLOHEXYLISOCYANATE)
0   101611    4,4'-METHYLENEBIS (N,N-DIMETHYL) BENZENAMINE
100 101688    METHYLENE BISPHENYL ISOCYANATE
100 74953     METHYLENE BROMIDE
0   75092     METHYLENE CHLORIDE
0   101779    4,4'-METHYLENE DIANILINE
100 120581    1,2-METHYLENEDIOXY-4-PROPENYL-BENZENE
0   94586     1,2-METHYLENEDIOXY-4-PROPYL-BENZENE
10  115106    METHYL ETHER
10  540670    METHYL ETHYL ETHER
10  78933     METHYL ETHYL KETONE
1   1338234   METHYL ETHYL KETONE PEROXIDE
100 104905    2-METHYL-5-ETHYLPYRIDINE
10  593533    METHYL FLUORIDE
10  107313    METHYL FORMATE
10  534225    2-METHYLFURAN
100 541855    5-METHYL-3-HEPTANONE
0   60344     METHYL HYDRAZINE
0   74884     METHYL IODIDE
500 110123    METHYL ISOAMYL KETONE
100 108112    METHYL ISOBUTYL CARBINOL
10  108101    METHYL ISOBUTYL KETONE
10  37206205  METHYL ISOBUTYL KETONE PEROXIDE
10  624839    METHYL ISOCYANATE
10  814788    METHYL ISOPROPENYL KETONE, inhibited
10  563804    METHYL ISOPROPYL KETONE
10  556616    METHYL ISOTHIOCYANATE
10  556241    METHYL ISOVALERATE
10  75161     METHYL MAGNESIUM BROMIDE
10  74931     METHYL MERCAPTAN
0   502396    METHYL MERCURY DICYANDIAMIDE
0   80626     METHYL METHACRYLATE
10  109024    METHYLMORPHOLINE
10  109024    4-METHYLMORPHOLINE
100 110430    METHYL (N-AMYL) KETONE
10  591786    METHYL N-BUTYL KETONE
1   624919    METHYL NITRITE
0   70257     1-METHYL-3-NITRO-1-NITROSO-GUANIDINE
10  681845    METHYL ORTHO SILICATE
0   298000    METHYL PARATHION
10  54363494  METHYLPENTADIENE
10  43133955  METHYLPENTANE
10  590363    2-METHYL-2-PENTANOL
100 110430    METHYL PENTYL KETONE
100 3735237   METHYL PHENKAPTON
10  149746    METHYLPHENYLDICHLOROSILANE
100 676971    METHYL PHOSPHONIC DICHLORIDE
10  676982    METHYL PHOSPHONOTHIOIC DICHLORIDE
10  676835    METHYL PHOSPHONOUS DICHLORIDE
10  626675    1-METHYLPIPERIDINE
10  554121    METHYL PROPIONATE
10  557175    METHYL PROPYL ETHER
10  107879    METHYL PROPYL KETONE
0   919868    METHYL-S-DEMETON
10  681845    METHYL SILICATE
10  98839     METHYL STYRENE
0   77781     METHYL SULFATE
10  75183     METHYL SULFIDE
10  1634044   METHYL-tert-BUTYL ETHER
10  25265683  METHYL TETRAHYDROFURAN
100 556649    METHYL THIOCYANATE
0   56042     6-METHYL-2-THIOURACIL
500 598992    METHYL TRICHLOROACETATE
10  75796     METHYL TRICHLOROSILANE
0   615532    METHYL URETHANE
10  123159    METHYL VALERALDEHYDE
0   78944     METHYL VINYL KETONE
0   1129415   METOLCARB
100 21087649  METRIBUZIN
0   443481    METRONIDAZOLE
500 7786347   MEVINPHOS
100 315184    MEXACARBATE
0   90948     MICHLERS KETONE
10  8032324   MINERAL SPIRITS
100           MINING REAGENT, LIQUID
0   2385855   MIREX
10            MISCHMETAL, POWDER
0   50077     MITOMYCIN C
0             MIXED ACID (NITRATING ACID)
10            MIXED ACID, SPENT
100 7439987   MOLYBDENUM
100 10241051  MOLYBDENUM CHLORIDE
100 10241051  MOLYBDENUM PENTACHLORIDE
500 1317335   MOLYBDENUM (IV) SULFIDE
100 1313275   MOLYBDENUM TRIOXIDE
100 13106768  MOLYBDIC ACID, DIAMMONIUM SALT
0   6923224   MONOCROTOPHOS
100 13537321  MONOFLUOROPHOSPHORIC ACID
100 110918    MORPHOLINE
10  100743    MORPHOLINE, 4-ETHYL-
0   59892     MORPHOLINE, 4-NITROSO-
100 123002    4-MORPHOLINEPROPANAMINE
10            MOTOR FUEL ANTI-KNOCK COMPOUND
10            MOTOR FUEL, n.o.s.
10  8006619   MOTOR SPIRIT
100 7647010   MURIATIC ACID
100 2763964   MUSCIMOL
100 81152     MUSK EXYLENE
0   505602    MUSTARD GAS
0   300765    NALED
10  8032324   NAPHTHA
100 65996794  NAPHTHA
              2-naphthacenecarboxamide, 4-(dimethylamino)-1,4,4a,5,5a,6,11,12a-
0   60548     octa hydro-3,6,10,12,12a-pentahydroxy-6-methyl-1,11-dioxo-4s-
              (4alpha,4Aalpha, SAalpha,6beta,12Aalpha)-
              5,12-NAPHTHACENEDIONE, 8-ACETYL-10- (3-AMINO-2,3,6-TRIDEOXY-
0   20830813  alpha-L LYXO-HEXOPYRANOSYL)OXY-7,8,9,1O-TETRAHYDRO-6,8,11-
              TRIHYDROXY-1 METHOXY-, (8S-cis)-
              5,12-NAPHTHACENEDIONE, 10- (3-AMINO-2,3,6-TRIDEOXY- alpha-L-LYXO
0   23214928  HEXOPYRANOSYL)OXY-7,8,9,1O-TETRAHYDRO-6,8,11-TRIHYDROXY-8
              (HYDROXYACETYL)-1-METHOXY-, (8S-cis)-
10  8032324   NAPHTHA DISTILLATE
0   134327    1-NAPHTHALENAMINE
0   91598     2-NAPHTHALENAMINE
0   135886    2-NAPHTHALENAMINE, N-PHENYL
0   91203     NAPHTHALENE
100 91178     NAPHTHALENE, DECAHYDRO-
100 25551284  NAPHTHALENE DIISOCYANATE
100 25551284  NAPHTHALENE, DIISOCYANATO
100 130154    1,4-NAPHTHALENEDIONE
100 117806    1,4-NAPHTHALENEDIONE, 2,3-DICHLORO
              2,7-NAPHTHALENEDISULFONIC ACID, 5-AMINO-3- 4'-(7-AMINO-1-
0   25180192  HYDROXY-3 SULFO-2-NAPHTHALENYL)AZO 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-4-
              HYDROXY
              2,7-NAPHTHALENEDISULFONIC ACID, 5-AMINO-3- 4'-(7-AMINO-1-
0   2429734   HYDROXY-3 SULFO-2-NAPHTHALENYL)AZO 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-4-
              HYDROXY-TRISODIUM SALT
              2,7-NAPHTHALENEDISULFONIC ACID, 4-AMINO-3- 4'-(2,4-DIAMINO-5-
0   25156494  METHYL PHENYL) AZO 1,2-DIBPHENYL-4-YL AZO-5-HYDROXY-6-
              (PHENYLAZO)-
              2,7-NAPHTHALENEDISULFONIC ACID, 4-AMINO-3- 4'-(2,4-DIAMINO-5-
0   2429836   METHYL PHENYL) AZO 1,2-DIBPHENYL-4-YL AZO-5-HYDROXY-6-
              (PHENYLAZO)- DISODIUM SALT
              2,7-NAPHTHALENEDISULFONIC ACID, 4-AMINO-3- 4'-(2,4-DIAMINO
0   1937377   PHENYL)AZO 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-5-HYDROXY-6-(PHENYLAZO)-,
              DISODIUM SALT
              1,3-NAPHTHALENEDISULFONIC ACID, 4-AMINO-5-HYDROXY-6- 4'- (2-
10  2586574   HYDROXY-1 APHTHALENYL)AZO-3,3'-DIMETHOXY 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-,
              DISODIUM SALT
              2,7-NAPHTHALENEDISULFONIC ACID, 4-AMINO-5-HYDROXY-6- 4'- (4-
10  4335095   HYDROXY PHENYL)AZO 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-3- (4-
              NITROPHENYL)AZO-, DISODIUM SALT
0   25180454  2,7-NAPHTHALENEDISULFONIC ACID, 4-AMINO-5-HYDROXY-3- 4'- (4-
              HYDROXY PHENYL)AZO 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-6-(PHENYLAZO)
              2,7-NAPHTHALENEDISULFONIC ACID, 4-AMINO-5-HYDROXY-3- 4'- (4-
0   3626286   HYDROXY PHENYL)AZO 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-6-(PHENYLAZO)-,
              DISODIUM SALT
0   25180465  2,7-NAPHTHALENEDISULFONIC ACID, 4-AMINO-5-HYDROXY-6- 4'- (4-
              HYDROXY PHENYL)AZO 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-3- (4- NITROPHENYL)AZO-
              2,7-NAPHTHALENEDISULFONIC ACID, 3-AMINO-4- 4'- 4- (4-
0   2429803   METHYLPHENYL) SULFONYL OXY PHENYL AZO 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-,
              DISODIUM SALT
0   2602462   2,7-NAPHTHALENEDISULFONIC ACID, 3,3'- 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4,4'- DIYLBIS
              (AZO) BIS 5-AMINO-4-HYDROXY-, TETRASODIUM SALT
              1,3-NAPHTHALENEDISULFONIC ACID, 6,6'- (3,3'-DIMETHOXY 1,1'
0   2610051   IPHENYL-4,4'-DIYL)BIS(AZO) BIS 4-AMINO-5-HYDROXY-, TETRASODIUM
              SALT
              2,7-NAPHTHALENEDISULFONIC ACID, 3,3'-(3,3'-DIMETHOXY 1,1'-
10  2429745   BIPHENYL-4,4' DIYL)BIS(AZO) BIS 5-AMINO-4-HYDROXY-, TETRASODIUM
              SALT
10  2150541   2,7-NAPHTHALENEDISULFONIC ACID, 3,3'- (3,3'-DIMETHYL 1,1'
              BIPHENYL- 4,4'-DIYL)BIS(AZO) BIS 4,5-DIHYDROXY-, TETRASODIUM SALT
10  25180272  2,7-NAPHTHALENEDISULFONIC ACID, 3,3'- (3,3'-DIMETHYL 1,1'
              BIPHENYL- 4,4'-DIYL)BIS(AZO) BIS 4,5-DIHYDROXY
              2,7-NAPHTHALENEDISULFONIC ACID, 3,3'- (3,3'-DIMETHYL 1,1'-
0   72571     BIPHENYL- 4,4'-DIYL)BIS(AZO) BIS 5-AMINO-4-HYDROXY-, TETRASODIUM
              SALT
              1,3-NAPHTHALENEDISULFONIC ACID, 8- 3,3'-DIMETHYL-4'- 4- (4-
10  6459945   METHYLPHENYL) SULFONYL OXY PHENYL AZO 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO- 7-
              HYDROXY-,DISODIUM SALT
10  3761533   2,7-NAPHTHALENEDISULFONIC ACID, 4- (2,4-DIMETHYLPHENYL)AZO-3-
              HYDROXY-, DISODIUM SALT
10  6358298   1,3-NAPHTHALENEDISULFONIC ACID, 8- 4'-(4-ETHOXYPHENYL)AZO-3, 3'-
              DIMETHYL 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-7-HYDROXY-, DISODIUM SALT
0   3530196   1,3-NAPHTHALENEDISULFONIC ACID, 8- 4'- (4-ETHOXYPHENYL)AZO 1,1'-
              BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-7-HYDROXY-, DISODIUM SALT
              1,3-NAPHTHALENEDISULFONIC ACID, 7-HYDROXY-8- 4'- 4- (4-
0   3567655   METHYLPHENYL) SULFONYL OXY PHENYL AZO 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-,
              DISODIUM SALT
100 1335871   NAPHTHALENE, HEXACHLORO-
10  27254360  NAPHTHALENE, NITRO-
100 2234131   NAPHTHALENE, OCTACHLORO-
100 1321648   NAPHTHALENE, PENTACHLORO-
              1-NAPHTHALENESULFONIC ACID, 4-AMIINO-3- 4'- (2-AMINO-8-HDROXY-6-
10  1937355   SULFO-1-NAPHTHALENYL)AZO 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO--1-
              NAPHTHALENYL)AZO 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-, DISODIUM SALT
10  25188301  1-NAPHTHALENESULFONIC ACID, 4-AMINO-3- 4'- (2-AMINO-8-HYDROXY- 6-
              SULFO-1-NAPHTHALENYL)AZO 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-,
10  2429701   1-NAPHTHALENESULFONIC ACID, 4-AMINO-3- 4'- (1-HYDROXY-4-SULFO- 2-
              NAPHTHALENYL)AZO 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-, DISODIUM SALT
10  25188298  1-NAPHTHALENESULFONIC ACID, 4-AMINO-3- 4'- (1-HYDROXY-4-SULFO- 2-
              NAPHTHALENYL)AZO 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-
0   573580    1-NAPHTHALENESULFONIC ACID, 3,3'- 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4,4'-DIYLBIS(AZO)
              BIS 4-AMINO-, DISODIUM SALT
0   25188447  2-NAPHTHALENESULFONIC ACID, 5,5'- 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4,4'-DIYLBIS(AZO)
              BIS 6-AMINO-4-HYDROXY
10  2586609   2-NAPHTHALENESULFONIC ACID, 5,5'- 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4,4'-DIYLBIS(AZO)
              BIS 6-AMINO-4-HYDROXY-, DISODIUM SALT
10  2429712   1-NAPHTHALENESULFONIC ACID, 3,3'- (3,3'-DIMETHOXY 1,1'-BIPHENYL-
              4,4' DIYL)BIS(AZO) BIS 4-HYDROXY-, DISODIUM SALT
10  992596    1-NAPHTHALENESULFONIC ACID, 3,3'- (3,3'-DIMETHYL 1,1'-BIPHENYL-
              4,4'-DIYL)BIS(AZO) BIS 4-AMINO-, DISODIUM SALT
500 1335882   NAPHTHALENE, TETARACHLORO-
100 1321659   NAPHTHALENE, TRICHLORO
1   55810178  NAPHTHALENE, TRINITRO
10  6426671   1,3,6-NAPHTHALENETRISULFONIC ACID, 8-HYDROXY-7- 4'- (2-HYDROXY-
              1-NAPHTHLENYL)AZO 1,1'-BIPHENYL-4-YL AZO-, TRISODIUM SALT
10  25329822  1,3,6-NAPHTHALENETRISULFONIC ACID, 8-HYDROXY-7- 4'- (2-HYDROXY- 1
              NAPHTHA1-NAPHTHALENYL)AZO 1,1-BIPHENYL-4-YL azo-
10  6358538   2-NAPHTHALENOL, 1- (2,5-DIMETHOXYPHENYL)AZO-
10  3118976   2-NAPHTHALENOL, 1- (2,4-DIMETHYLPHENYL)AZO-
0   842079    2-NAPHTHALENOL, 1-(PHENYLAZO)-
10  8032324   NAPHTHA, PETROLEUM
10            NAPHTHA, SOLVENT
10  61789513  NAPHTHENIC ACID, COBALT SALT
0   134327    1-NAPHTHYLAMINE
0   91598     2-NAPHTHYLAMINE
0   134327    alpha-NAPHTHYLAMINE
0   91598     beta-NAPHTHYLAMINE
10  30553049  NAPHTHYLTHIOUREA
0   86884     alpha-NAPHTHYL THIOUREA
10  6950841   1-NAPHTHYLUREA
10  13114620  2-NAPHTHYLUREA
100 1338245   NAPTHENIC ACID
10  74828     NATURAL GAS, LIQUID (REFRIGERATED) with a high METHANE content
10            NATURAL GASOLINE
10  74828     NATURAL GAS with a high METHANE content, COMPRESSED
0   64093794  NEOCHROMIUM
10  26748414  NEODECANEPEROXOIC ACID, 1,1-DIMETHYLETHYL ESTER
10  26748470  NEODECANEPEROXOIC ACID, 1-METHYL-1-PHENYLETHYL ESTER
10  75832     NEOHEXANE
500 7440019   NEON
10  463821    NEOPENTANE
0   7440020   NICKEL
10            NICKEL compounds
100 15699180  NICKEL AMMONIUM SULFATE
0   13463393  NICKEL CARBONYL
0   7440020   NICKEL CATALYST, DRY
10            NICKEL CATALYST, FINELY DIVIDED, ACTIVATED or SPENT
100 37211055  NICKEL CHLORIDE
0   7718549   NICKEL CHLORIDE
100 557197    NICKEL CYANIDE
0   12054487  NICKEL HYDROXIDE
10  13138459  NICKEL NITRATE
10  14216752  NICKEL NITRATE
10  17861620  NICKEL NITRITE
0   7786814   NICKEL SULFATE
0   54115     NICOTINE
10            NICOTINE, compounds and preparations, n.o.s.
0   16543558  NICOTINE, 1'-DEMETHYL-l'-NITROSO-
500 2820511   NICOTINE HYDROCHLORIDE
100 29790521  NICOTINE SALICYLATE
100 65305     NICOTINE SULFATE
100 3275738   NICOTINE TARTRATE
1   479458    NITRAMINE
100 1929824   NITRAPYRIN
10            NITRATES, inorganic, n.o.s.
10            NITRATING ACID, MIXTURES
10            NITRATING ACID MIXTURE, SPENT
10  7697372   NITRIC ACID
10  13473900  NITRIC ACID, ALUMINUM SALT
10  6484522   NITRIC ACID, AMMONIUM SALT
10  10022318  NITRIC ACID, BARIUM SALT
10  13597994  NITRIC ACID, BERYLLIUM SALT
1   10124375  NITRIC ACID, CALCIUM SALT
10  7789186   NITRIC ACID, CESIUM SALT
1   13548384  NITRIC ACID, CHROMIUM (3+)
10  3251238   NITRIC ACID, COPPER(II) SALT
0   625581    NITRIC ACID, ETHYL ESTER
10  10421484  NITRIC ACID, IRON(III) SALT
0   10099748  NITRIC ACID, LEAD (2+) SALT
1   7790694   NITRIC ACID, LITHIUM SALT
10  10377603  NITRIC ACID, MAGNESIUM SALT
10  10377669  NITRIC ACID, MANGANESE(2+) SALT
10  10415755  NITRIC ACID, MERCURY(1+) SALT
10  10045940  NITRIC ACID, MERCURY(II) SALT
1   1712647   NITRIC ACID, 1-METHYLETHYL ESTER
10  13138459  NITRIC ACID, NICKEL(2+) SALT
10  1002160   NITRIC ACID, PENTYL ESTER
10  7757791   NITRIC ACID POTASSIUM SALT
1   627134    NITRIC ACID, PROPYL ESTER
0   7761888   NITRIC ACID SILVER(1+) SALT
0   7631994   NITRIC ACID SODIUM SALT
10  10042769  NITRIC ACID, STRONTIUM SALT
10  10102451  NITRIC ACID, THALLIUM(1+) SALT
0   13823295  NITRIC ACID, THORIUM SALT
10  7779886   NITRIC ACID, ZINC SALT
10  13746899  NITRIC ACID, ZIRCONIUM(4+) SALT
0   10102439  NITRIC OXIDE
0   139139    NITRILOTRIACETIC ACID
10            NITRITES, inorganic, n.o.s.
500 88744     o-NITROANILINE
0   100016    p-NITROANILINE
0   100016    4-NITROANILINE
0   99592     5-NITRO-o-ANISIDINE
0   100174    p-NITROANISOLE
100 98953     NITROBENZENE
100 31212289  NITROBENZENESULFONIC ACID
1   2338127   5-NITROBENZOTRIAZOL
500 98464     3-NITROBENZOTRIFLUORIDE
0   92933     4-NITROBIPHENYL
10  586787    p-NITROBROMOBENZENE
1   9004700   NITROCELLULOSE
0   100005    NITROCHLOROBENZENE
0   100005    p-NITROCHLOROBENZENE
10  39974351  1-NITRO-2-CHLOROBENZO-3-TRIFLUORIDE
10  118832    1-NITRO-4-CHLOROBENZO-2-TRIFLUORIDE
100 121175    2-NITRO-1-CHLOROBENZO-4-TRIFLUORIDE
10  25889387  2-NITRO-4-CHLOROBENZO-1-TRIFLUORIDE
10  777377    4-NITRO-1-CHLOROBENZO-2-TRIFLUORIDE
10  12167203  NITROCRESOLS
100 1122607   NITROCYCLOHEXANE
10  79243     NITROETHANE
0   1836755   NITROFEN
500 7727379   NITROGEN
0   10102440  NITROGEN DIOXIDE
10  10544726  NITROGEN DIOXIDE
10            NITROGEN FERTILIZER SOLUTION
10  7783542   NITROGEN FLUORIDE
1   10036472  NITROGEN FLUORIDE
0   51752     NITROGEN MUSTARD
0   302705    NITROGEN MUSTARD N-OXIDE HYDROCHLORIDE
10  10544726  NITROGEN OXIDE
0   10024972  NITROGEN OXIDE
10  12033497  NITROGEN OXIDE
100 10544737  NITROGEN OXIDE
0   10102439  NITROGEN OXIDE
0   10102440  NITROGEN OXIDE
10  10544726  NITROGEN TETROXIDE
10  7783542   NITROGEN TRIFLUORIDE
10  12033497  NITROGEN TRIOXIDE
100 10544737  NITROGEN TRIOXIDE
0   55630     NITROGLYCERIN
1   556887    NITROGUANIDINE
100 8007565   NITROHYDROCHLORIC ACID
10  75525     NITROMETHANE
10  27254360  NITRONAPHTHALENE
100 88755     2-NITROPHENOL
100 554847    3-NITROPHENOL
0   100027    4-NITROPHENOL
10  25154556  NITROPHENOL, mixed isomers-
10  108032    1-NITROPROPANE
0   79469     2-NITROPROPANE
0             NITROSAMINES
0   1116547   N-NITROSODIETHANOLAMINE
0   1116547   NITROSODIETHANOLAMINE
0   55185     N-NITROSODIETHYLAMINE
0   55185     NITROSODIETHYLAMINE
0   62759     N-NITROSODIMETHYLAMINE
0   62759     NITROSODIMETHYLAMINE
0   138896    NITROSODIMETHYLANILINE
0   138896    p-NITROSODIMETHYLANILINE
0   924163    N-NITROSODI-N-BUTYLAMINE
0   924163    NITROSODI-N-BUTYLAMINE
0   621647    N-NITROSODI-N-PROPYLAMINE
0   621647    NITROSODI-N-PROPYLAMINE
0   86306     N-NITROSODIPHENYLAMINE
0   156105    NITROSODIPHENYLAMINE
0   86306     NITROSODIPHENYLAMINE
0   156105    p-NITROSODIPHENYLAMINE
0   4549400   NITROSOMETHYLVINYLAMINE
0   59892     N-NITROSOMORPHOLINE
0   59892     NITROSOMORPHOLINE
0   759739    NITROSO-N-ETHYLUREA
0   684935    N-NITROSO-N-METHYLUREA
0   684935    NITROSO-N-METHYLUREA
0   16543558  N-NITROSONORNICOTINE
0   100754    N-NITROSOPIPERIDINE
0   100754    NITROSOPIPERIDINE
0   930552    N-NITROSOPYRROLIDINE
0   13256229  N-NITROSOSARCOSINE
0   13256229  NITROSOSARCOSINE
1   9056386   NITROSTARCH
100 2696926   NITROSYL CHLORIDE
100 7782787   NITROSYLSULFURIC ACID
1   1321126   NITROTOLUENE
1   99081     m-NITROTOLUENE
0   88722     o-NITROTOLUENE
0   99990     p-NITROTOLUENE
0   99558     5-NITRO-o-TOLUIDINE
10  544161    NITROUS ACID, BUTYL ESTER
1   109955    NITROUS ACID, ETHYL ESTER
1   110463    NITROUS ACID, 3-METHYL BUTYL ESTER
1   624919    NITROUS ACID, METHYL ESTER
0   7758090   NITROUS ACID, POTASSIUM SALT
0   10024972  NITROUS OXIDE
500 99514     m-NITROXYLENE
500 25168041  NITROXYLOL
0   759739    N-NITROSO-N-ETHYLUREA
10  111842    NONANE
10  1941793   NONANEDIPEROXOIC ACID
10  1455216   1-NONANETHIOL
500           NONFLAMMABLE GAS, n.o.s.
100 5283670   NONYL TRICHLOROSILANE
100 991424    NORBORMIDE
0   68224     NORETHINDRONE
0   68224     NORETHISTERONE
0   57636     19-NORPREGNA-1,3,5(10)-TRIEN-20-YNE-3,17-DIOL, (17alpha)-
0   72333     19-NORPREGNA-1,3,5(10)-TRIEN-20-YN-17-OL, 3-METHOXY-, (17 alpha)-
0   68224     19-NORPREGN-4-EN-20-YN-3-ONE, 17-HYDROXY-, (17alpha)-
10  140807    NOVOLDIAMINE
100 2234131   OCTACHLORONAPHTHALENE
10  2885009   1-OCTADECANETHIOL
0   7428480   OCTADECANOIC ACID, LEAD SALT
100 12772473  9-OCTADECENOIC ACID (Z)-, ESTER WITH 2,2-BIS(HYDROXYMETHYL)-1,3
              PROPANEDIOL
0   1191806   9-OCTADECENOIC ACID (Z)-, MERCURY(2+) SALT
100 112049    OCTADECYL TRICHLOROSILANE
10  63597411  OCTADIENE-
500 360894    OCTAFLUOROBUT-2-ENE
500 115253    OCTAFLUOROCYCLOBUTANE
500 76197     OCTAFLUOROPROPANE
100 152169    OCTAMETHYL DIPHOSPHORAMIDE
10  111659    OCTANE
10  111886    1-OCTANETHIOL
100 541855    3-OCTANONE
10  762163    OCTANOYL PEROXIDE
10  123057    OCTYL ALDEHYDE
10  5809085   tert-OCTYL HYDROPEROXIDE
10  111886    OCTYL MERCAPTAN
10  5283669   OCTYL TRICHLOROSILANE
10            OIL GAS
100 8008513   OILS, CAMPHOR
10  3288582   0,0-DIETHYL S-METHYL DITHIOPHOSPHATE
10            ORGANIC PEROXIDE, liquid or solution, n.o.s.
10            ORGANIC PEROXIDE mixture
10            ORGANIC PEROXIDE, n.o.s., trial quantities
10            ORGANIC PEROXIDE, samples, n.o.s.
10            ORGANIC PEROXIDE, solid, n.o.s.
10  14265442  ORGANIC PHOSPHATE COMPOUND, SOLID (POISON B)
10            ORGANIC PHOSPHOROUS COMPOUND, mixed with COMPRESSED GAS
10            ORGANOCHLORINE PESTICIDES, FLAMMABLE, LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s. flash
              point less than 23C
10            ORGANOCHLORINE PESTICIDES, FLAMMABLE, LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s. flash
              point between 23C and 61C
10            ORGANOCHLORINE PESTICIDES, LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
10            ORGANOCHLORINE PESTICIDES, SOLID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
10            ORGANOPHOSPHOROUS PESTICIDES, FLAMMABLE, LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s.,
              flash point between 23C and 61C
10            ORGANOPHOSPHOROUS PESTICIDES, FLAMMABLE, LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s.,
              flash point less than 23C
10            ORGANOPHOSPHOROUS PESTICIDES, LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
10            ORGANOPHOSPHOROUS PESTICIDES, SOLID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
10  PMN82147  ORGANORHODIUM COMPLEX3
10            ORGANOTIN PESTICIDES, FLAMMABLE LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s., flash
              point between 23C and 61C
10            ORGANOTIN PESTICIDES, FLAMMABLE LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s., flash
              point than 23C
10            ORGANOTIN PESTICIDES, LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
10            ORGANOTIN PESTICIDES, SOLID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
0   65861     OROTIC ACID
0   20816120  OSMIUM OXIDE
0   20816120  OSMIUM TETROXIDE
100 630604    OUABAIN
0   106876    7-OXABICYCLO 4.1.0 HEPTANE, 3-OXIRANYL-
100 144627    OXALIC ACID
100 23135220  OXAMYL
0   1120714   1,2-OXATHIOLANE 2,2-DIOXIDE
0   50180     2H-1,3,2-OXAZAPHOSPHORIN-2-AMINE, N,N-BIS(2-CHLOROETHYL)
              TETRAHYDRO-, 2-OXIDE
0   604751    OXAZEPAM
0   127480    2,4-OXAZOLIDINEDIONE, 3,5,5-TRIMETHYL-
100 78717     OXETANE, 3,3-BIS(CHLOROMETHYL)-
0   57578     2-OXETANONE
1   674828    2-OXETANONE, 4-METHYLENE-
100 9001370   OXIDASE, GLUCOSE
10            OXIDIZER, CORROSIVE, LIQUID, n.o.s.
10            OXIDIZER, CORROSIVE, SOLID, n.o.s.
10            OXIDIZER, POISONOUS LIQUID, n.o.s.
10            OXIDIZER, POISONOUS SOLID, n.o.s.
10            OXIDIZING SUBSTANCE, n.o.s.
0   75218     OXIRANE
0   1675543   OXIRANE, 2,2' ((1-METHYLETHYLIDENE)BIS(4,1-
              PHENYLENEOXYMETHYLENE))BIS -
0   3132647   OXIRANE, BROMOMETHYL-
0   2426086   OXIRANE, (BUTOXYMETHYL)-
0   765344    OXIRANECARBOXALDEHYDE
0   106898    OXIRANE, CHLOROMETHYL-
0   106887    OXIRANE, ETHYL-
0   556525    OXIRANEMETHANOL
0   75569     OXIRANE, METHYL-
0   4016142   OXIRANE, (1-METHYLETHOXY)METHYL-
100 2238075   OXIRANE, 2,2'-OXYBIS(METHYLENE) BIS-
0   122601    OXIRANE, (PHENOXYMETHYL)-
0   96093     OXIRANE, PHENYL-
0   101906    OXIRANE, 2,2'- [1,3-PHENYLENEBIS (OXYMETHYLENE)] BIS-
0   106923    OXIRANE, (2-PROPENYLOXY)METHYL-
100 428591    OXIRANE, TRIFLUORO(TRIFLUOROMETHYL)-
100 2497076   OXYDISULFOTON
10  7782447   OXYGEN
10  7783417   OXYGEN DIFLUORIDE
10  7783417   OXYGEN FLUORIDE
0   434071    OXYMETHOLONE
0   10028156  OZONE
10            PAINT, etc., FLAMMABLE LIQUID
10            PAINT RELATED MATERIAL, CORROSIVE LIQUID
10            PAINTS, ENAMELS, LACQUERS, STAINS, etc.
500           PAINTS, LATEX
100 8049476   PANCREATIN
0   9001734   PAPAIN
10            PAPER, UNSATURATED OIL TREATED, INCOMPLETELY DRY
10  30525894  PARAFORMALDEHYDE
10  123637    PARALDEHYDE
10  52061606  PARAMETHANE HYDROPEROXIDE
0   311455    PARAOXON
0   1910425   PARAQUAT
10  2074502   PARAQUAT METHOSULFATE
0   56382     PARATHION
0             PARATHION AND COMPRESSED GAS MIXTURE
0   298000    PARATHION-METHYL
100 12002038  PARIS GREEN
0   59536651  PBB
0   67774327  PBB
0   1336363   PCB-1242 (CHLORODIPHENYL (42% Cl))
0   1336363   PCB-1254 (CHLORODIPHENYL (54% Cl))
0   1336363   PCB's
10  762130    PELARGONYL PEROXIDE
0   61336     PENICILLIN
10  19624227  PENTABORANE
500 608935    PENTACHLOROBENZENE
100 76017     PENTACHLOROETHANE
100 1321648   PENTACHLORONAPHTHALENE
100 87865     PENTACHLOROPHENOL
100 2570265   PENTADECYLAMINE
10  54363494  PENTADIENE, METHYL-
1   78115     PENTAERYTHRITE TETRANITRATE
1   78115     PENTAERYTHRITOL, TETRANITRATE
10  30586186  PENTAMETHYLHEPTANE
10  110623    PENTANAL
10  123159    PENTANAL, 2-METHYL
10  110587    1-PENTANAMINE
10  108098    2-PENTANAMINE, 4-METHYL-
100 2050922   1-PENTANAMINE, N-PENTYL-
10  109660    PENTANE
10  29756385  PENTANE, BROMO-
10  543599    PENTANE, 1-CHLORO-
0   111308    PENTANEDIAL
10  140807    1,4-PENTANEDIAMINE, N1,N1-DIETHYL-
0   69056     1,4-PENTANEDIAMINE, N,N,N,N-(6-CHLORO-2-METHOXY-9-ACRIDINYL)-N,
              N-DIETHYL-, DIHYDROCHLORINE
0   54057     1,4-PENTANEDIAMINE, N,N,N,N-(7-CHLORO-4-QUINOLINYL)-N,N-DIETHYL-
10  30586108  PENTANE, DICHLORO-
0   107415    2,4-PENTANEDIOL, 2-METHYL-
100 123546    2,4-PENTANEDIONE
100 123546    PENTANE-2,4-DIONE
10  37187227  2,4-PENTANEDIONE, PEROXIDE
10  43133955  PENTANE, METHYL-
1   28604913  PENTANENITRILE, AZOBIS 2,4-DIMETHYL-
1   15545978  PENTANENITRILE, 2,2"-AZOBIS 4-METHOXY-2,4-DIMETHYL-
10  110667    1-PENTANETHIOL
10  540841    PENTANE, 2,2,4-TRIMETHYL-
100 109524    PENTANOIC ACID
10  71410     1-PENTANOL
10  584021    3-PENTANOL
100 108112    2-PENTANOL, 4-METHYL-
100 108849    2-PENTANOL, 4-METHYL, ACETATE
10  107879    2-PENTANONE
10  96220     3-PENTANONE
10  123422    2-PENTANONE, 4-HYDROXY-4-METHYL-
10  54693468  2-PENTANONE, 4-HYDROXY-4-METHYL-, PEROXIDE
100 107700    2-PENTANONE, 4-HYDROXY-4-METHYL-
10  108101    2-PENTANONE, 4-METHYL-
10  37206205  2-PENTANONE, 4-METHYL-, PEROXIDE
100 638299    PENTANOYL CHLORIDE
10  25377724  PENTENE
10  27236460  PENTENE, 2-METHYL
10  25167708  PENTENE, 2,4,4-TRIMETHYL
0   141797    3-PENTEN-2-ONE, 4-METHYL
100 12772473  PENTOL
1   8066339   PENTOLITE
1   79210     PERACETIC ACID
10            PERBORATE, n.o.s.
10            PERCHLORATES, INORGANIC, n.o.s.
1   7790989   PERCHLORIC ACID, AMMONIUM SALT
10  13465957  PERCHLORIC ACID, BARIUM SALT
10  13477366  PERCHLORIC ACID, CALCIUM SALT
1   7601903   PERCHLORIC ACID, greater than 50% but less than 72% acid, by
              weight
0   13637768  PERCHLORIC ACID, LEAD(2+) SALT
1   7601903   PERCHLORIC ACID, less than 50% acid by weight
10  10034818  PERCHLORIC ACID, MAGNESIUM SALT
10  7778747   PERCHLORIC ACID, POTASSIUM SALT
10  7601890   PERCHLORIC ACID, SODIUM SALT
10  13450970  PERCHLORIC ACID, STRONTIUM SALT
0   127184    PERCHLOROETHYLENE
100 594423    PERCHLOROMETHYL MERCAPTAN
10  7616946   PERCHLORYL FLUORIDE
10            PERMANGANATES, inorganic, n.o.s.
10  7787362   PERMANGANIC ACID, BARIUM SALT
10  10118760  PERMANGANIC ACID, CALCIUM SALT
0   7722647   PERMANGANIC ACID, POTASSIUM SALT
10  13446101  PERMANGANIC ACID, AMMONIUM SALT
10  10101505  PERMANGANIC ACID, SODIUM SALT
10  23414724  PERMANGANIC ACID, ZINC SALT
1   644315    PEROXIDE, ACETYL BENZOYL
10  3179564   PEROXIDE, ACETYL CYCLOHEXYLSULFONYL
1   94177     PEROXIDE, BIS(4-CHLOROBENZOYL)
10  133142    PEROXIDE, BIS(2,4-DICHLOROBENZOYL)
10  110054    PEROXIDE, BIS(1,1-DIMETHYLETHYL)
1   3437841   PEROXIDE, BIS(2-METHYL-1-OXOPROPYL)
10  80433     PEROXIDE, BIS(1-METHYL-1-PHENYLETHYL)
10  762129    PEROXIDE, BIS(1-OXODECYL)
10  105748    PEROXIDE, BIS(1-OXODODECYL)
10  58449379  PEROXIDE, BIS(1-OXOISONONYL)
10  762130    PEROXIDE, BIS(1-OXONONOYL)
10  762163    PEROXIDE, BIS(1-OXOOCTYL)
1   3248280   PEROXIDE, BIS(1-OXOPROPYL)
10  3006868   PEROXIDE, CYCLOHEXYLIDENEBIS (1,1-DIMETHYLETHYL)
10  110225    PEROXIDE, DIACETYL
0   94360     PEROXIDE, DIBENZOYL
1   2167239   PEROXIDE, (1-METHYLPROPYLIDENE)BIS (1,1-DIMETHYLETHYL)
10            PEROXIDES, INORGANIC, n.o.s.
10  78637     PEROXIDE, (1,1,4,4-TETRAMETHYL-1,4-BUTANEDIYL)BIS (1,1-
              DIMETHYLETHYL)
10  6731368   PEROXIDE, (3,3,5-TRIMETHYLCYCLOHEXYLIDENE)BIS (1,1-
              DIMETHYLETHYL)
1   79210     PEROXYACETIC ACID
10  15520113  PEROXYDICARBONIC ACID, BIS 4-(1,1-DIMETHYLETHYL)CYCLOHEXYL ESTER
10  16111629  PEROXYDICARBONIC ACID, BIS(2-ETHYLHEXYL) ESTER
1   105646    PEROXYDICARBONIC ACID, BIS(1-METHYLETHYL) ESTER
10  19910657  PEROXYDICARBONIC ACID, BIS(1-METHYLPROPYL) ESTER
10  2144458   PEROXYDICARBONIC ACID, BIS(PHENYLMETHYL) ESTER
10  16215499  PEROXYDICARBONIC ACID, DIBUTYL ESTER
10  1561495   PEROXYDICARBONIC ACID, DICYCLOHEXYL ESTER
1   14666785  PEROXYDICARBONIC ACID, DIETHYL ESTER
10  26322145  PEROXYDICARBONIC ACID, DIHEXADECYL ESTER
10  52326666  PEROXYDICARBONIC ACID, DIOCTADECYL ESTER
10  16066389  PEROXYDICARBONIC ACID, DIPROPYL ESTER
10  3313926   PEROXYDICARBONIC ACID, DISODIUM SALT
10  53220227  PEROXYDICARBONIC ACID, DITETRADECYL ESTER
10  7727540   PEROXYDISULFURIC ACID, DIAMMONIUM SALT
10  7727211   PEROXYDISULFURIC ACID, DIPOTASSIUM SALT
10  7775271   PEROXYDISULFURIC ACID DISODIUM SALT
10            PESTICIDES, FLAMMABLE LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s., flash point between
              23C and 61C
10            PESTICIDES, FLAMMABLE LIQUID, TOXIC n.o.s., flash point less than
              23C
10            PESTICIDES, LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
10            PESTICIDES, SOLID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
10  8006619   PETROL
10  8002059   PETROLEUM CRUDE OIL
10            PETROLEUM DISTILLATES, n.o.s.
10  8032324   PETROLEUM ETHER
10  68476857  PETROLEUM GASES, LIQUEFIED
10  8032324   PETROLEUM NAPHTHA
10            PETROLEUM OIL
10  8032324   PETROLEUM SPIRITS
0   62442     PHENACETIN
10  70111     PHENACYL BROMIDE
0   85018     PHENANTHRENE
100 578949    PHENARSAZINE CHLORIDE
100 578949    PHENARSAZINE, 10-CHLORO-5,10-DIHYDRO-
100 58366     PHENARSAZINE OXIDE
0   136403    PHENAZOPYRIDINE HYDROCHLORIDE
500 1321319   PHENETIDINE
0   108952    PHENOL
0   27598852  PHENOL, AMINO-
100 95852     PHENOL, 2-AMINO-4-CHLORO-
0   128370    PHENOL, 2,6-BIS(1,1-DIMETHYLETHYL)-4-METHYL-
100 28805869  PHENOL, BUTYL-
0   95578     PHENOL, 2-CHLORO-
100 106489    PHENOL, p-CHLORO-
500 1321104   PHENOL, CHLOROMETHYL-
100 131895    PHENOL, 2-CYCLOHEXYL-4,6-DINITRO-
100 6341975   PHENOL, 2,4-DICHLORO-ACETATE
10  28165711  PHENOL, 2,6-DICHLORO-ACETATE
0   56531     PHENOL, 4,4'-(1,2-DIETHYL-1,2-ETHENEDIYL)BIS-, (E)-
0   84173     PHENOL, 4,4-(DIETHYLIDENE-ETHYLENE)DI-
500 105679    PHENOL, 2,4-DIMETHYL-
100 2032657   PHENOL, 3,5-DIMETHYL-4-(METHYLTHIO)-, METHYLCARBAMATE
100 315184    PHENOL, 4-(DIMETHYLAMINO)-3,5-DIMETHYL-, METHYLCARBAMATE (ESTER)
1   25550587  PHENOL, DINITRO-
100 80057     PHENOL, 4,4'-ISOPROPYLIDENEDI-
100 108430    PHENOL, m-CHLORO
100 150765    PHENOL, 4-METHOXY-
100 1319773   PHENOL, METHYL-
100 95487     PHENOL, 2-METHYL-
100 108394    PHENOL, 3-METHYL-
100 106445    PHENOL, 4-METHYL-
0   534521    PHENOL, 2-METHYL-4,6-DINITRO-
100 70304     PHENOL, 2,2'-METHYLENEBIS 3,4,6-TRICHLORO-
0   114261    PHENOL, 2-(1-METHYLETHOXY)-, METHYLCARBAMATE
100 64006     PHENOL, 3-(1-METHYLETHYL)-, METHYLCARBAMATE
10  12167203  PHENOL, METHYLNITRO-
100 89725     PHENOL, 2-(1-METHYLPROPYL)-
1   602993    PHENOL, 3-METHYL-2,4,6-TRINITRO-
100 88755     PHENOL, 2-NITRO-
100 554847    PHENOL, 3-NITRO-
0   100027    PHENOL, 4-NITRO-
100 87865     PHENOL, PENTACHLORO-
100 131522    PHENOL, PENTACHLORO-, SODIUM SALT
1   146849    PHENOL, 2,4,6-TRINITRO-, SILVER(1+) SALT
100 139026    PHENOL, SODIUM SALT
100 98113     PHENOLSULPHONIC ACID
100 4418660   PHENOL, 2,2'-THIOBIS(4-CHLORO-6-METHYL-)
100 97187     PHENOL, 2,2'-THIOBIS-4,6-DICHLORO-
100 95954     PHENOL, 2,4,5-TRICHLORO-
0   88062     PHENOL, 2,4,6-TRICHLORO-
10  42589071  PHENOL, 2,4,5-TRICHLORO- compound with AMINE(1:1)
0   88891     PHENOL, 2,4,6-TRINITRO-
1   131748    PHENOL, 2,4,6-TRINITRO-, AMMONIUM SALT
100 92842     PHENOTHIAZINE
100 92842     1OH-PHENOTHIAZINE
100 58366     PHENOXARSINE, 10,10'OXYDI-
100 1300716   PHENOL, DIMETHYL-
10            PHENOXY PESTICIDES, FLAMMABLE, LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s. flash point
              between 23C and 61C
10            PHENOXY PESTICIDES, FLAMMABLE, LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s. flash point
              less than 23C
10            PHENOXY PESTICIDES, LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
10            PHENOXY PESTICIDES, SOLID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
100 140294    PHENYLACETONITRILE
100 103800    PHENYLACETYL CHLORIDE
0   148823    l-PHENYLALANINE, 4- BIS(2-CHLOROETHYL)AMINO-
0   135886    n-PHENYL-beta-NAPHTHYLAMINE
500 104518    PHENYLBUTANE
100 622446    PHENYLCARBYLAMINE CHLORIDE
100 1885149   PHENYLCHLOROFORMATE
100 696286    PHENYLDICHLOROARSINE
0   108452    m-PHENYLENEDIAMINE
0   95545     o-PHENYLENEDIAMINE
0   106503    p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE
0   39156417  m-PHENYLENEDIAMINE, 4-METHOXY-, SULFATE
100 101848    PHENYL ETHER
0   100425    PHENYL ETHYLENE
0   122601    PHENYL GLYCIDYL ETHER
10  69910     PHENYLGLYCINE ACID
0   100630    PHENYLHYDRAZINE
0   59881     PHENYLHYDRAZINE HYDROCHLORIDE
100 103719    PHENYL ISOCYANATE
10  108985    PHENYLMERCAPTAN
0   62384     PHENYLMERCURIC ACETATE
0             PHENYLMERCURIC COMPOUND, SOLID, n.o.s.
0   100572    PHENYLMERCURIC HYDROXIDE
0   55685     PHENYLMERCURIC NITRATE
0   90437     PHENYLPHENOL
0   90437     o-PHENYLPHENOL
0   90437     2-PHENYL PHENOL
10  638211    PHENYLPHOSPHINE
10  644973    PHENYL PHOSPHORUS DICHLORIDE
10  3497005   PHENYL PHOSPHORUS THIODICHLORIDE
100 2097190   PHENYLSILATRANE
100 103855    PHENYLTHIOUREA
10  98135     PHENYL TRICHLOROSILANE
10            PHENYL UREA PESTICIDES, FLAMMABLE LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s., flash
              point between 23C and 61C
10            PHENYL UREA PESTICIDES, FLAMMABLE LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s., flash
              point than 23C
10            PHENYL UREA PESTICIDES, LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
10            PHENYL UREA PESTICIDES, SOLID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
0   57410     PHENYTOIN
10  298022    PHORATE
100 4104147   PHOSACETIM
100 7786347   PHOSDRIN
100 947024    PHOSFOLAN
10  75445     PHOSGENE
0   732116    PHOSMET
10  13387020  9-PHOSPHABICYCLONONANE
10  13396800  9-PHOSPHABICYCLONONANE
10  13387020  9-PHOSPHABICYCLO 3.3.1 NONANE
10  13396800  9-PHOSPHABICYCLO 4.2.1 NONANE
100 13171216  PHOSPHAMIDON
100 16940811  PHOSPHATE(1-), HEXAFLUORO-, HYDROGEN
10  7803512   PHOSPHINE
0   52244     PHOSPHINE SULFIDE, TRIS(1-AZIRIDINYL)
500 13598362  PHOSPHONIC ACID
0   52686     PHOSPHONIC ACID, (2,2,2-TRICHLORO-1-HYDROXYETHYL)-,DIMETHYL ESTER
100 944229    PHOSPHONODITHIOIC ACID, ETHYL-, 0-ETHYL S-PHENYL ESTER
100 2703131   PHOSPHONOTHIOIC ACID, METHYL-, 0-ETHYL 0-(4-METHYLTHIO) PHENYL
              ESTER
100 2665307   PHOSPHONOTHIOIC ACID, METHYL-, 0-(4-NITROPHENYL) 0-PHENYL ESTER
100 50782699  PHOSPHONOTHIOIC ACID, METHYL-, S-(2- (BIS
              (METHYLETHYL)AMINO)ETHYL) 0 ETHYL ESTER
100 2104645   PHOSPHONOTHIOIC ACID, PHENYL-, 0-ETHYL 0-(4-NITROPHENYL) ESTER
100 993431    PHOSPHONOTHIOIC DICHLORIDE, ETHYL-
10  676982    PHOSPHONOTHIOIC DICHLORIDE, METHYL-
100 1498404   PHOSPHONOUS DICHLORIDE, ETHYL-
10  676835    PHOSPHONOUS DICHLORIDE, METHYL-
100 299865    PHOSPHORAMIDIC ACID, METHYL-, 2-CHLORO-4-(1,1-DIMETHYLETHYL)
              PHENYL METHYL ESTER
10  22224926  PHOSPHORAMIDIC ACID, (1-METHYLETHYL)-, ETHYL 3-METHYL-4-
100 10265926  PHOSPHORAMIDOTHIOIC ACID, 0, S-DIMETHYL ESTER
100 7789697   PHOSPHORANE, PENTABROMO-
10  10026138  PHOSPHORANE, PENTACHLORO-
10  7647190   PHOSPHORANE, PENTAFLUORO-
10  14684254  PHOSPHORDICHLORIDOTHIOUS ACID, PHENYL ESTER
100 7664382   PHOSPHORIC ACID
100 7784307   PHOSPHORIC ACID, ALUMINUM SALT (1:1)
100 470906    PHOSPHORIC ACID, 2-CHLORO-1-(2,4-DICHLOROPHENYL) ETHENYL
              DIETHYLESTER
100 13171216  PHOSPHORIC ACID, 2-CHLORO-3-(DIETHYLAMINO)-1-METHYL-3-OXO-1- PRO
0   961115    PHOSPHORIC ACID, 2-CHLORO-1-(2,4,5-TRICHLOROPHENYL) VINYL
              DIMETHYL ESTER
0   300765    PHOSPHORIC ACID, 1,2-DIBROMO-2,2-DICHLOROETHYL DIMETHYL ESTER
100 12788931  PHOSPHORIC ACID, DIBUTYL ESTER
100 107664    PHOSPHORIC ACID, DIBUTYL ESTER
0   62737     PHOSPHORIC ACID, 2,2-DICHLOROETHENYL DIMETHYL ESTER
0   311455    PHOSPHORIC ACID, DIETHYL P-NITROPHENYL ESTER
0   141662    PHOSPHORIC ACID, 3-(DIMETHYLAMINO)-1-METHYL-3-OXO-1-PROPENYL
              DIMETHYL ESTER, (E)-
0   6923224   PHOSPHORIC ACID, DIMETHYL 1-METHYL-3-(METHYLAMINO)-3-OXO-1-
              PROPENYL ESTER, (E)-
100 3254635   PHOSPHORIC ACID, DIMETHYL 4-(METHYLTHIO)PHENYL ESTER
100 7558794   PHOSPHORIC ACID, DISODIUM SALT
100 1623241   PHOSPHORIC ACID, MONO(1-METHYLETHYL) ESTER
100 12789467  PHOSPHORIC ACID, PENTYL ESTER
100 126738    PHOSPHORIC ACID TRIBUTYL ESTER
0   545551    PHOSPHORIC ACID, TRIETHYLENEIMINE
100 78308     PHOSPHORIC ACID, TRI-O-TOLYL ESTER
100 115866    PHOSPHORIC ACID, TRIPHENYL ESTER
100 7601549   PHOSPHORIC ACID, TRISODIUM SALT
10  1314563   PHOSPHORIC ANHYDRIDE
0   680319    PHOSPHORIC TRIAMIDE, HEXAMETHYL
100 2524030   PHOSPHOROCHLORIDOTHIOIC ACID, 0,0-DIMETHYL ESTER
10  2524041   PHOSPHOROCHLORIDOTHIOIC ACID, 0,0-DIETHYL ESTER
100 1498517   PHOSPHORODICHLORIDIC ACID, ETHYL ESTER
100 13779414  PHOSPHORODIFLUORIDIC ACID
100 35400432  PHOSPHORODITHIOIC ACID, 0-ETHYL 0- 4-(METHYLTHIO)PHENYL S- PROPYL
              ESTER
0   298044    PHOSPHORODITHIOIC ACID, 0,0-DIETHYL S- 2-(ETHYLTHIO)ETHYL ESTER
10  298022    PHOSPHORODITHIOIC ACID, 0,0-DIETHYL S- (ETHYLTHIO)METHYL ESTER
0   86500     PHOSPHORODITHIOIC ACID, 0,0-DIMETHYL S- (4-OXO-1,2,3-BENZO
              TRIAZIN-3(4H)-Yl)METHYI ESTER
0   60515     PHOSPHORODITHIOIC ACID, 0,0-DIMETHY, S-(2-(METHYLAMINO)-2-
              OXOETHYL)ESTER
0   732116    PHOSPHORODITHIOIC ACID, S-((1,3-DIHYDRO-1,3-DIOXO-24-ISOINDOL-2-
              YL) METHYL) 0,0-DIMETHYL ESTER
0   950378    PHOSPHORODITHIOIC ACID, S-((5-METHOXY-2-OXO-1,3,4-THIAZOL- 3(2H)-
              YL) METHYL) 0,0-DIMETHYL ESTER
100 78342     PHOSPHORODITHIOIC ACID, S,S'-1,4-DIOXANE-2,3-DIYL 0,0,0',0'-
              TETRAETHYL ESTER
100 563122    PHOSPHORODITHIOIC ACID, S,S'-METHYLENE 0,0,0',0'-TETRAETHYL ESTER
100 56724     PHOSPHOROTHIOIC ACID, 0-(3-CHLORO-4-METHYL-2-OXO-2H-1- BENZOPYRAN
              -7-YL) 0,0-DIETHYL ESTER
              PHOSPHOROTHIOIC ACID, 0- 2-(ETHYLTHIO)ETHYL 0,0-DIMETHYL
100 8022002   ESTER,MIXTURE with S-2-(ETHYLTHIO)ETHYL 0,0-DIMETHYL PHOSPHORO-
              THIOATE
0   23505411  PHOSPHOROTHIOIC ACID, 0,0-DIETHYL O-(2-(DIETHYLAMINO)-6-METHYL 4-
              PYRIMIDINYL) ESTER
100 8065483   PHOSPHOROTHIOIC ACID, 0,0-DIETHYL 0- 2-(ETHYLTHIO)ETHYL ESTER,
              mixture with 0,0-DIETHYL s- 2-(ETHYLTHIO)ETHYL PHOSPHOROTHIOATE
100 333415    PHOSPHOROTHIOIC ACID, 0,0-DIETHYL 0- 6-METHYL-2-(1- METHYLETHYL)
              4-PYRIMIDINYL ESTER
100 115902    PHOSPHOROTHIOIC ACID, 0,0-DIETHYL 0- 4-METHYLSULFINYL)PHENYL
              ESTER
0   56382     PHOSPHOROTHIOIC ACID, 0,0-DIETHYL O-(4-NITROPHENYL) ESTER
100 297972    PHOSPHOROTHIOIC ACID, 0,0-DIETHYL, O-PYRAZINYL ESTER
0   2921882   PHOSPHOROTHIOIC ACID, 0,0-DIETHYL 0-(3,5,6-TRICHLORO-2-
              PYRIDINYL) ESTER
100 52857     PHOSPHOROTHIOIC ACID, 0,0-DIMETHYL ESTER, 0-ESTER with p-
              HYDROXY-N,N DIMETHYL BENZENE-SULFONAMIDE
100 55389     PHOSPHOROTHIOIC ACID, 0,0-DIMETHYL 0-3-METHYL-4-
              (METHYLTHIO)PHENYL ESTER
0   298000    PHOSPHOROTHIOIC ACID, 0,0-DIMETHYL O-(4-NITROPHENYL) ESTER
0   299843    PHOSPHOROTHIOIC ACID, O,O-DIMETHYL 0-(2,4,5-TRICHLOROPHENYL)
              ESTER
100 3383968   PHOSPHOROTHIOIC ACID, 0,0'-(THIODI-4,1-PHENYLENE) 0,0,0',0'
              TETRAMETHYL ESTER
0   919868    PHOSPHOROTHIOIC ACID, S-(2(ETHYLTHIO)ETHYL) 0,0-DIMETHYL ESTER
100 2 587908  PHOSPHOROTHIOTIC ACID, O,O-DIMETHYL-S-(2-METHYLTHIO)ETHYL ESTER
500 13598362  PHOSPHOROUS ACID, ortho
100 122521    PHOSPHOROUS ACID, TRIETHYL ESTER
100 121459    PHOSPHOROUS ACID, TRIMETHYL ESTER
10  1314563   PHOSPHOROUS PENTOXIDE
10  7789608   PHOSPHOROUS TRIBROMIDE
10  7719122   PHOSPHOROUS TRICHLORIDE
10  7783553   PHOSPHOROUS TRIFLUORIDE
10  7723140   PHOSPHORUS
10  7723140   PHOSPHORUS, AMORPHOUS, RED
10  644973    PHOSPHORUS DICHLORIDE, PHENYL
10  12037820  PHOSPHORUS HEPTA-SULPHIDE
10  1314563   PHOSPHORUS OXIDE
100 1314245   PHOSPHORUS OXIDE
100 7789595   PHOSPHORUS OXYBROMIDE
10  10025873  PHOSPHORUS OXYCHLORIDE
100 7789697   PHOSPHORUS PENTABROMIDE
10  10026138  PHOSPHORUS PENTACHLORIDE
10  7647190   PHOSPHORUS PENTAFLUORIDE
10  1314803   PHOSPHORUS PENTASULFIDE
10  1314563   PHOSPHORUS PENTOXIDE
10  7723140   PHOSPHORUS (RED)
10  1314858   PHOSPHORUS SESQUISULFIDE
10  12037820  PHOSPHORUS SULFIDE
10  1314803   PHOSPHORUS SULFIDE
10  12165694  PHOSPHORUS SULFIDE
10  1314858   PHOSPHORUS SULFIDE
10  7789608   PHOSPHORUS TRIBROMIDE
10  7719122   PHOSPHORUS TRICHLORIDE
10  7783553   PHOSPHORUS TRIFLUORIDE
100 1314245   PHOSPHORUS TRIOXIDE
10  12165694  PHOSPHORUS TRISULFIDE
10  7723140   PHOSPHORUS (WHITE)
10  7723140   PHOSPHORUS (YELLOW)
100 7789595   PHOSPHORYL BROMIDE
10  10025873  PHOSPHORYL CHLORIDE
10            PHTHALATE ESTERS
500 85687     PHTHALIC ACID, BENZYL BUTYL ESTER
100 85449     PHTHALIC ANHYDRIDE
0             PHTHALIMIDE DERIVATIVE PESTICIDES, FLAMMABLE, LIQUID, TOXIC,
              n.o.s., flash point between 23C and 61C
0             PHTHALIMIDE DERIVATIVE PESTICIDES, FLAMMABLE, LIQUID, TOXIC,
              n.o.s., flash point less than 23C
0             PHTHALIMIDE DERIVATIVE PESTICIDES, LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
0             PHTHALIMIDE DERIVATIVE PESTICIDES, SOLID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
100 626175    m-PHTHALODINITRILE
100 84800     PHYLLOQUINONE
100 57476     PHYSOSTIGMINE
100 57647     PHYSOSTIGMINE, SALICYLATE (1:1)
0   1918021   PICLORAM
10  1333411   PICOLINE
100 109068    2-PICOLINE
100 104905    2-PICOLINE, 5-ETHYL-
10  63868826  PICRAMIC ACID, ZIRCONIUM SALT
0   88891     PICRIC ACID
1             PICRITE, with greater than 20% WATER
100 124878    PICROTOXIN
10  28324529  PINANE HYDROPEROXIDE
100 83261     PINDONE
10  80568     alpha-PINENE
10  1330161   PINENE
100 8002093   PINE OIL
100 110850    PIPERAZINE
100 7209383   PIPERAZINE,1,4-BIS(3-AMINOPROPYL)--
500 142643    PIPERAZINE DIHYDROCHLORIDE
100 140318    1-PIPERAZINEETHANAMINE
10  6094402   PIPERAZINE HYDROCHLORIDE
10  110894    PIPERIDINE
10  766096    PIPERIDINE, 1-ETHYL-
10  626675    PIPERIDINE, 1-METHYL-
0   100754    PIPERIDINE, 1-NITROSO-
100 5281130   PIPROTAL
0   23103982  PIRIMICARB
0   23505411  PIRIMPHOS-ETHYL
100 83261     PIVAL
10            PLASTICS MOULDING materials, evolving FLAMMABLE VAPORS
10            PLASTICS, NITROCELLULOSE BASED, SPONTANEOUSLY COMBUSTIBLE
1   16919587  PLATINATE (2-), HEXACHLORO-, DIAMMONIUM
100 16941121  PLATINATE, HEXACHLORO-, DIHYDROGEN-
0   16921305  PLATINATE (2-), HEXACHLORO-, DIPOTASSIUM,
100 1307820   PLATINATE (2-), HEXACHLORO-DISODIUM, TETRAHYDRATE
100 13820412  PLATINATE (2-), TETRACHLORO-, DIAMMONIUM
100 10025997  PLATINATE, TETRACHLORO-, DIPOTASSIUM,
100 16941121  PLATINIC CHLORIDE
0   10025657  PLATINOUS CHLORIDE
10  7440064   PLATINUM
0   13454961  PLATINUM TETRACHLORIDE
0   78002     PLUMBANE, TETRAETHYL
0   75741     PLUMBANE, TETRAMETHYL
10            POISONOUS LIQUID or GAS, FLAMMABLE, n.o.s.
10            POISONOUS LIQUID or GAS, n.o.s.
10            POISONOUS LIQUIDS, CORROSIVE, n.o.s.
10            POISONOUS LIQUIDS, FLAMMABLE, n.o.s.
10            POISONOUS LIQUIDS, n.o.s., OR POISON B LIQUIDS
10            POISONOUS SOLIDS, CORROSIVE, n.o.s.
10            POISONOUS SOLIDS, FLAMMABLE, n.o.s.
10            POISONOUS SOLIDS, n.o.s.
0   67774327  POLYBROMINATED BIPHENYLS
0   59536651  POLYBROMINATED BIPHENYLS
0   1336363   POLYCHLORINATED BIPHENYLS
10            POLYNUCLEAR AROMATIC HYDROCARBONS
10            POLYSTYRENE BEADS, EXPANDED, mixture with FLAMMABLE LIQUID
10  7440097   POTASSIUM
0   7784410   POTASSIUM ARSENATE
0   10124502  POTASSIUM ARSENITE
0   7778509   POTASSIUM BICHROMATE
100 7789299   POTASSIUM BIFLUORIDE
100 7646937   POTASSIUM BISULFIDE
100           POTASSIUM BISULFITE solution
10  13762511  POTASSIUM BOROHYDRIDE
10  7758012   POTASSIUM BROMATE
10  3811049   POTASSIUM CHLORATE
0   7789006   POTASSIUM CHROMATE
100           POTASSIUM CUPROCYANIDE
0   151508    POTASSIUM CYANIDE
10  2244215   POTASSIUM DICHLOROISOCYANURATE
0   7778509   POTASSIUM DICHROMATE
10            POTASSIUM DITHIONITE
100 7789233   POTASSIUM FLUORIDE
100 7789299   POTASSIUM FLUORIDE
100 23745860  POTASSIUM FLUOROACETATE
0   16921305  POTASSIUM HEXACHLOROPLATINATE
100 16871902  POTASSIUM HEUAFLUOROSILICATE
100 7789299   POTASSIUM HYDROGEN FLUORIDE
100 7646937   POTASSIUM HYDROGEN SULFATE
10  14293733  POTASSIUM HYDROSULFITE
100 1310583   POTASSIUM HYDROXIDE
100 7778667   POTASSIUM HYPOCHLORITE
10  13769432  POTASSIUM METAVANADATE
10  7757791   POTASSIUM NITRATE
10            POTASSIUM NITRATE and SODIUM NITRITE, mixture
0   7758090   POTASSIUM NITRITE
100 12136457  POTASSIUM OXIDE
10  7778747   POTASSIUM PERCHLORATE
0   7722647   POTASSIUM PERMANGANAT
1   17014710  POTASSIUM PEROXIDE
10  7727211   POTASSIUM PERSULFATE
10  20770416  POTASSIUM PHOSPHIDE
1             POTASSIUM SALTS OF NITRO-AROMATIC DERIVATIVES, explosive
100 7790592   POTASSIUM SELENATE
10  10431477  POTASSIUM SELENITE
100 16871902  POTASSIUM SILICOFLUORIDE
100 506616    POTASSIUM SILVER CYANIDE
10  11135812  POTASSIUM-SODIUM ALLOY
1   1312738   POTASSIUM SULFIDE
10  12030885  POTASSIUM SUPEROXIDE
100 1002 5997 POTASSIUM TETRACHLOROPLATINATE
100 591899    POTASSIUM TETRACYANOMERCURATE (II)
0   2955386   PRAZEPAM
0   50248     PREDNISOLONE
0   53032     PREDNISONE
0   50248     PREGNA-1,4-DIENE-3,2O-DIONE, 11,17,21-TRIHYDROXY-, (11beta)-
0   53032     PREGNA-1,4-DIENE-3,11,20-TRIONE, 17,21-DIHYDROXY
0   57830     PREGN-4-ENE-3,20-DIONE
0   671169    PROCARBAZINE
0   366701    PROCARBAZINE HYDROCHLORIDE
0   57830     PROGESTERONE
100 2631370   PROMECARS
0   23950585  PRONAMIDE
10  463490    PROPADIENE
10  463490    1,2-PROPADIENE
10  123386    PROPANAL
10  78842     PROPANAL, 2-METHYL-
0   116063    PROPANAL, 2-METHYL-2-(METHYLTHIO)-, 0- ((METHYLAMINO)CARBONYL)-
              OXIME
10  3268493   PROPANAL, 3-(METHYLTHIO)-
10  107108    1-PROPANAMINE
10  75310     2-PROPANAMINE
10  78819     1-PROPANAMINE, 2-METHYL-
10  108189    2-PROPANAMINE, N-(1-METHYLETHYL)-
10  926636    1-PROPANAMINE, N,N-DIMETHYL-
100 102692    1-PROPANAMINE, N,N-DIPROPYL-
10  142847    1-PROPANAMINE, N-PROPYL-
10  74986     PROPANE
0   621647    1-PROPANEAMINE N-NITROSO, N-PROPYL-
10  26446775  PROPANE, BROMO-
10  78773     PROPANE, 1-BROMO-2-METHYL
10  507197    PROPANE, 2-BROMO-2-METHYL
100 600259    PROPANE, 1-CHLORO-I-NITRO-
10  78900     1,2-PROPANEDIAMINE
100 56188     1,3-PROPANEDIAMINE, N-(3-AMINOPROPYL)-
100 104789    1,3-PROPANEDIAMINE, N,N-DIETHYL-
0   96128     PROPANE, 1,2-DIBROMO-3-CHLORO-
0   78875     PROPANE, 1,2-DICHLORO-
10  463821    PROPANE, 2,2-DIMETHYL
100 109773    PROPANEDINITRILE
0   2698411   PROPANEDINITRILE, (2-CHLOROPHENYL)METHYLENE-
1   8066339   1,3-PROPANEDIOL, 2,2-BIS (NITROOXY)METHYL-, DINITRATE (ESTER),
              mixture with 2-METHYL-1,3,5-TRINITROBENZENE
100 6423434   1,2-PROPANEDIOL, DINITRATE
0   57534     1,3-PROPANEDIOL, 2-METHYL-2-PROPYL-, DICARBAMATE
10  109535    PROPANE, 1-(ETHENYLOXY)-2-METHYL-
10  628320    PROPANE, 1-ETHOXY-
10  26914023  PROPANE, IODO-
10  110781    PROPANE, 1-ISOCYANATO-
10  1795488   PROPANE, 2-ISOCYANATO-
10  1873296   PROPANE, 1-ISOCYANATO-2-METHYL-
10  1609865   PROPANE, 2-ISOCYANATO-2-METHYL-
10  557175    PROPANE, 1-METHOXY-
10  75285     PROPANE, 2-METHYL-
10  68476857  PROPANE MIXTURES
10  107120    PROPANENITRILE
1   78671     PROPANENITRILE, 2,2'-AZOBIS 2-METHYL-
100 75865     PROPANENITRILE, 2-HYDROXY-2-METHYL-
10  78820     PROPANENITRILE, 2-METHYL-
10  108032    PROPANE, 1-NITRO-
0   79469     PROPANE, 2-NITRO-
500 76197     PROPANE, OCTAFLUORO--
10  111433    PROPANE, 1,1'-OXYBIS--
10  108203    PROPANE, 2,2'-OXYBIS--
100 108601    PROPANE, 2,2'-OXYBIS 1-CHLORO-
10  927071    PROPANEPEROXOIC ACID, 2,2-DIMETHYL-, 1,1-DIMETHYLETHYL ESTER
10  109137    PROPANEPEROXOIC ACID, 2-METHYL-, 1,1-DIMETHYLETHYL ESTER
0   1120714   PROPANE SULTONE
10  79869582  PROPANETHIOL
10  107039    1-PROPANETHIOL
10  75332     2-PROPANETHIOL
100 1185575   1,2,3-PROPANETRICARBOXYLIC ACID, 2-HYDROXY-, AMMONIUM IRON(III)
              SALT
100 3012655   1,2,3-PROPANETRICARBOXYLIC ACID, 2-HYDROXY-, DIAMMONIUM SALT
0   96184     PROPANE, 1,2,3-TRICHLORO-
0   55630     1,2,3-PROPANETRIOL, TRINITRATE
100 79094     PROPANOIC ACID
100 123626    PROPANOIC ACID, ANHYDRIDE
10  590012    PROPANOIC ACID, BUTYL ESTER
100 28554009  PROPANOIC ACID, CHLORO-
100 535137    PROPANOIC ACID, 2-CHLORO-, ETHYL ESTER
10  17639939  PROPANOIC ACID, 2-CHLORO-, METHYL ESTER
100 75990     PROPANOIC ACID, 2,2-DICHLORO-
10  105373    PROPANOIC ACID, ETHYL ESTER
100 58164888  PROPANOIC ACID, 2-HYDROXY-, ANTIMONY(3+) SALT (3:1)
100 138227    PROPANOIC ACID, 2-HYDROXY-, BUTYL ESTER
500 97643     PROPANOIC ACID, 2-HYDROXY-, ETHYL ESTER
100 79425     PROPANOIC ACID, 2-MERCAPTO-
100 79312     PROPANOIC ACID, 2-METHYL-
100 97723     PROPANOIC ACID, 2-METHYL-, ANHYDRIDE
10  554121    PROPANOIC ACID, METHYL ESTER
10  637785    PROPANOIC ACID, 1-METHYLETHYL ESTER
10  97621     PROPANOIC ACID, 2-METHYL-, ETHYL ESTER
10  617505    PROPANOIC ACID, 2-METHYL-, 1-METHYLETHYL ESTER
500 97858     PROPANOIC ACID, 2-METHYL-, 2-METHYLPROPYL ESTER
10  540421    PROPANOIC ACID, 2-METHYLPROPYL ESTER
10  71238     1-PROPANOL
100 78897     1-PROPANOL, 2-CHLORO-
10  627305    1-PROPANOL, 3-CHLORO-
0   126727    1-PROPANOL, 2,3-DIBROMO-, PHOSPHATE (3:1)
0   96231     2-PROPANOL, 1,3-DICHLORO-
100 107982    PROPANOL, METHOXY-
100 34590948  PROPANOL, (2-METHOXYMETHYLETHOXY)-
10  78831     1-PROPANOL, 2-METHYL-
10  67641     2-PROPANONE
0   534076    2-PROPANONE, 1,3-DICHLORO-
0   116165    2-PROPANONE, 1,1,1,3,3,3-HEXACHLORO-
10  684162    2-PROPANONE, 1,1,1,3,3,3-HEXAFLUORO-
100 10543950  2-PROPANONE, 1,1,1,3,3,3-HEXAFLUORO-, MONOHYDRATE
10  79038     PROPANOYL CHLORIDE
100 3282302   PROPANOYL CHLORIDE, 2,2-DIMETHYL-
10  79301     PROPANOYL CHLORIDE, 2-METHYL
100 2312358   PROPARGITE
10  107197    PROPARGYL ALCOHOL
1   106967    PROPARGYL BROMIDE-
0   107028    2-PROPENAL
0   78853     2-PROPENAL, 2-METHYL-
0   79061     2-PROPENAMIDE
500 107119    2-PROPEN-1-AMINE
100 102705    2-PROPEN-1-AMINE, N,N-DI-2-PROPENYL-
100 124027    2-PROPEN-1-AMINE, N-2-PROPENYL-
10  115071    1-PROPENE
10  106956    1-PROPENE, 3-BROMO-
10  557982    PROPENE, 2-CHLORO-
0   107051    1-PROPENE, 3-CHLORO-
0   563473    1-PROPENE, 3-CHLORO-2-METHYL
0   542756    1-PROPENE-1,3-DICHLORO-
10  3054953   1-PROPENE, 3,3-DIETHOXY-
1   557313    1-PROPENE, 3-ETHOXY-
500 116154    1-PROPENE, 1,1,2,3,3,3-HEXAFLUORO-
10  556569    1-PROPENE, 3-IODO-
0   57067     1-PROPENE, 3-ISOTHIOCYANATO-
10  115117    1-PROPENE, 2-METHYL-
500 7756947   1-PROPENE, 2-METHYL-, TRIMER
0   107131    2-PROPENENITRILE
10  126987    2-PROPENENITRILE, 2-METHYL-
10  557404    1-PROPENE, 3,3'-OXYBIS-
10  1931620   2-PROPENEPEROXOIC ACID, 3-CARBOXY-, 1-(1,1-DIMETHYLETHYL) ESTER,
              (Z)
10  13987014  1-PROPENE, TRIMER
1   79107     2-PROPENOIC ACID
100 141322    2-PROPENOIC ACID, BUTYL ESTER
100 137053    2-PROPENOIC ACID, 2-CYANO-, METHYL ESTER
0   140885    2-PROPENOIC ACID, ETHYL ESTER
1   79414     2-PROPENOIC ACID, 2-METHYL-
100 97881     2-PROPENOIC ACID, 2-METHYL-, BUTYL ESTER
100 2867472   2-PROPENOIC ACID, 2-METHYL-, 2-(DIMETHYLAMINO)ETHYL ESTER
0   96333     2-PROPENOIC ACID, METHYL ESTER
0   97632     2-PROPENOIC ACID, 2-METHYL-, ETHYL ESTER
0   80626     2-PROPENOIC ACID, 2-METHYL-, METHYL ESTER
10  97869     2-PROPENOIC ACID, 2-METHYL-, 2-METHYLPROPYL ESTER
10  106638    2-PROPENOIC ACID, 2-METHYLPROPYL ESTER
0   107186    2-PROPEN-1-OL
10  108225    1-PROPEN-2-OL, ACETATE
10  513428    2-PROPEN-1-OL, 2-METHYL-
0   57578     beta-PROPIOLACTONE
10  123386    PROPIONALDEHYDE
100 79094     PROPIONIC ACID
10  40058875  PROPIONIC ACID, 2-CHLORO-1-METHYLETHYL ESTER
0   93721     PROPIONIC ACID, 2-(2,4,5-TRICHLORO-PHENOXY)-
100 6047172   PROPIONIC ACID, 3-(2,4,5) TRICHLORO-PHENOXY-3-BUTOXY-PROPYL ESTER
10  73826296  PROPIONIC ACID, 2-(2,4,5) TRICHLORO-PHENOXY)-,p-CHLORO- PHENACYL
              ESTER
100 123626    PROPIONIC ANHYDRIDE
10  107120    PROPIONITRILE
100 542767    PROPIONITRILE, 3-CHLORO-
0   21725462  PROPIONITRILE, 2-((4-CHLORO-6-(ETHYLAMINO)-1,3,5-TRIAZIN-2-YL)AM-
              2-METHYL-
10  1738256   PROPIONITRILE, 3-(DIMETHYLAMINO)
10  79038     PROPIONYL CHLORIDE
1   3248280   PROPIONYL PEROXIDE
100 70699     PROPIOPHENONE, 4-AMINO-
0   114261    PROPOXUR
10  109604    n-PROPYL ACETATE
10  71238     PROPYL ALCOHOL
0   67630     sec-PROPYL ALCOHOL
10  107108    PROPYLAMINE
10  103651    PROPYL BENZENE
10  540545    PROPYL CHLORIDE
100 109615    PROPYLCHLOROFORMATE
10  115071    PROPYLENE
100 78897     PROPYLENE CHLOROHYDRIN
10  78900     PROPYLENEDIAMINE
0   78875     PROPYLENE DICHLORIDE
100 1331175   PROPYLENE GLYCOL, ALLYL ETHER
100 6423434   PROPYLENE GLYCOL DINITRATE
100 107982    PROPYLENE GLYCOL MONOMETHYL ETHER
0   75558     PROPYLENEIMINE
0   75569     PROPYLENE OXIDE
10  6842155   PROPYLENE TETRAMER
10  111433    PROPYL ETHER
10  110747    PROPYL FORMATE
10  110781    PROPYL ISOCYANATE
10  107039    PROPYL MERCAPTAN
1   627134    n-PROPYL NITRATE
0   51525     6-PROPYL-2-THIOURACIL
10  141571    PROPYL TRICHLOROSILANE
10  74997     1-PROPYNE
1   106967    PROPYNE, 3-BROMO-
10  107197    2-PROPYN-1-OL
100 2275185   PROTHOATE
100 95636     PSEUDOCUMENE
0   446866    1H-PURINE, 6- (1-METHYL-4-NITRO-1H-IMIDAZOL-5-YL)THIO-
10  110872    2H-PYRAN, 3,4-DIHYDRO-
0   129000    PYRENE
100 121299    PYRETHRINS
100 121211    PYRETHRINS
100 8003347   PYRETHRINS and PYRETHROIDS
100 8003347   PYRETHRUM
100 504290    2-PYRIDINAMINE
100 462088    3-PYRIDINAMINE
10  110861    PYRIDINE
100 504245    PYRIDINE, 4-AMINO
0   1918021   2-PYRIDINECARBOXYLIC ACID, 4-AMINO-3,5,6-TRICHLORO-
100 109091    PYRIDINE, 2-CHLORO-
100 1929824   PYRIDINE, 2-CHLORO-6-
0   136403    2,6-PYRIDINEDIAMINE, 3-(PHENYLAZO)-, MONOHYDROCHLORIDE
10  1333411   PYRIDINE, METHYL-
500 2820511   PYRIDINE, 3-(1-METHYL-2-PYRROLIDINYL)-, HYDROCHLORIDE, (S)-
0   54115     PYRIDINE, 3-(1-METHYL-2-PYRROLIDINYL)-, (S)-
100 3275738   PYRIDINE, 3-(1-METHYL-2-PYRROLIDINYL)-, (S)-, R-(R*,R*)-2,3-
              DIHYDROXY BUTAN EDIOATE
100 65305     PYRIDINE, 3-(1-METHYL-2-PYRROLIDINYL)-, (S)-, SULFATE
100 140761    PYRIDINE, 2-METHYL-5-VINYL-
0   1124330   PYRIDINE, 4-NITRO-, 1-OXIDE
10  694053    PYRIDINE, 1,2,3,6-TETRAHYDRO-
10  137882    PYRIDINIUM, 1- (4-AMINO-2-PROPYL-5-PYRIMIDINYL)METHYL-2-METHYL
              CHLORIDE, MONOHYDROCHLORIDE
500 2971906   4-PYRIDINOL, 3,5-DICHLORO-2,6-DIMETHYL-
100 535897    PYRIMIDINE, 2-CHLORO-4-(DIMETHYLAMINO)-6-METHYL-
0   738705    2,4-PYRIMIDINEDIAMINE, 5-((3,4,5-TRIMETHOXY-PHENYL)METHYL)-
0   66751     2,4(1H,3H)-PYRIMIDINEDIONE, 5- BIS(2-CHLOROETHYL)AMINO-
0   314409    2,4(1H,3H)-PYRIMIDINEDIONE, 5-BROMO-6-METHYL-3-(1- METHYLPROPYL)-
0   51218     2,4(1H,3H)-PYRIMIDINEDIONE, 5-fluoro-
0   56042     4(1H)-PYRIMIDINONE, 2,3-DIHYDRO-6-METHYL-2-THIOXO-
0   51525     4(1H)-PYRIMIDINONE, 2,3-DIHYDRO-6-PROPYL-2-THIOXO-
100 53558251  PYRIMINIL
0   120809    PYROCATECHOL
100           PYROPHORIC FUEL, n.o.s.
10            PYROPHORIC LIQUIDS, n.o.s.
10            PYROPHORIC METALS OR ALLOYS, n.o.s.
10            PYROPHORIC SOLIDS, n.o.s.
10            PYROSULFURIC ACID
10  7791277   PYROSULPHURYL CHLORIDE
10  123751    PYRROLIDINE
0   69056     QUINACRINE HYDROCHLORIDE
0   91225     QUINOLINE
0   56575     QUINOLINE, 4-NITRO-, 1-OXIDE
0   106514    QUINONE
100 82688     QUINTOZENE
100 75718     R-12
500 75456     R-22
0             RADIOACTIVE SUBSTANCES (see Section 100 of Regulations)
500           RAGS, OILY
500           RARE GASES, MIXTURES
500           RARE GASES, MIXTURES WITH NITROGEN
10            RARE GASES, MIXTURES WITH OXYGEN
1   121824    RDX
100           RED SQUILL
10            REDUCING LIQUID
500           REFRIGERANT GASES, n.o.s.
10            REFRIGERANT GAS, FLAMMABLE, n.o.s.
10            REMOVING LIQUID
0   50555     RESERPINE
10  61789659  RESIN ACIDS and ROSIN ACIDS, ALUMINUM SALTS
10  9007130   RESIN ACIDS and ROSIN ACIDS, CALCIUM SALTS
10            RESIN' FAST BLACK WP
10            RESIN OIL
10            RESIN SOLUTION
10            RESIN SOLUTION, POISONOUS
0   108463    RESORCINOL
0   101906    RESORCINOL DIGLYCIDYL ETHER
1   82713     RESORCINOL, 2,4,6-TRINITRO
10  7440166   RHODIUM
100 10049077  RHODIUM (III) CHLORIDE (1:3)
100 10049077  RHODIUM TRICHLORIDE
500 8052424   ROAD ASPHALT, LIQUID
10            ROAD FLARES
10            ROAD OIL
100           RODENTICIDES, LIQUID or SOLID, n.o.s.
0   299843    RONNEL
500 8002162   ROSIN OIL
100 83794     ROTENONE
100 3691358   ROZOL
10            RUBBER SCRAP, POWDERED or GRANULATED
10            RUBBER SOLUTION
10  8032324   RUBBER SOLVENT
10  7440177   RUBIDIUM
100 1310823   RUBIDIUM HYDROXIDE
0   81072     SACCHARIN
0   94597     SAFROLE
500 14167181  SALCOMINE
10  107448    SARIN
10            SEED CAKE, CONTAINING VEGETABLE OIL, less than 1.5% OIL and
              greater than 11% MOISTURE
10            SEED CAKE, CONTAINING VEGETABLE OIL, MECHANICALLY EXPELLED
              greater than 10% of OIL or more than 20% of oil and MOISTURE
10            SEED CAKE, CONTAINING VEGETABLE OIL, SOLVENT EXTRACTIONS less
              than 10% of OIL or more than 20% of oil and MOISTURE
10            SELENATES, n.o.s., or SELENITES, n.o.s.
100 7783086   SELENIC ACID
10  14019911  SELENIC ACID, CALCIUM SALT (1:1)
0   13410010  SELENIC ACID, DISODIUM SALT
100 7791233   SELENINYL CHLORIDE
100 7783008   SELENIOUS ACID
0   10102188  SELENIOUS ACID, DISODIUM SALT
100 7782492   SELENIUM
10            SELENIUM compounds
0   7446084   SELENIUM DIOXIDE
100 7488564   SELENIUM DISULFIDE
100 7783791   SELENIUM FLUORIDE
100 7783791   SELENIUM HEXAFLUORIDE
0   7446084   SELENIUM OXIDE
100 7791233   SELENIUM OXYCHLORIDE
0   7446346   SELENIUM SULFIDE
100 7783008   SELENOUS ACID
1             SELF-REACTIVE SUBSTANCES, TRIAL QUANTITIES, n.o.s.
1             SELF-REACTIVE SUBSTANCES, SAMPLES, n.o.s.
500 563417    SEMICARBAZIDE HYDROCHLORIDE
0   115026    L-SERINE, DIAZOACETATE (ESTER)
100 136787    SESONE
0   68308349  SHALE OIL
10  9000593   SHELLAC
10  7803625   SILANE
100 3037727   SILANE, (4-AMINOBUTYL)DIETHOXYMETHYL-
10  7521804   SILANE, BUTYLTRICHLORO
100 993000    SILANE, CHLOROMETHYL-
0   75774     SILANE, CHLOROTRIMETHYL-
10  10137696  SILANE, (3-CYCLOHEXENYL)TRICHLORO-
10  4109960   SILANE, DICHLORO-
10  1719535   SILANE, DICHLORODIETHYL-
100 80104     SILANE, DICHLORODIPHENYL-
10  1789588   SILANE, DICHLOROETHYL-
100 1125275   SILANE, DICHLOROETHYLPHENYL-
10  75547     SILANE, DICHLOROMETHYL-
10  149746    SILANE, DICHLOROMETHYLPHENYL-
10  78626     SILANE, DIETHOXYDIMETHYL-
10  75763     SILANE, TETRAMETHYL-
10  10026047  SILANE, TETRACHLORO-
100 7783611   SILANE, TETRAFLUORO-
10  10025782  SILANE, TRICHLORO-
10  98124     SILANE, TRICHLOROCYCLOHEXYL-
10  27137855  SILANE, TRICHLORO(DICHLOROPHENYL)-
100 4484724   SILANE, TRICHLORODODECYL-
10  75945     SILANE, TRICHLOROETHENYL-
10  115219    SILANE, TRICHLOROETHYL-
10  928654    SILANE, TRICHLOROHEXYL-
10  75796     SILANE, TRICHLOROMETHYL-
100 5283670   SILANE, TRICHLORONONYL-
100 112049    SILANE, TRICHLORODATADECYL-
10  5283669   SILANE, TRICHLOROOCTYL-
10  107722    SILANE, TRICHLOROPENTYL-
10  98135     SILANE, TRICHLOROPHENYL-
10  107379    SILANE, TRICHLORO-2-PROPENYL-
10  141571    SILANE, TRICHLOROPROPYL-
10  26571799  SILANE, TRICHLORO(CHLOROPHENYL)-
10  16961834  SILICATE (2-), HEXAFLUORO-, DIHYDROGEN
100 16871902  SILICATE (2-), HEXAFLUORO-, DIPOTASSIUM
100 16893859  SILICATE (2-), HEXAFLUORO-, DISODIUM
100 18972560  SILICATE (2-), HEXAFLUORO-, MAGNESIUM
500 16871719  SILICATE (2-), HEXAFLUORO-, ZINC (1:1)
100 78104     SILICIC ACID, TETRAETHYL ESTER
10  681845    SILICIC ACID, TETRAMETHYL ESTER
10  16961834  SILICOFLUORIC ACID
10            SILICOFLUORIDES, n.o.s.
10  10026047  SILICON TETRACHLORIDE
100 7783611   SILICON TETRAFLUORIDE
10  7803625   SILICON TETRAHYDRIDE
10  7440224   SILVER
10            SILVER compounds
0   7784089   SILVER ARSENITE
100 506649    SILVER CYANIDE
0   7761888   SILVER NITRATE
1   146849    SILVER PICRATE
100 64742241  SLUDGE ACID
1             SMOKELESS POWDER, SMALL ARMS
100 8006288   SODA LIME
10  7440235   SODIUM
100 11138491  SODIUM ALUMINATE
100 15096523  SODIUM ALUMINUM FLUORIDE
10  13770962  SODIUM ALUMINUM HYDRIDE
100 11138491  SODIUM ALUMINUM OXIDE
10  11110524  SODIUM AMALGAM
1   7782925   SODIUM AMIDE
100 13718268  SODIUM AMMONIUM VANADATE
500 128563    SODIUM ANTHRAQUINONE-1-SULFONATE
100 127855    SODIUM ARSANILATE
0   7631892   SODIUM ARSENATE
0   7784465   SODIUM ARSENITE
0   26628228  SODIUM AZIDE
0   10588019  SODIUM BICHROMATE
100 1333831   SODIUM BIFLUORIDE
100 7681381   SODIUM BISULFATE
0   16721805  SODIUM BISULFIDE
0   7631905   SODIUM BISULFITE
500 1303964   SODIUM BORATES
10  16940662  SODIUM BOROHYDRIDE
10  7789380   SODIUM BROMATE
100 124652    SODIUM CACODYLATE
0   7775099   SODIUM CHLORATE
1   7758192   SODIUM CHLORITE
100 3926623   SODIUM CHLOROACETATE
100 1307820   SODIUM CHLOROPLATINATE
0   7775113   SODIUM CHROMATE
10            SODIUM CUPROCYANIDE SOLID
10            SODIUM CUPROCYANIDE SOLUTION
0   143339    SODIUM CYANIDE
1             SODIUM 2-DIAZO-1-NAPHTHOL-4-SULFONATE
10            SODIUM 2-DIAZO-1-NAPHTHOL-5-SULFONATE
0   2893789   SODIUM DICHLORO-ISOCYANATE
0   2893789   SODIUM DICHLORO-S-TRIAZINETRIONE
0   10588019  SODIUM DICHROMATE
1   2312767   SODIUM DINITRO-ortho-CRESOLATE
10  7775146   SODIUM DITHIONITE
100 25155300  SODIUM DODECYLBENZENE SULFONATE
100 15096523  SODIUM FLUOALUMINATE
100 1333831   SODIUM FLUORIDE
0   7681494   SODIUM FLUORIDE
0             SODIUM FLUORIDES
0   62748     SODIUM FLUOROACETATE
100 16893859  SODIUM FLUOROSILICATE
100 1307820   SODIUM HEXACHLOROPLATINATE (VI)
10  7646697   SODIUM HYDRIDE
100 1313831   SODIUM HYDROGEN FLUORIDE
100 7681381   SODIUM HYDROGEN SULFATE
0   16721805  SODIUM HYDROSULFIDE
100 1310732   SODIUM HYDROXIDE
0   7681529   SODIUM HYPOCHLORITE
10  10022705  SODIUM HYPOCHLORITE
0   7681574   SODIUM METABISULFITE
10  124414    SODIUM METHOXIDE
10  124414    SODIUM METHYLATE
10  12401864  SODIUM MONOXIDE
0   7631994   SODIUM NITRATE
0   7632000   SODIUM NITRITE
10            SODIUM NITRITE and POTASSIUM NITRATE mixtures
10  12401864  SODIUM OXIDE
100 131522    SODIUM PENTACHLOROPHENATE
10  15630894  SODIUM PERCARBONATE
10  3313926   SODIUM PERCARBONATE
10  4452588   SODIUM PERCARBONATE
10  7601890   SODIUM PERCHLORATE
10  10101505  SODIUM PERMANGANATE
10  1313606   SODIUM PEROXIDE
10  7775271   SODIUM PERSULFATE
100 139026    SODIUM PHENOLATE
100 139026    SODIUM PHENOXIDE
500 10140655  SODIUM PHOSPHATE, DIBASIC
500 10039324  SODIUM PHOSPHATE, DIBASIC
100 7558794   SODIUM PHOSPHATE, DIBASIC
500 7758294   SODIUM PHOSPHATE, TRIBASIC
500 10124568  SODIUM PHOSPHATE, TRIBASIC
500 10101890  SODIUM PHOSPHATE, TRIBASIC
500 10361894  SODIUM PHOSPHATE, TRIBASIC
100 7601549   SODIUM PHOSPHATE, TRIBASIC
500 7765844   SODIUM PHOSPHATE, TRIBASIC
100 12058854  SODIUM PHOSPHIDE
10  831527    SODIUM PICRAMATE, WET, greater than 20% water
10  11135812  SODIUM-POTASSIUM ALLOY
10            SODIUM SALTS OF NITRO-AROMATIC DERIVATIVES, n.o.s.
0   13410010  SODIUM SELENATE
0   10102188  SODIUM SELENITE
0   7782823   SODIUM SELENITE
500 77577826  SODIUM SULFATE, solution
10  1313822   SODIUM SULFIDE
10  12034127  SODIUM SUPEROXIDE
0   10102202  SODIUM TELLURITE
100 13718268  SODIUM VANADATE
10            SPENT MIXED ACID
0   8025818   SPIRAMYCIN
10            STAIN
100 56360     STANNANE, ACETOXYTRIBUTYL
100 900958    STANNANE, ACETOXYTRIPHENYL-
500 994310    STANNANE, CHLOROTRIETHYL
100 639587    STANNANE, CHLOROTRIPHENYL
0   76879     STANNANE, HYDROXYTRIPHENYL
100 7646788   STANNANE, TETRACHLORO-
100 13121705  STANNANE, TRICYCLOHEXYLHYDROXY-
100 7646788   STANNIC CHLORIDE
100 10026069  STANNIC CHLORIDE, HYDRATED
10  25324565  STANNIC PHOSPHIDE
0   7772998   STANNOUS CHLORIDE
100 7783473   STANNOUS FLUORIDE
1   9056386   STARCH, NITRATE
10            STEEL SWARF
100 7803523   STIBINE
10  7789619   STIBINE, TRIBROMO-
10  10025919  STIBINE, TRICHLORO-
100 7783564   STIBINE, TRIFLUORO-
100 8052413   STODDARD SOLVENT
500 59018     D-STREPTAMINE, O-3-AMINO-3-DEOXY-alpha-D-GL000PYRANOSYL-(1-6)-
              ortho (6-AMINO-6-DEOXY-alpha-D-GL000PYRANOSYL-(1-4))-2-DEOXY-
              STREPTAMINE, 0-beta-D-MANNOPYRANOSYL-(1-4)-2-DEOXY-2-
0   128461    (METHYLAMINO)-alpha-L-GL000PYRANO-SYL-(1-2)-5-DEOXY-0-3-C-
              (HYDROXYMETHYL)-alpha-L-LYXOFURANOSYL-(1-4)-N,N'-DIAMIDINO-, 1)
0   57921     STREPTOMYCIN
0   18883664  STREPTOZOCIN
10  7440246   STRONTIUM
100 15195069  STRONTIUM ARSENITE
10  7791108   STRONTIUM CHLORATE
0   7789062   STRONTIUM CHROMATE
10  10042769  STRONTIUM NITRATE
10  13450970  STRONTIUM PERCHLORATE
10  1314187   STRONTIUM PEROXIDE
500 12504131  STRONTIUM PHOSPHIDE
100 1314961   STRONTIUM SULFIDE
100 57249     STRYCHNIDIN-10-ONE
500 357573    STRYCHNIDIN-10-ONE, 2,3-DIMETHOXY-
100 57249     STRYCHNINE
100 60413     STRYCHNINE, SULFATE
1   82713     STYPHNIC ACID
0   100425    STYRENE MONOMER
0   96093     STYRENE OXIDE
10            SUBSTANCES, WHICH,WHEN IN CONTACT WITH WATER,EMIT FLAMMABLE
              GASES,n.o.s.
10            SUBSTITUTED NITROPHENOL PESTICIDES, LIQUID, FLAMMABLE, TOXIC,
              n.o.s., flash point less than 23C
10            SUBSTITUTED NITROPHENOL PESTICIDES, LIQUID, FLAMMABLE, TOXIC,
              n.o.s., flash point between 23C and 61C
10            SUBSTITUTED NITROPHENOL PESTICIDES, LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
10            SUBSTITUTED NITROPHENOL PESTICIDES, SOLID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
100 1395217   SUBTILISINS (Proteolytic Enzyme as 100% pure crystalline enzyme)
10  123239    SUCCINIC ACID PEROXIDE
100 110612    SUCCINONITRILE
0   95067     SULFALLATE
500 723466    SULFAMETHOXAZOLE
100 5329146   SULFAMIC ACID
1   7773060   SULFAMIC ACID, MONOAMMONIUM SALT
0   72140     SULFATHIAZOLE
100 3689245   SULFOTEPP
100 3569571   SULFOXIDE, 3-CHLOROPROPYL OCTYL
10  7704349   SULFUR
10  10025679  SULFUR CHLORIDE
0   7446095   SULFUR DIOXIDE
500 2551624   SULFUR FLUORIDE
10  7783600   SULFUR FLUORIDE
100 5714227   SULFUR FLUORIDE
500 2551624   SULFUR HEXAFLUORIDE
100 7664939   SULFURIC ACID
500 10043013  SULFURIC ACID, ALUMINUM SALT (3:2)
100 10045893  SULFURIC ACID, AMMONIUM IRON(II) SALT (2:2:1)
100 15699180  SULFURIC ACID, AMMONIUM NICKEL(2+) SALT (2:2:1)
100 14489259  SULFURIC ACID, CHROMIUM SALT
0   10101538  SULFURIC ACID, CHROMIUM(3+) SALT (3:2)
0   7758987   SULFURIC ACID, COPPER(II) SALT (1:1)
0   64675     SULFURIC ACID, DIETHYL ESTER
100 7783360   SULFURIC ACID, DIMERCURY(1+) SALT
0   77781     SULFURIC ACID, DIMETHYL ESTER
10  8014957   SULFURIC ACID, FUMING
0   7720787   SULFURIC ACID, IRON(2+) SALT (1:1)
100 10028225  SULFURIC ACID, IRON(III) SALT (3:2)
0   7446142   SULFURIC ACID, LEAD (2+) SALT 1:1
100 7783359   SULFURIC ACID, MERCURY(II) SALT (1:1)
10  8014957   SULFURIC ACID, mixture with SULFUR TRIOXIDE
100 7803636   SULFURIC ACID, MONOAMMONIUM SALT
100 7782787   SULFURIC ACID, MONOANHYDRIDE WITH NITROUS ACID
100 540829    SULFURIC ACID, MONOETHYL ESTER
100 7646937   SULFURIC ACID, MONOPOTASSIUM SALT
100 7681381   SULFURIC ACID, MONOSODIUM SALT
0   7786814   SULFURIC ACID, NICKEL(2+) SALT (1:1)
100 10031591  SULFURIC ACID, THALLIUM SALT
0   7733020   SULFURIC ACID, ZINC SALT (1:1)
100 14644612  SULFURIC ACID, ZIRCONIUM (4+) SALT (2:1)
10  12771083  SULFUR MONOCHLORIDE
100 13780035  SULFUROUS ACID, CALCIUM SALT (2:1)
0   140578    SULFUROUS ACID, 2-CHLOROETHYL 2- 4-(1,1- DIMETHYLETHYL)PHENOXY-1-
              METHYL ETHYL ESTER
100 10196040  SULFUROUS ACID, DIAMMONIUM SALT
100 2312358   SULFUROUS ACID, 2- 4-(1, l-DIMETHYLETHYL)PHENOXY CYCLOHEXYL 2-
              PROPYNYL ESTER
100 7782992   SULFUROUS ACID
100 10192300  SULFUROUS ACID, MONOAMMONIUM SALT
0   7631905   SULFUROUS ACID, MONOSODIUM SALT
100 7782992   SULFUROUS ACID SOLUTION
100 5714227   SULFUR PENTAFLUORIDE
10  7783600   SULFUR TETRAFLUORIDE
10  7446119   SULFUR TRIOXIDE
10  7791255   SULFURYL CHLORIDE
100 2699798   SULFURYL FLUORIDE
100 5329146   SULPHAMIC ACID
100 35400432  SULPROFOS
100 122101    SWAT
10  87901     SYMCLOSENE
0   93765     2,4,5-T
100 77816     TABUN
10  7440257   TANTALUM
0             TAR, liquid
500 50317     2,3,6-TBA
100 76039     TCA
0   1746016   TCDD
100           TEAR GAS CANDLES, NON-EXPLOSIVE
100           TEAR GAS (IRRITATING SUBSTANCES, liquid or solid), n.o.s.
0   13494809  TELLURIUM
100 7783804   TELLURIUM FLUORIDE
100 7783804   TELLURIUM HEXAFLUORIDE
100 846504    TEMAZEPAM
100 3383968   TEMEPHOS
100 107493    TEPP
100 13071799  TERBUFOS
100 100210    TEREPHTHALIC ACID
10  68956569  TERPENE HYDROCARBONS, n.o.s.
100 92068     m-TERPHENYL
100 84151     o-TERPHENYL
500 92944     p-TERPHENYL
500 586629    TERPINOLENE
10            tert-BUTYL HYDROPEROXIDE SOLUTION, maximum 80% in DI-tert-BUTYL
              PEROXIDE and solvent
10            tert-BUTYL PEROXYDIETHYL-ACETATE with tert-BUTYL PEROXYBENZOATE
10            tert-BUTYL PEROXYISONONANOATE
10            tert-BUTYL PEROXY-PHTHALATE
10            tert-BUTYL-2,4,6-TRINITRO-m-XYLENE
10            tert-OCTYL PEROXY-2-ETHYLHEXANOATE
0   58220     TESTOSTERONE
10  100970    1,3,5,7-TETRAAZATRICYCLO 3.3.1.13,7 DECANE
100 25167208  TETRABROMOETHANE
100 79276     TETRABROMOETHANE
500 95943     1,2,4,5-TETRACHLOROBENZENE
0   1746016   2,3,7,8-TETRACHLORODIBENZO-p-DIOXIN
100 76120     1,1,2,2-TETRACHLORO-1,2-DIFLUOROETHANE
500 76119     1,1,1,2-TETRACHLORO-2,2-DIFLUOROETHANE
100 630206    1,1,1,2-TETRACHLOROETHANE
0   79345     1,1,2,2-TETRACHLOROETHANE
0   127184    TETRACHLOROETHYLENE
500 1335882   TETRACHLORONAPHTHALENE
100 58902     2,3,4,6-TETRACHLOROPHENOL
10  117088    TETRACHLOROPHTHALIC ANHYDRIDE
0   961115    TETRACHLOROVINPHOS
0   60548     TETRACYCLINE
100 3689245   TETRAETHYL DITHIOPYRO-PHOSPHATE
0   112572    TETRAETHYLENEPENTAMINE
0   78002     TETRAETHYL LEAD
100 107493    TETRAETHYL PYROPHOSPHATE
100 78104     TETRAETHYL SILICATE
100 597648    TETRAETHYLTIN
10  116143    TETRAFLUOROETHYLENE
1   10036472  TETRAFLUOROHYDRAZINE
500 75730     TETRAFLUOROMETHANE
100 1321160   TETRAHYDROBENZALDEHYDE
10  110838    1,2,3,4-TETRAHYDROBENZENE
10  109999    TETRAHYDROFURAN
500 4795293   TETRAHYDROFURFURYLAMINE
100 85438     TETRAHYDROPHTHALIC ANHYDRIDE
10  694053    1,2,3,6-TETRAHYDROPYRIDINE
500 110010    TETRAHYDROTHIOPHENE
10  771299    TETRALIN HYDROPEROXIDE
100 75592     TETRAMETHYL AMMONIUM HYDROXIDE
10  5809085   1,1,3,3-TETRAMETHYL BUTYL HYDROPEROXIDE
10  22288433  1,1,3,3-TETRAMETHYLBUTYLPEROXY-2-ETHYL HEXANOATE,technical pure
0   90948     TETRAMETHYLDIAMINOBENZOPHENONE
0   75741     TETRAMETHYL LEAD
500 51809     TETRAMETHYLMETHYLENEDIAMINE
10  75763     TETRAMETHYL SILANE
100 3333526   TETRAMETHYL SUCCINONITRILE
1   53014372  TETRANITRO-ANILINE
10  509148    TETRANITROMETHANE
100 757584    TETRAPHOSPHORIC ACID, HEXAETHYL ESTER
10  3087374   TETRAPROPYLORTHOTITANATE
100 7722885   TETRASODIUM PYROPHOSPHATE
1   2691410   1,3,5,7-TETRAZOCINE, OCTAHYDRO-1,3,5,7-TETRANITRO
10  21732172  TETRAZOL-1-ACETIC ACID
10  21732172  1H-TETRAZOLE-1-ACETIC ACID
10  108623    1,3,5,7-TETROXOCANE, 2,4,6,8-TETRAMETHYL
1   479458    TETRYL
10            TEXTILE WASTE, WET, n.o.s.
100 1314325   THALLIC OXIDE
100 7440280   THALLIUM
100 563688    THALLIUM ACETATE
100 13453300  THALLIUM CHLORATE
10            THALLIUM compounds
10  10102451  THALLIUM NITRATE
10            THALLIUM SALT, n.o.s.
500 12039520  THALLIUM SELENIDE
100 10031591  THALLIUM SULFATE
0   6533739   THALLOUS CARBONATE
100 7791120   THALLOUS CHLORIDE
100 2757188   THALLOUS MALONATE
100 7446186   THALLOUS SULFATE
100 10031591  THALLOUS SULFATE
500 551166    4-THIA-1-AZABICYCLO 3.2.0 HEPTANE-2-CARBOXYLIC ACID, 6-AMINO-3,
              3-DIMETHYL-7-OXO-, 2S-(2 alpha,5 alpha,6 beta)-
              4-THIA-1-AZABICYCLO 3.2.0 HEPTANE-2-CARBOXYLIC ACID, 6-
100 69534     (AMINOPHENYL ACETYL)AMINO-3,3-DIMETHYL-7-OXO-, 2S-2alpha, 5alpha,
              6beta(S*)-
0   61336     4-THIA-1-AZABICYLCO 3.2.0 HEPTANE-2-CARBOXYLIC ACID, 3,3-
              DIMETHYL-7-OXO-6-(PHENYLACETYL)AMINO-2S-(2alpha,5alpha,6beta)-
10  3268493   4-THIAPENTANAL
10            THINNERS
0   62555     THIOACETAMIDE
10  507095    THIOACETIC ACID
100 4418660   2,2'-THIOBIS(4-CHLORO-6-METHYL)PHENOL
100 97187     2,2'-THIOBIS-4,6-DICHLORO-PHENOL
500 96695     4,4'-THIOBIS (6-tert BUTYL-m-CRESOL)
100 2231574   THIOCARBAZIDE
100 1762954   THIOCYANIC ACID, AMMONIUM SALT
100 21564170  THIOCYANIC ACID, (2-BENZOTHIAZOLYLTHIO)METHYL ESTER
100 112561    THIOCYANIC ACID, 2-(2-BUTOXYETHOXY)ETHYL ESTER
0   592870    THIOCYANIC ACID, LEAD(2+) SALT
100 592858    THIOCYANIC ACID, MERCURY (2+) SALT
0   139651    4,4'-THIODIANILINE
100 3689245   THIODIPHOSPHORIC ACID, O-TETRAETHYL ESTER
10  39196184  THIOFANOX
100           THIOGLYCOL
100 68111     THIOGLYCOLIC ACID
100 79425     THIOLACTIC ACID
0   640153    THIOMETON
100 297972    THIONAZIN
100 7719097   THIONYL CHLORIDE
0   97778     THIOPEROXYDICARBONIC DIAMIDE, TETRAETHYL-
0   137268    THIOPEROXYDICARBONIC DIAMIDE, TETRAMETHYL-
10  110021    THIOPHENE
500 110010    THIOPHENE, TETRAHYDRO-
10  108985    THIOPHENOL
100 463718    THIOPHOSGENE
100 79196     THIOSEMICARBAZIDE
100 7783188   THIOSULFURIC ACID, DIAMMONIUM SALT
0   62566     THIOUREA
100 5344821   THIOUREA, (2-CHLOROPHENYL)-
500 614788    THIOUREA, (2-METHYLPHENYL)-
10  30553049  THIOUREA, NAPHTHALENYL-
0   86884     THIOUREA, 1-NAPHTHALENYL-
0   137268    THIRAM
0   7440291   THORIUM
0   1314201   THORIUM DIOXIDE
0   13823295  THORIUM NITRATE
0   1314201   THORIUM OXIDE
500 7440315   TIN
0   7772998   TIN CHLORIDE
100 10026069  TIN(IV) CHLORIDE, PENTAHYDRATE(1:4:5)
100 7783473   TIN FLUORIDE
10  25324565  TIN PHOSPHIDE
100 7646788   TIN TETRACHLORIDE
10  7440326   TITANIUM
10  7705079   TITANIUM CHLORIDE
100 7550450   TITANIUM CHLORIDE
100 13463677  TITANIUM DIOXIDE
10  11140684  TITANIUM HYDRIDE
100 13463677  TITANIUM OXIDE
100 13825746  TITANIUM OXO(SULFATO)-
10            TITANIUM SPONGE, granules or powder
100 13825746  TITANIUM SULFATE
100 7550450   TITANIUM TETRACHLORIDE
10  7705079   TITANIUM TRICHLORIDE
10            TOE PUFFS, NITROCELLULOSE BASE
0   119937    o-TOLIDINE
0   671169    p-TOLUAMIDE-n-ISOPROPYL-alpha-(2-METHYLHYDRAZINO)
0   108883    TOLUENE
0   25376458  TOLUENEDIAMINE
0   584849    TOLUENE-2,4-DIISOCYANATE
0   91087     TOLUENE-2,6-DIISOCYANATE
500 98464     TOLUENE, 3-NITRO-alpha, alpha, alpha-TRIFLUORO-
100 25231463  TOLUENE SULFONIC ACID
10  108441    m-TOLUIDINE
0   95534     o-TOLUIDINE
0   106490    p-TOLUIDINE
0   636215    o-TOLUIDINE HYDROCHLORIDE
0   99558     o-TOLUIDINE-5-NITRO
0   8001352   TOXAPHENE
10  32524955  2,4,5-TP ESTERS
500 9000651   TRAGACANTH GUM
0   1332214   TREMOLITE
0   299752    TREOSULFAN
100 102705    TRIALLYLAMINE
500 1693716   TRIALLYL BORATE
500 1031476   TRIAMIPHOS
0   1912249   1,3,5-TRIAZINE-2,4-DIAMINE, 6-CHLORO-N-ETHYL-N'-(l-METHYLETHYL)-
1   121824    1,3,5-TRIAZINE, HEXAHYDRO-1,3,5-TRINITRO-TRIAZINE PESTICIDES,
              LIQUID, FLAMMABLE, TOXIC, n.o.s., flash point between 23C and 61C
10  2782572   1,3,5-TRIAZINE-2,4,6(1H,3H,5H)-TRIONE, 1,3-DICHLORO-
10  2244215   1,3,5-TRIAZINE-2,4,6(1H,3H,5H)-TRIONE, 1,3-DICHLORO-,
0   2893789   S-TRIAZINE-2,4,6 (1H,3H,5H)-TRIONE, DICHLORO-, SODIUM SALT
              POTASSIUM SALT
10  87901     1,3,5-TRIAZINE-2,4,6(1H,3H,5H)-TRIONE, 1,3,5-TRICHLORO-
10            TRIAZINE PESTICIDES, LIQUID, FLAMMABLE, TOXIC, n.o.s., flash
              point between 23C and 61C
10            TRIAZINE PESTICIDES, LIQUID, FLAMMABLE, TOXIC, n.o.s., flash
              point less than 23c
10            TRIAZINE PESTICIDES, LIQUID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
10            TRIAZINE PESTICIDES, SOLID, TOXIC, n.o.s.
10  108770    1,3,5-TRIAZINE, 2,4,6-TRICHLORO-
100 21087649  1,2,4-TRIAZIN-5(4H)-ONE, 4-AMINO-6-(1,1-DIMETHYLETHYL)-3-
              (METHYLTHIO)-
0   68768     TRIAZIQUONE
100 24017478  TRIAZOFOS
0   28911015  TRIAZOLAM
0   61825     1H-1,2,4-TRIAZOL-3-AMINE
0   28911015  4H-S-TRIAZOLO (4,3-A) (1,4) BENZODIAZEPINE, 8-CHLORO-6-(O-
              CHLOROPHENYL) 1-METHYL-
0   28981977  4H-S-TRIAZOLO(4,3-aLpha))1,4)BENZODIAZEPINE, 8-CHLORO-1-METHYL-
              6-PHENYL
10  1116707   TRIBUTYL ALUMINUM
100 102829    TRIBUTYLAMINE
100 126738    TRIBUTYL PHOSPHATE
100 56360     TRIBUTYLTIN ACETATE
0   52686     TRICHLORFON
100 76039     TRICHLOROACETIC ACID
100 76028     TRICHLOROACETYL CHLORIDE
10  87616     1,2,3-TRICHLOROBENZENE
100 120821    1,2,4-TRICHLOROBENZENE
10  12002481  TRICHLOROBENZENES
10  51023224  TRICHLOROBUTENE
100 1558254   TRICHLORO(CHLOROMETHYL)SILANE
10  27137855  TRICHLORO(DICHLOROPHENYL)SILANE
0   71556     TRICHLOROETHANE, 1,1,1-
0   71556     1,1,1-TRICHLOROETHANE
0   79005     1,1,2-TRICHLOROETHANE
0   79016     TRICHLOROETHENE
0   79016     TRICHLOROETHYLENE
10  115219    TRICHLOROETHYLSILANE
100 75694     TRICHLOROFLUOROMETHANE
10  87901     TRICHLOROISOCYANURIC ACID
100 594423    TRICHLORO METHANE SULFENYL CHLORIDE
100 1321659   TRICHLORONAPHTHALENE
100 327980    TRICHLORONATE
10  25167822  TRICHLOROPHENOL
10  15950660  2,3,4-TRICHLOROPHENOL
10  933788    2,3,5-TRICHLOROPHENOL
500 933755    2,3,6-TRICHLOROPHENOL
100 95954     2,4,5-TRICHLOROPHENOL
0   88062     2,4,6-TRICHLOROPHENOL
10  609198    3,4,5-TRICHLOROPHENOL
0   93765     2,4,5-(TRICHLOROPHENOXY) ACETIC ACID
0   93721     TRICHLOROPHENOXYPROPIONIC ACID
10  73826296  TRICHLOROPHENOXYPROPIONIC ACID ESTER
100 6047172   TRICHLOROPHENOXYPROPIONIC ACID ESTER
500 55720995  TRICHLOROPHENYL ETHER
10  98135     TRICHLOROPHENYLSILANE
0   52686     TRICHLOROPHON
0   96184     1,2,3-TRICHLOROPROPANE
10  10025782  TRICHLOROSILANE
100 76131     1,1,2-TRICHLORO 1,2,2-TRIFLUOROETHANE
10  27323417  TRIETHANOLAMINE DODECYLBENZENESULFONATE
100 998301    TRIETHOXYSILANE
10  97938     TRIETHYL ALUMINUM
10  121448    TRIETHYLAMINE
100 280579    TRIETHYLENE DIAMINE
0   112243    TRIETHYLENE TETRAMINE
100 122521    TRIETHYL PHOSPHITE
500 994310    TRIETHYLTIN CHLORIDE
100 76051     TRIFLUOROACETIC ACID
500 75638     TRIFLUOROBROMOMETHANE
10  79389     TRIFLUOROCHLOROETHYLENE
100 27987060  TRIFLUOROETHANE
500 75467     TRIFLUOROMETHANE
10  88175     2-TRIFLUOROMETHYL ANILINE
100 98168     3-TRIFLUOROMETHYL ANILINE
100 1582098   TRIFLURALIN
10  100992    TRIISOBUTYL ALUMINIUM
500 7756947   TRIISOBUTYLENE
10            TRIISOCYANATOISOCYANURATE of ISOPHORONEDIISOCYANATE, solution
10  5419556   TRIISOPROPYL BORATE
100 552307    TRIMELLITIC ANHYDRIDE
0   127480    TRIMETHADIONE
0   738705    TRIMETHOPRIM
100 3282302   TRIMETHYLACETYL CHLORIDE
10  75241     TRIMETHYL ALUMINUM
10  75503     TRIMETHYLAMINE
100 88051     2,4,6-TRIMETHYL ANILINE
100 95636     1,2,4-TRIMETHYL BENZENE
100 25551137  TRIMETHYL BENZENE
100 108678    1,3,5-TRIMETHYLBENZENE
10  121437    TRIMETHYLBORATE
0   75774     TRIMETHYLCHLOROSILANE
10  34216347  TRIMETHYLCYCLOHEXYLAMINE
10  25620580  TRIMETHYLHEXAMETHYLENEDIAMINE
10  28679165  TRIMETHYLHEXAMETHYLENEDI-ISOCYANATE
10  28324529  TRIMETHYL NORPINANYL HYDROPEROXIDE
100 824113    TRIMETHYLOLPROPANE PHOSPHITE
10  25167708  2,4,4-TRIMETHYLPENTENE
10            2,4,4-TRIMETHYLPENTYL-2-PEROXYPHENOXY-ACETATE
100 121459    TRIMETHYL PHOSPHITE
500 1066451   TRIMETHYLTIN CHLORIDE
1   26952421  TRINITRO-ANILINE
1   606359    TRINITROANISOLE
0   99354     TRINITROBENZENE
10  2508192   TRINITROBENZENESULFONIC ACID
1   129668    TRINITROBENZOIC ACID
1   28260619  TRINITROCHLOROBENZENE
10  25322149  TRINITROFLUORENONE
1   602993    TRINITRO-m-CRESOL
1   55810178  TRINITRONAPHTHALENE
10  4732143   TRINITROPHENETOLE
0   88891     2,4,6-TRINITROPHENOL
1   82713     TRINITRORESORCINOL
0   118967    2,4,6-TRINITROTOLUENE
100 78308     TRIORTHOCRESYL PHOSPHATE
10  123637    1,3,5-TRIOXANE, 2,4,6-TRIMETHYL-
500 603349    TRIPHENYL AMINE
100 115866    TRIPHENYL PHOSPHATE
100 639587    TRIPHENYLTIN CHLORIDE
0   76879     TRIPHENYLTIN HYDROXIDE
10  102670    TRIPROPYL ALUMINUM
100 102692    TRIPROPYLAMINE
10  13987014  TRIPROPYLENE
0   68768     2,3,5-TRIS(1-AZIRIDINYL)-p-BENZOQUINONE
0   545551    TRIS(1-AZIRIDINYL)PHOSPHINE OXIDE, solution
0   52244     TRIS(1-AZIRIDINYL)-PHOSPHINE SULFIDE
0   555771    TRIS(2-CHLOROETHYL)AMINE
0   126727    TRIS(2,3-DIBROMOPROPYL)PHOSPHATE
10  2244215   TROCLOSENE POTASSIUM
0   72571     TRYPAN BLUE
100 9002077   TRYPSIN
10  13560991  2,4,5-T SALTS
0   7440337   TUNGSTEN
100 12070121  TUNGSTEN CARBIDE
100 7783826   TUNGSTEN FLUORIDE
100 7783826   TUNGSTEN HEXAFLUORIDE
10  8006642   TURPENTINE
10            TURPENTINE SUBSTITUTE
0   555306    2-TYROSINE, 3-HYDROXY-alpha-METHYL-
500 1120214   UNDECANE
10  5332525   1-UNDECANETHIOL
0   66751     URACIL, 5-(BIS(2-CHLOROETHYL)AMINO)
0   51218     URACIL, 5-FLUORO
0   56042     URACIL, 6-METHYL-2-THIO-
0   51525     URACIL, 6-PROPYL-2-THIO-
0   7440611   URANIUM
0   541093    URANIUM, BIS(ACETATO-O)DIOXO-
0   10102064  URANIUM, BIS(NITRATO-0)DIOXO-
0   13520837  URANIUM, BIS(NITRATO-O)DIOXO-, HEXAHYDRATE
0   1344576   URANIUM DIOXIDE
0   7783815   URANIUM FLUORIDE
0   7783815   URANIUM HEXAFLUORIDE
0   10026105  URANIUM (IV) CHLORIDE
0   19525156  URANIUM PEROXIDE
0   10026105  URANIUM TETRACHLORIDE
0   10049146  URANIUM TETRAFLUORIDE
0   10025931  URANIUM TRICHLORIDE
0   1344587   URANIUM TRIOXIDE
0   7791266   URANIUM (VI), DICHLORODIOXY
0   541093    URANYL ACETATE
0   7791266   URANYL CHLORIDE
0   1344576   URANYL DIOXIDE
0   10102064  URANYL NITRATE
0   13520837  URANYL NITRATE HEXAHYDRATE
0   19525156  URANYL PEROXIDE
0   18433482  URANYL PHOSPHATE
0   1314643   URANYL SULFATE
0   13010474  UREA, 1-(2-CHLOROETHYL)-3-CYCLOHEXYL-1-NITROSO--
10  124436    UREA, compound with HYDROGEN PEROXIDE
10  124436    UREA HYDROGEN PEROXIDE
0   127071    UREA, HYDROXY-
10  124470    UREA, MONONITRATE
10  13114620  UREA, 2-NAPHTHALENYL
10  6950841   UREA, 1-NAPHTHALENYL
0   330541    UREA, N'-(3,4-DICHLOROPHENYL)-N,N-DIMETHYL-
0   759739    UREA, N-ETHYL-N-NITROSO-
10  124470    UREA NITRATE
0   684935    UREA, N-METHYL-N-NITROSO-
0   154938    UREA, N,N'-BIS(2-CHLOROETHYL)-N-NITROSO-
0   2164172   UREA, N,N-DIMETHYL-N-(3-TRIFLUOROMETHYL)PHENYL)-
10  124436    UREA PEROXIDE
0   51796     URETHANE
10  110623    VALERALDEHYDE
100 109524    VALERIC ACID
100 638299    VALERYL CHLORIDE
100 2001958   VALINOMYCIN
100 7803556   VANADATE, AMMONIUM
10  13769432  VANADATE, POTASSIUM
10  11130215  VANADIUM CARBIDE
100 7718981   VANADIUM CHLORIDE
100 7632511   VANADIUM CHLORIDE
10  7440622   VANADIUM (fume and dust)
100 1314621   VANADIUM OXIDE
100 1314347   VANADIUM OXIDE
100 27774136  VANADIUM, OXO SULFATO(2-)-O-
10  7727186   VANADIUM OXYTRICHLORIDE
100 1314621   VANADIUM PENTOXIDE
100 7632511   VANADIUM TETRACHLORIDE
100 7718981   VANADIUM TRICHLORIDE
10  7727186   VANADIUM, TRICHLOROOXO-
100 1314347   VANADIUM TRIOXIDE
100 27774136  VANADYL SULFATE
10  7727186   VANADYL TRICHLORIDE
10            VARNISH
100 8052413   VARNOLINE
100 8052413   VARSOL
1   108054    VINYL ACETATE
1   108054    VINYL ACETATE MONOMER
0   4549400   VINYLAMINE, N-METHYL-N-NITROSO-
0   100425    VINYL BENZINE
0   593602    VINYL BROMIDE
10  123206    VINYL BUTYRATE
0   75014     VINYL CHLORIDE
10  2549511   VINYL CHLOROACETATE
0   106876    VINYL CYCLOHEXENE DIOXIDE
10  109922    VINYL ETHYL ETHER
10  75025     VINYL FLUORIDE
0   75354     VINYLIDENE CHLORIDE
10  75387     VINYLIDENE FLUORIDE
10  109535    VINYL ISOBUTYL ETHER
10  107255    VINYL METHYL ETHER
1   111342    VINYL-n-BUTYL ETHER
500 3048644   VINYLNORBORNENE
0   25013154  VINYL TOLUENE
10  75945     VINYL TRICHLOROSILANE
10  8032324   V.M. & P. NAPHTHA
0   81812     WARFARIN
0   129066    WARFARIN SODIUM
10            WASTE OIL
10            WATER REACTIVE SOLID, n.o.s.
500           WAX, LIQUID
100 8052413   WHITE SPIRITS
10            WOOD FILLER, LIQUID
10            WOOD PRESERVATIVE, LIQUID
10            WOOL WASTE, WET
0   81889     XANTHYLIUM, 9-(2-CARBOXYPHENYL)-3,6-BIS(DIETHYL AMINO)-, CHLORIDE
0   989388    XANTHYLIUM, 9- 2-(ETHOXYCARBONYL)PHENYL-3,6-BIS(ETHYLAMINO)- 2,7
              DIMETHYL-, CHLORIDE
500 7440633   XENON
0   108383    m-XYLENE
0   95476     o-XYLENE
100 28258595  XYLENE, BROMO-
0   106423    p-XYLENE
100 1477550   m-XYLENE a,a'-DIAMINE
0   1330207   XYLENES
100 1300716   XYLENOL
100 1300738   XYLIDINE
500 87627     2,6-XYLIDINE
100 28258595  XYLYL BROMIDE
100 28347139  XYLYLENE DICHLORIDE
              YOHIMBAN-16-CARBOXYLIC ACID, 11,17-DIMETHOXY-18- (3,4,5-
0   50555     TRIMETHOXY BENZOYL)OXY-, METHYL ESTER, (3beta, 16beta, 17alpha,
              18beta, 20alpha)
10  7440655   YTTRIUM
0   557346    ZINC ACETATE
10  14639486  ZINC AMMONIUM CHLORIDE
100 52628258  ZINC AMMONIUM CHLORIDE
10  14639975  ZINC AMMONIUM CHLORIDE
10  63885018  ZINC AMMONIUM NITRITE
0   1303395   ZINC ARSENATE
0   10326246  ZINC ARSENITE
10            ZINC ASHES
10            ZINC BISULFITE solution
100 1332076   ZINC BORATE
10  14519074  ZINC BROMATE
100 7699458   ZINC BROMIDE
100 3486359   ZINC CARBONATE
10  10361952  ZINC CHLORATE
0   7646857   ZINC CHLORIDE
0   13530659  ZINC CHROMATE
10            ZINC compounds
100 557211    ZINC CYANIDE
100 58270089  ZINC,DICHLORO(4,4-DIMETHYL-5- ((((METHYLAMINO)CARBONYL)OXY)IMINO)
              PENTANENITRILE)
10  557200    ZINC, DIETHYL-
10  544978    ZINC, DIMETHYL-
10  7779864   ZINC DITHIONITE
0   12122677  ZINC, ETHYLENE BIS(DITHIOCARBAMATE)
100 7783495   ZINC FLUORIDE
100 557415    ZINC FORMATE
10  7440666   ZINC (fume and dust)
10  7779864   ZINC HYDROSULFITE
10  7779886   ZINC NITRATE
100 1314132   ZINC OXIDE
100 1314132   ZINC OXIDE FUME
10  23414724  ZINC PERMANGANATE
1   1314223   ZINC PEROXIDE
100 127822    ZINC PHENOLSULFONATE
10  1314847   ZINC PHOSPHIDE
0   11103869  ZINC POTASSIUM CHROMATE
10  9010699   ZINC RESINATE
10            ZINC SELENATE
10  13597461  ZINC SELENITE
500 16871719  ZINC SILICOFLUORIDE
0   7733020   ZINC SULFATE
0   12122677  ZINEB
100 297972    ZINOPHOS
100 16923958  ZIRCONATE(2-), HEXAFLUORO-, DIPOTASSIUM,
10  7440677   ZIRCONIUM
10  10026116  ZIRCONIUM CHLORIDE
1   77049961  ZIRCONIUM HYDRIDE
10  13746899  ZIRCONIUM NITRATE
10  63868826  ZIRCONIUM PICRAMATE
100 16923958  ZIRCONIUM POTASSIUM FLUORIDE
100 14644612  ZIRCONIUM SULFATE
10  10026116  ZIRCONIUM TETRACHLORIDE
 
   (d)   Specific threshold reporting quantities were assigned for the hazard
categories. Each category has the inherent property of presenting a level of
concern when a given substance from that category is present in a quantity
greater than a specific amount. That quantity is defined as the threshold
reporting quantity ("at any amount") is established pursuant to the
requirements of the Administrative Code, § 24-704(a). The current threshold
reporting quantity of 500 pounds was kept for substances presenting health or
physical hazard not otherwise specified. Other hazard categories include the
following groups and their threshold reporting quantity indicated in brackets:
unusual physical hazards [1 pound], special physical hazard [10 pounds], health
hazards [100 pounds], physical hazards [500 pounds].
   (e)   Calculation of quantity present in a mixture:
      (1)   If a container or storage vessel holds a mixture or solution of a
hazardous substance, then the concentration of hazardous substance, in weight
percent, shall be multiplied by the mass (in pounds) in the vessel to determine
to actual quantity of hazardous substance therein.
      (2)   If the specific concentration in weight percent is unknown and
cannot be obtained from the manufacturer, the owner or operator shall assume
that the hazardous substance is present at a maximum concentration provided by
the manufacturer.
      (3)   If the maximum concentration is not available, the owner or
operator shall assume that the concentration is proportional to the number of
ingredients listed on the Material Safety Data Sheet.
   (f)   Framework for the development of Threshold Reporting Quantities.
Pursuant to § 24-703 of the Administrative Code, DEP has established Threshold
Reporting for all substances appearing on the Hazardous Substance List by using
the following hazard categories:
 
Threshold Reporting Quantities Hazard Category
(in pounds)
                               Special Health Hazards
                               • carcinogen
0                              • teratogen
                               • mutagen
                               • other reproductive hazards
                               • radioactive
                               Unusual Physical Hazards
1                              • explosive
                               • unstable
                               Special Physical Hazards
                               • water reactive
                               • highly flammable
10                             • organic peroxide
                               • oxidizer
                               • pyrophoric
                               • ignitable
                               Health Hazards
                               • corrosive
                               • irritants
                               • sensitizers
100                            • hepatoxins
                               • neurotoxins
                               • nephrotoxins
                               • toxic/highly toxic
                               • hemotopoietic antagonists
                               Physical Hazards
500                            • combustible
                               • reactive
                               • non-flammable compressed or liquified gasses
500                            Health or Physical Hazard Not Otherwise
                               Specified
 
§ 41-05 Facility Inventory Reporting.
   (a)   A responsible party of a facility shall file a Facility Inventory Form
(FIF) for such facility, pursuant to § 24-705 of the New York City
Administrative Code and
Appendix A of this chapter, which shall include:  
      (1)   Each hazardous substance required to be reported pursuant to 15
RCNY §
41-04 which has been present within such facility at any time during the
preceding calendar year in an amount which exceeds the Threshold Reporting
Quantity published with the Hazardous Substance List; and
      (2)   Each mixture required to be reported pursuant to 15 RCNY §
41-04 which contains a hazardous substance in an amount that exceeds the
Threshold Reporting Quantity and such mixture has been present within such
facility at any time during the preceding calendar year in an amount which
exceeds five hundred pounds.
      (3)   A responsible party shall provide the following information for
mixtures: names of the mixtures or brand names, followed by hazardous
ingredients and their Chemical Abstract Service numbers.
      (4)   If a reportable substance is known to a responsible party by a name
listed in § (f)(2) of these Rules as a synonym for a substance on the Hazardous
Substance List, it may be reported by its synonym.
   (b)   A responsible party of a facility shall complete and submit an FIF,
and an MSDS for each hazardous substance including hazardous substances
contained in mixtures reported on the FIF, on or before March 1 of every year
beginning March 1 of every year to:
      New York City Department of Environmental Protection
      Bureau of ____________ Right-to-Know Officer
      59-17 Junction Boulevard
      Corona, New York 11368-5107
or any other address designated by the Commissioner, and published in the City
Record.
   (c)   A responsible party of a facility shall file a facility inventory
update if a previously unreported hazardous substance is added at a facility or
if an already reported quantity of a hazardous substance increases by twenty-
five percent or more, within thirty days of the occurrence of such event.
      (1)   The FIF shall be used for such updates; "UPDATE" should be written
in as the Reporting Period.
      (2)   The update should include only those hazardous substances subject
to the update reporting requirements.
   (d)   These filing requirements shall not apply to:
      (1)   Facilities where the only hazardous substances present during the
preceding calendar year were in mixtures in which the total content of the
hazardous substance was less than the Threshold Reporting Quantity per
container unless such hazardous substance was present at the facility in an
aggregate amount equal to or greater than the Threshold Reporting Quantity; and
      (2)   Owners or tenants of residential buildings that contain no
commercial or manufacturing enterprise.
   (e)   Penalties.
      (1)   Any person who knowingly or recklessly makes any false statement,
representation or certification on the FIF, FIF UPDATE, MSDS, or any other
document filed with the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the
New York City Community Right-to-Know Law or these Regulations, shall be
subject to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or imprisonment of up
to one year, or both.
      (2)   Any person who violates these filing requirements shall be liable
for a civil penalty, as follows:
         (i)   for a first violation, in an amount of up to one hundred
dollars;
         (ii)   for a second violation, in an amount of up to two thousand five
hundred dollars;
         (iii)   and for each subsequent violation, in an amount of up to five
thousand dollars.
   (f)   Fees. Upon filing a FIF a responsible party shall submit a fee to the
Department. The fee shall be determined by three factors: the total number of
hazardous substances (which includes extremely hazardous substances) reported
on the most recent FIF; the highest single quantity of a hazardous substance
(which includes extremely hazardous substances) reported on the most recent
FIF; and whether an extremely hazardous substance has been reported on the most
recent FIF. When an extremely hazardous substance has been reported, this will
result in a higher fee which shall be based on 125% of the amount calculated
using Table 1, and may be calculated by using a multiplier of 1.25 as
illustrated in paragraph (4) below. The fee shall be calculated in the
following manner:
      (1)   Identify on the horizontal axis on Table 1 the column corresponding
to the total number of hazardous substances (which includes extremely hazardous
substances) reported on the most recent FIF;
      (2)   Identify on the vertical axis on Table 1 the row corresponding to
the range in pounds of the highest quantity of any single hazardous substance
(which includes extremely hazardous substances) reported on the most recent
FIF;
      (3)   If no extremely hazardous substances are reported on the most
recent FIF, the fee shall be the dollar amount appearing at the intersection of
the column and row identified in paragraphs (1) and (2) above. Example: if
there are three hazardous substances present at a facility, none of which is
extremely hazardous, and the greatest reportable quantity of any single
substance is fifteen million pounds, then the amount owed would be $350.00,
which is the amount listed at the intersection of the horizontal column for (1-
3) substances and the vertical column which lists the reporting range for
substances between 10,000,000 and 49,999,999 pounds;
      (4)   If an extremely hazardous substance was reported on the most recent
FIF, the fee shall be 125% of the dollar amount appearing at the intersection
of the column and row identified in paragraphs (1) and (2) and may be
calculated by multiplying that figure by 1.25. Example: if any of the
substances in the above noted example is an extremely hazardous substance, than
to determine the fee multiply $350.00 by 1.25. The fee for this example would
therefore be $437.50.
 
TABLE 1
(The dollar amounts listed below are in actual dollars.)
(Fee is based upon the greatest reported amounts of any single substance.)
RIGHT-TO-KNOW PROGRAM – FEE SCHEDULE
Reporting   TOTAL NUMBER OF HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
Ranges in   (which includes extremely hazardous substances)
lbs.
           1-3 4-7 8-  11- 14- 18- 21- 24- 28- 31- 51- 101- 151- 201- 251-  300+
                    10  13  17  20  23  27  30  50  100 150  200  250  300
0-99        200 225 250 275 300 325 350 375 400 450 500 550  600  700  800   950
100 - 999   225 250 275 300 325 350 375 400 425 475 525 575  625  725  825   975
1,000 -     250 275 300 325 350 375 400 425 450 500 550 600  650  750  850   1,000
9,999
10,000 -    275 300 325 350 375 400 425 450 475 525 575 625  675  775  875   1,025
99,999
100,000 -   300 325 350 375 400 425 450 475 500 550 600 650  700  800  900   1,050
999,999
1,000,000 -
            325 350 375 400 425 450 475 500 525 575 625 675  725  825  925   1,075
9,999,999
10,000,000
-           350 375 400 425 450 475 500 525 550 600 650 700  750  850  950   1,100
49,999,999
50,000,000
-           375 400 425 450 475 500 525 550 575 625 675 725  775  875  975   1,125
99,999,999
100,000,000
-           400 425 450 475 500 525 550 575 600 650 700 750  800  900  1,000 1,150
499,999,999
500,000,000
-           425 450 475 500 525 550 575 600 625 675 725 775  825  925  1,025 1,175
999,999,999
BILLION -   450 475 500 525 550 575 600 625 650 700 750 800  850  950  1,050 1,200
HIGHER
 
(Amended City Record 2/6/2019, eff. 3/8/2019)
§ 41-06 Trade Secrets.
   (a)   A responsible party withholding the specific chemical identity of a
hazardous substance pursuant to subdivision (b) of this section, or requesting
non-disclosure of the specific chemical identity of a hazardous substance
pursuant to subdivision (c) of this section, shall file a sanitized version of
an MSDS for such hazardous substance.
   (b)   Procedure for withholding information based on a federal or state
claim.
      (1)   A responsible party may withhold from the FIF and FIF UPDATE and/or
risk management plan the specific chemical identity of a hazardous substance,
including the chemical name and other specific identification, and the method
or process in which an EHS or regulated toxic substance is used, if a trade
secret claim has been filed pursuant to § 322 of the Federal Emergency Planning
and Community Right-to-Know Act of 1986 or such information has been registered
as a trade secret pursuant to Article 48 of the New York State Public Health
Law or Article 28 of the New York State Labor Law. The responsible party must
submit a notarized statement verifying the facts of the claim or registration,
including the date, place and recipient of the claim or registration, and that
the chemical identity, or the method or process in which an EHS or regulated
toxic substance is used, continues to be treated as confidential by the
governmental authorities with whom such claim or registration has been filed.
The responsible party must also affirm that the claim or registration complied
with the requirements for such a submission, that reasonable measures have been
taken to safeguard the confidentiality of the chemical identity claimed or
registered as a trade secret, and such measures will continue in the future.
      (2)   The responsible party must indicate in the manner provided on the
FIF, FIF UPDATE and/or risk management plan that information has been withheld
because of a trade secret claim or registration.
   (c)   Procedure for requesting non-disclosure based on DEP determination of
trade secret status.
      (1)   The responsible party requesting DEP determination of trade secret
status must not withhold from the FIF, FIF UPDATE and/or risk management plan
any of the information for which trade secret status is sought. Such
responsible party must submit "Trade Secret Verification" on a form to be
prescribed by the Department, at the time of the FIF, FIF UPDATE and/or risk
management plan filing, containing answers to the questions listed in Paragraph
(2) of this Subdivision (c). Information included in this Verification or in
supplemental information provided at the request of DEP shall be treated as
confidential, and therefore shall not be disclosed by DEP, regardless of the
ultimate disposition of the specific hazardous substance trade secret claim,
provided that the responsible party certifies that such information, if
disclosed, would cause economic harm to the responsible party.
      (2)   The responsible party must substantiate claims of trade secrecy by
providing a specific answer including, where applicable, specific facts, to
each of the following questions and requests for information:
         (i)   Describe the specific actions you have taken to safeguard the
confidentiality of the chemical identity, method or process claimed as trade
secret, and indicate whether these actions will continue in the future.
         (ii)   Have you disclosed the information claimed as trade secret to
any other person (other than a member of a local emergency planning committee,
officer or employee of the United States or a State or local government, or
your employee) who is not bound by a confidentiality agreement to refrain from
disclosing this trade secret information to others?
         (iii)   List any municipal, State, and Federal government entities to
which you have disclosed the specific chemical identity, method or processes.
For each, indicate whether you asserted a confidentiality claim for the
chemical identity, method or process and whether the government entity granted
or denied that claim.
         (iv)   In order to show the validity of a trade secrecy claim, you
must identify your specific use of the chemical, method or process claimed as
trade secret and explain why it is a secret of interest to competitors.
            (A)   Describe the specific use of the chemical claimed as trade
secret, identifying the product or process in which it is used. (If you use the
chemical other than as a component of a product or in a manufacturing process,
identify the activity where the chemical is used.)
            (B)   Has your company or facility identity been linked to the
specific chemical identity, method or process claimed as trade secret in a
patent, or in publications or other information sources available to the public
or your competitors (of which you are aware)? If so, explain why this public
information does not eliminate the need for protection of the trade secret.
            (C)   If this use of the chemical, method or process claimed as
trade secret is unknown outside your company, explain how your competitors
could infer the use, method or process from disclosure of the chemical
identity, method or process together with other information on the FIF, FIF
UPDATE and/or risk management plan.
            (D)   Explain why your use of the chemical, method or process
claimed as trade secret would be valuable information to your competitors.
         (v)   Indicate the nature of the economic harm that would likely
result from disclosure of the specific chemical identity, and indicate why such
harm would be substantial.
         (vi)   (A)   To what extent is the chemical, method or process claimed
as trade secret available to the public or your competitors in products,
articles, or environmental releases?
            (B)   Describe the factors which influence the cost of determining
the identity of the chemical claimed as trade secret by chemical analysis of
the product, article, or waste which contains the chemical (e.g., whether the
chemical is in pure form or is mixed with other substances).
      (3)   The responsible party must include and sign the following
certification at the end of the Verification: "I certify under penalty of law
that I have personally examined the information submitted in this and all
attached documents. Based on my inquiry of those individuals responsible for
obtaining the information, I certify that the submitted information is true,
accurate, and complete. I acknowledge that I may be asked by DEP to provide
further detailed factual evidence relating to this claim of trade secrecy, and
certify to the best of my knowledge and belief that such information is
available. I understand that knowingly or recklessly making any false
statement, representation or certification could subject me to a penalty of
$1,000, or imprisonment of up to one year, or both."
      (4)   A responsible party may request an extension of time for the
submission of the Trade Secret Verification form by including in the FIF filing
or risk management plan filing a notarized statement requesting additional time
to fully comply with the verification requirements of this section.
      (5)   (i)   DEP may request supplemental information from the responsible
party in support of its trade secret claim. DEP may specify the kind of
information to be submitted, or the responsible party may submit any additional
detailed information which further supports the truth of the information
previously supplied to DEP in its initial verification under this section. Any
request for supplemental information must be submitted to DEP.
         (ii)   Any substantial information submitted by a responsible party
must include a certification pursuant to Paragraph (3) of Subdivision (c) of
this section, and where applicable, a certification pursuant to Paragraph (1)
of Subdivision (c) of this section.
      (6)   If a trade secret claim is submitted after DEP has received the
information to which such claim relates, DEP may make reasonable efforts to
process the late claim with the previously submitted information.
      (7)   No information claimed as a trade secret shall be disclosed by DEP
prior to an affirmative determination by DEP as to the validity of the claim.
      (8)   (i)   The responsible party shall be notified in writing of DEP's
determination as to the validity of the claim.
         (ii)   Within 7 business days of the receipt of written notice denying
the claim, the responsible party may file a written appeal with the
Commissioner.
         (iii)   The appeal shall be determined within 20 business days of the
receipt of the appeal. Written notice of the Commissioner's determination shall
include a statement of the reasons for the determination.
         (iv)   A proceeding to review an adverse determination may be
commenced pursuant to Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules.
      (9)   Pursuant to § 24-709(c) of the New York City Community Right-to-
Know Law, the Commissioner shall disclose trade secret information in the
emergency circumstances specified in Paragraph 1 of that section, and the
responsible party shall disclose trade secret information for medical diagnosis
and treatment purposes specified in Paragraph 2 of that section.
(Amended City Record 1/5/2018, eff. 2/4/2018)
§ 41-07 Labeling Requirements.
   (a)   A responsible party shall ensure that each container of hazardous
substance(s) at the facility is labeled, tagged or marked with the following
information:
      (1)   Chemical name or other name used in the Hazardous Substance List;
and
      (2)   Chemical Abstracts Service Registry number.
   (b)   A responsible party shall ensure that labels or other forms of warning
are legible, in English, and prominently displayed on the container, or readily
available in the work area throughout each work shift. Employers having
employees who speak other languages may add the information in other languages
as long as the information is also presented in English.
   (c)   A responsible party may use signs, placards, process sheets, batch
tickets, operating procedures, or other such written materials instead of
attaching labels to individual containers, as long as the alternative method
identifies the containers to which it is applicable and conveys the information
required by Subdivision (a) of this section. The written materials must be
readily accessible to the employees in their work area throughout each work
shift.
   (d)   A responsible party is not required to label portable containers into
which hazardous chemicals are transferred from labeled containers if the
portable container will only be used by the employee who performs the transfer.
The employee shall not abandon control of any unlabeled portable container in
which any hazardous chemical remains.
   (e)   A responsible party need not affix new labels to comply with this
section if existing labels already convey the required information.
(Amended City Record 1/5/2018, eff. 2/4/2018)
§ 41-08 Risk Management Plan Filing.
   (a)   On or before March first of each year beginning in 1995 a responsible
party of a facility where an EHS or regulated toxic substance is present at or
above the TPQ for that substance must file with the Department a risk
management plan. The plan must be submitted to:
      New York City Department of Environmental Protection
      Division of Emergency Response and Technical Assessment
      Right-to-Know Program
      59-17 Junction Boulevard, 1st Floor
      Flushing, New York 11373-5107
   (b)   A responsible party that has previously filed a risk management plan
which has been approved by the Department may, in lieu of submitting an entire
risk management plan, file an update of the plan with the Department. The
update of the plan shall include, but be limited to, the following:
      (1)   a description of any change in a facility's process(es) or changes
in the surrounding community that require that a facility amend its risk
management plan to remain in compliance with this Rule.
      (2)   amendments to a facility's risk management plan.
      (3)   if a responsible party has not amended its risk management plan, a
responsible party shall submit to the Department a signed affidavit attesting
that no changes occurred at a facility or in the community surrounding a
facility, which required that the facility amend its risk management plan to
remain in compliance with this Rule.
   (c)   A responsible party that is required to prepare a risk management plan
as a result of amendments to the United States Environmental Protection
Agency's rules regarding EHS's or regulated toxic substances, which are made
after the effective date of this Rule, shall file a risk management plan with
the Department on March 1 of the year that provides a responsible party a
minimum of one year to prepare a risk management plan.
   (d)   If any section of this Rule does not apply to a particular facility, a
responsible party shall submit a brief explanation as to why that section is
not applicable in lieu of complying with such section.
   (e)   The risk management plan shall be prepared by one or more of the
following persons provided that a professional engineer shall be responsible
for any portion of a plan which involves the practice of the profession of
engineering as defined in Education Law § 7206.
      (1)   an industrial hygienist certified by the American Board of
Industrial Hygienists;
      (2)   a professional engineer licensed pursuant to § 7206 of the New York
State Education Law;
      (3)   a safety certified professional by the Board of Certified Safety
Professionals;
      (4)   an individual possessing a baccalaureate or graduate degree, issued
upon completion of a course of study from an accredited college or university,
with a major in one of the following areas; chemistry, chemical engineering,
environmental and/or occupational health science, industrial hygiene, safety
engineering; and three years of full-time experience in the identification,
evaluation and control of environmental and safety hazards for protection
against exposure to harmful substances and/or hazardous conditions.
   (f)   Proof of the credentials of the individual which prepared the risk
management plan shall be submitted when the risk management plan is filed with
the Department.
(Amended City Record 1/5/2018, eff. 2/4/2018)
§ 41-09 Risk Management Plan Review.
   (a)   Within thirty days after receipt of a risk management plan, the
Commissioner shall determine whether such plan is complete. If the Commissioner
determines that the plan is incomplete, then he or she shall notify the
responsible party that the plan is incomplete and identify the respects in
which the plan is incomplete. Within fifteen days after such notification, the
responsible party shall file a revised plan consistent with the Commissioner's
notification. Within fifteen days after receipt of such revised plan, the
Commissioner shall determine whether the revised plan is complete.
   (b)   Within ninety days after the Commissioner's determination that the
responsible party has filed a complete plan, the Commissioner shall approve or
make modifications to the plan and shall notify the responsible party filing
such plan in writing of his or her approval or modifications.
   (c)   If the Commissioner makes modifications to the responsible party's
risk management plan, the responsible party shall incorporate such
modifications into its risk management plan, provided, however that the
responsible party may, within forty-five days after receipt of such
modifications, submit alternative modifications to the Commissioner or explain
why the Commissioner's modifications are not necessary. The Commissioner shall
within forty-five days review the alternative modifications or explanation and
shall: (i) require the responsible party to incorporate, by a date certain not
to exceed forty-five days, either the Commissioner's modifications, the
alternative modifications or a combination of such modifications into its risk
management plan, (ii) approve the unmodified plan or (iii) disapprove the plan.
§ 41-10 Risk Assessment Program.
   (a)   The risk management plan shall include a risk assessment program.
   (b)   The risk assessment program shall include the following components:
      (1)   Identification of the maximum amount of an EHS and/or regulated
toxic substance that would be released to an off-site area during a worst-case
release. To determine a worst-case release scenario, a responsible party shall
examine each covered process and assume that all mitigation systems fail to
minimize the consequences of the release.
      (2)   Evaluation of the possibility and effects of a significant
accidental release. A responsible party must examine each covered process and
identify the circumstances that may cause a significant accidental release
(e.g., pump failure, failure of controls, or operator error), evaluate the
likelihood that such a release could occur, and perform a general evaluation of
the effects that a significant accidental release would have on public health
and the environment.
      (3)   Submission of a form, prescribed by the Department, that lists each
EHS and/or regulated toxic substance at or above its TPQ present at a facility,
the amount of each substance, and the physical storage conditions for each
substance.
      (4)   A hazard analysis of all equipment and covered processes, which
shall include but not be limited to:
         (i)   the identification of all significant accidental release(s) that
occurred over the last five years;
         (ii)   identification of all engineering and administrative controls
applicable to the hazards of a covered process, including the application of
detection methods that provide early warning release.
(Amended City Record 1/5/2018, eff. 2/4/2018)
§ 41-11 Risk Reduction Program.
   (a)   The risk management plan shall include a risk reduction program.
   (b)   The risk reduction program shall include the following components:
      (1)   Consideration of the use of alternative substances and equipment to
eliminate or reduce the use of EHS's or regulated toxic substances in a covered
process(es). A facility that eliminates or reduces the use of EHS's or
regulated toxic substances below the TPQ for such substances by implementing
alternatives will not be required to comply with 15 RCNY §§
41-08 through
41-12.
         (i)   A responsible party must make the following considerations with
respect to the use of alternative substances and equipment;
            (A)   an assessment of the uses of EHS's and regulated toxic
substances in a covered process(es);
            (B)   an examination of alternative substances and equipment to
reduce or eliminate the use of EHS's and/or regulated toxic substances in a
covered process(es);
            (C)   a timetable for implementing alternatives that are
technically and economically feasible.
         (ii)   Mechanisms to facilitate the use of alternative substances and
equipment shall include but not be limited to any of the following:
            (A)   modification or redesign of production processes and/or
products;
            (B)   changes in materials usage, handling and storage practices,
including improved inventory control, preventive maintenance and spill and leak
prevention;
            (C)   use of closed-loop reclamation, reuse or recycling processes;
            (D)   use of other on-site recycling techniques.
         (iii)   To verify compliance with this section, a responsible party
must submit a summary report demonstrating the consideration of the use of
alternative substances and equipment.
      (2)   A pre-start-up safety review of the design of new or modified
equipment and/or covered processes prior to operating such equipment and/or
processes at a facility. A pre-start-up review is not required for the
replacement of equipment or covered processes, if such replacements have the
same design specifications as the existing equipment or covered processes. A
pre-start-up review shall include the following:
         (i)   an evaluation of the construction of equipment to determine that
the equipment meets manufacturer's design specifications;
         (ii)   an evaluation to determine if safety procedures, operation and
maintenance procedures, and emergency procedures for equipment and covered
processes, are in place and are adequate. A responsible party shall replace any
procedures that are determined to be inadequate.
         (iii)   a review to ensure that for all new equipment and covered
processes all recommendations made as a result of the hazard analysis required
by 15 RCNY §
41-10(b)(4) have been implemented.
      (3)   Written standard operating procedures that provide clear
instructions for the safe operation of all equipment and covered processes,
which shall include the following:
         (i)   the initial start-up procedures for each operating phase;
         (ii)   the normal operating procedures for each operating phase;
         (iii)   procedures for the normal shutdown of each operating phase;
         (iv)   emergency shutdown procedures including the condition under
which emergency shutdown will be required, and the assignment of shutdown
responsibility to qualified operators;
         (v)   procedures for start-up following a turnaround or after an
emergency shutdown;
         (vi)   procedures for emergency operation during each operating phase;
         (vii)   the consequences of deviating from the standard operating
procedures;
         (viii)   a list of steps required to restore normal operation
following deviation from the standard operating procedures;
         (ix)   the precautions necessary to prevent exposure to EHS and
regulated toxic substances including engineering controls and the use of
personal protective equipment;
         (x)   the control measures that will be taken of an individual who
experiences physical contact or airborne exposure to an EHS or regulated toxic
substance;
         (xi)   a list of any special or unique hazards;
         (xii)   the availability of standard operating procedures to employees
who work with or maintain a process;
         (xiii)   regular review of standard operating procedures to ensure
that they conform with this section;
         (xiv)   development and implementation of safe work practices such as
lock out/tag out devices, confined space entry, opening of equipment or piping,
and controls over the entrance into a facility of maintenance workers,
contractors, laboratory workers, and other support personnel;
         (xv)   description of type, location, and purpose of all safety relief
devices, interlocks, alarms, detectors, controls, and activation points;
         (xvi)   development of a table of contents and record of change in
standard operating procedures; and
         (xvii)   schedule of operator attendance at all times during the
operation of covered process, including off-shifts, weekends, and turnarounds.
      (4)   A training program for operators of a covered process that ensures
that personnel involved with EHS and/or regulated toxic substances understand
the standard operating procedures developed in accordance with subdivision (b)
(3) of this section. The training program shall include the following:
         (i)   instruction in emergency operation and emergency shutdown
procedures;
         (ii)   informing employees of the safe work practices developed in
accordance with subdivision (b)(3)(xiv) of this section; and
         (iii)   the owner must provide a formal written training program. The
written program shall include descriptions, qualification procedures, reference
materials, training methods, and trainer qualifications. The program shall
include instruction for recordkeeping as well as procedures and a schedule for
evaluating training effectiveness;
         (iv)   refresher training that must be conducted at least once every
three years.
      (5)   A preventive maintenance program for equipment. A responsible party
shall develop a list of equipment and controls the failure of which could
result in a significant accidental release. The list shall include pressure
vessels, storage tanks, piping systems including valves, relief and vent
systems and devices, emergency shutdown systems, controls such as monitoring
devices, sensors, alarms, and interlock devices and pumps.
         (i)   a maintenance schedule for equipment shall be developed based
upon manufacturers' recommendations where applicable or the experience of
facility operators.
         (ii)   a record of routine maintenance, inspection, testing, and
equipment repairs shall be logged at the facility, and shall include the action
taken, the date of the action, and who performed the action. Such records shall
be kept on premises for five years.
      (6)   Implementation of accident release investigation procedures for
identifying the causes of releases including fires and explosions. Accident
investigation procedures shall be initiated as promptly as possible, but not
later than 48 hours following a significant accidental release. Such procedures
shall include the following:
         (i)   a responsible party shall develop a list containing a history of
significant accidental releases at a facility including a chronicle of
significant accidental releases of EHS's and regulated toxic substances, the
reporting history of significant accidental releases of EHS's and regulated
toxic substances, and a record of the community response and interaction
related to any significant accidental releases;
         (ii)   preparation of the accident investigation report which shall
include:
            (A)   time and location of the accidental release;
            (B)   identity, amount, and duration of the release;
            (C)   equipment, materials, procedures, and personnel involved;
            (D)   determination as to whether the accidental release was caused
by human error, a procedural inadequacy, or equipment failure;
            (E)   detailed description of the accident, including the number of
evacuees, injuries, fatalities, and the impact on the community;
            (F)   recommendations for preventing a recurrence, including
retraining or reassignment of employees determined to be lacking in knowledge
or operating procedures and safety practices; and
            (G)   signatures and position titles of the investigators.
      (7)   Safety audits shall be conducted at least once every three years in
order to certify that a facility is in compliance with these Rules.
         (i)   a report of the findings of the audit shall be developed and
submitted to the Department as part of the risk management plan;
         (ii)   as part of the report, a responsible party shall record any
response taken as a result of the findings of the audit.
         (iii)   the two most recent safety audit reports shall be retained at
the facility.
      (8)   Management of change procedures that shall consist of written
procedures which address the following considerations prior to any changes in a
covered process.
         (i)   the impact of the proposed change on the likelihood of a
significant accidental release;
         (ii)   the necessary modifications to standard operating procedures as
a result of the proposed change;
         (iii)   informing and training of employees that are involved in a
process that will be affected by a proposed change prior to the start-up of the
change; and
         (iv)   updating if any part of the risk management plan required by
this Regulation if a change is implemented.
(Amended City Record 10/2/2018, eff. 11/1/2018)
§ 41-12 Emergency Response Program.
   (a)   The risk management plan shall include an emergency response program.
   (b)   The emergency response program shall contain the following components:
      (1)   A general site plan which shall consist of a general site map
layout. A general site map example and list of map symbols is set forth in
Appendix B of this chapter. If it becomes necessary to use any other symbol on
such map, the preparer shall include a reference of the symbol. Colors shall
not be used on the site map. For sites with more than one building, a general
layout on one page and separate map pages for floor or area shall be used. An 8
1/2" by 11" size map on grid paper shall be used only. The following elements
shall be included as part of the general site map layout:
         (i)   outline of buildings and areas within the property including
parking lots, internal roads, alleys, and streets adjacent to a facility;
         (ii)   designation of all adjacent property uses such as commercial or
residential, and a list of the exact street address of all public institutions
(e.g., hospitals, health care facilities, day care centers, schools, hospices,
places of assembly), within one-half mile of the facility;
         (iii)   a layout of all storage areas for EHS's and regulated toxic
substances, and turn-off valves for water, electricity, and gas;
         (iv)   directional orientation (north arrow);
         (v)   water supplies to include the nearest fire hydrants, size of
mains and cross connects, pressure/gravity tanks, suctions from rivers and
bodies of water;
         (vi)   all sewers, transformer vaults, high voltage lines, air
conditiong intakes, tunnels, bridges, railroads, and subways within 200 feet of
the facility.
      (2)   An individual site plan which shall consist of an individual
facility/building map layout. A specific floor or area map is required for each
building in accordance with the 8 1/2 × 11 map grid provided in Appendix B of
this chapter. Colors shall not be used on the map grid. An individual facility/
building map shall include the following elements: (i) outline of building
including the height, area, and type of construction areas;
         (ii)   fire rated corridors within the building, if known;
         (iii)   location of each building with respect to the street;
         (iv)   location of all areas where EHS's and regulated toxic
substances are stored or used.
      (3)   A responsible party shall appoint an emergency response coordinator
who shall be knowledgeable about EHS's and regulated toxic substances and shall
be knowledgeable about all facility operations and the layout of a facility.
The emergency response coordinator shall be on duty during normal working hours
or when otherwise required by the Department. The emergency response
coordinator shall have the following responsibilities:
         (i)   coordinate emergency response efforts with the emergency
response agencies on a 24-hour basis. The emergency response coordinator shall
maintain a list at a facility of the names, titles, and office and home
telephone numbers of contacts in each emergency response agency;
         (ii)   review the emergency response plan with each facility employee,
upon its completion and approval each year the plan is submitted to the
Department, upon the initial assignment of emergency response duties, and when
the emergency response plan is changed in accordance with subdivision (b)(5)
(xiii) of this section;
         (iii)   maintain a log of all reviews required by this section. These
logs shall be available for inspection for three years;
         (iv)   critique the facilities response in follow-up to an accidental
release of an EHS or regulated toxic substance within thirty days of such a
release. Such critique shall be written and copies retained at the facility for
three years;
         (v)   identify a deputy emergency response coordinator who shall
perform the duties of the emergency response coordinator when he or she is not
present at the facility. The deputy emergency response coordinator must meet
the qualification requirement set forth in subdivision (b)(3) of this section.
      (4)   An emergency response plan which shall include:
         (i)   a list of all employees designated response duties in the
emergency response plan, including a description of such duties.
         (ii)   a list of emergency response, personal protective, and
mitigation equipment, and the location of such equipment at the facility. The
list shall include portable monitoring equipment for detecting EHS's and
regulated toxic substances. Such equipment shall be placed in a location that
will reduce the likelihood of its damage, inoperability or inacessibility,
should an accidental release occur;
         (iii)   written procedures for the use of emergency response equipment
and for the inspection, testing, and maintenance of such equipment by facility
personnel. The maintenance of such equipment shall be recorded in a log book.
Such log books shall be kept on the premises for a three-year period and be
readily available for inspection;
         (iv)   training of employees given response duties in the emergency
response plan in emergency response procedures. Such training shall address the
use of personal protective equipment and emergency response equipment.
         (v)   conduct a minimum of one drill per year to evaluate the
effectiveness of the emergency response plan, and prepare a written assessment
of the emergency response plan following each drill and when the emergency
response plan is actually implemented. Such written assessments shall be kept
on the premises for a three-year period and shall be readily available for
inspection.
         (vi)   procedures for reporting fires and other emergencies to
emergency response agencies, including back-up reporting procedures;
         (vii)   emergency evacuation procedures including:
            (A)   routes and protective actions for employees that are not
given response duties in the emergency response plan;
            (B)   on-site notification procedures to identify evacuation areas.
            (C)   maps of primary and alternate evacuation routes.
            (D)   designation of primary and alternate assembly areas.
            (E)   a list of all personnel and procedures to account for all
personnel after emergency evacuation has been completed.
            (F)   procedures for determining a safe distance from the facility
and, if needed, a primary and alternate place or refuge.
            (G)   site security and control.
         (vii)   installation of an audible employee alarm system that complies
with 29 C.F.R. § 1910.165.
         (ix)   procedures for the administration of first aid and other
emergency medical treatment necessary to treat human exposure to each EHS and
regulated toxic substance located at the facility.
         (x)   procedures for medical surveillance of emergency responders at
the facility if any exists.
         (xi)   decontamination procedures for employees.
         (xii)   a training program designated to train a sufficient number of
persons to assist in a safe and orderly emergency evacuation of employees.
         (xiii)   the emergency response plan shall be updated annually and
within thirty days of the following occurrences:
            (A)   When a reported quantity of an EHS or regulated toxic
substance is increased by 25% or more.
            (B)   A previously unreported EHS or regulated toxic substance is
added to a facility's inventory.
            (C)   A significant change is made to the operations of a facility,
which increases the potential for a release of an EHS or regulated toxic
substance.
            (D)   When the results of a emergency response drill, conducted in
compliance with subdivision (b)(5)(v) of this section, demonstrates that, in
the interest of facility safety or public safety, a change in the emergency
response plan is warranted.
         (xiv)   the responsible party shall maintain a copy of the emergency
response plan at the facility at all times, and shall include the names and
regular job titles, and business and home telephone numbers of persons,
including those of the emergency response coordinator and deputy emergency
response coordinator or departments who can be contacted for further
information or explanation of duties under the plan, and all facility material
Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) required pursuant to law. The emergency response plan
and the names and 24-hour telephone number of the suppliers of the facilities
EHS and regulated toxic substances shall be kept in a Fire Department key box
at a location designated by the Fire Department.
(Amended City Record 2/6/2019, eff. 3/8/2019)
§ 41-13 Compliance with OSHA.
To comply with any section of this chapter, a facility may submit any documents
prepared to comply with the United States Occupation Safety and Health
Administration's (OSHA) regulations regarding the Process Safety Management of
highly hazardous chemicals as contained in 29 C.F.R. §§ 1910.119 et seq. which
have been approved by OSHA.
(Amended City Record 1/5/2018, eff. 2/4/2018)
§ 41-14 Siting and Storage of Portable Containers.
   (a)   Applicability. This section applies to any responsible party who:
      (1)   is obligated to file a facility inventory form in accordance with
15 RCNY §
41-05; and
      (2)   owns, operates or manages any portable container used to store
fewer than 2,200 pounds of any hazardous substance(s).
      (3)   This section shall not apply to the use or management of portable
containers during an extreme weather watch or event by (a) medical facilities,
hospitals, or clinics engaged in the preservation and sustainment of human life
and (b) government, utility and telecommunications entities and their
contractors engaged in the maintenance, operation, repair and recovery of
critical infrastructure or conducting other emergency or weather event response
activities.
   (b)   Spillage Prevention. Portable containers storing hazardous substances
may not be used during extreme weather watches. Responsible parties must ensure
that every portable container is managed in accordance with the following
requirements, whenever such container holds a hazardous substance and is not
currently in use, and whenever such container holds a hazardous substance
during an extreme weather watch.
   Measures that must be implemented to prevent spillage include:
      (1)   To the extent possible, every portable container must be water
tight, and must be tightly sealed. If storage in water tight containers is not
possible, hazardous substances must be stored using double containment drums or
"over packs".
      (2)   Portable containers holding incompatible substances must not be
stored in in close proximity to one another, such that they would likely come
in contact with one another in case of a spill.
      (3)   Facilities where loss of power would increase the likelihood of a
hazardous substance spillage must have manual means to safely transfer
substances to secure containment vessels.
      (4)   Every portable container must be stored on drum spill containment
pallets or equivalent structures to prevent contact with wet floors.
   (c)   Facilities in the Special Flood Hazard Area. Portable containers
storing hazardous substances may not be used during extreme weather watches.
The following additional measures must be implemented at facilities located in
Special Flood Hazard Areas to secure portable containers storing hazardous
substances during extreme weather watches:
      (1)   Every portable container must be stored on a shelf or in a cabinet,
such as a flammable or chemical storage cabinet, that is:
         (i)   Located in a facility area that is least susceptible to
flooding, including, when possible, areas at higher elevations, in protected
areas, or above the ground floor;
         (ii)   Securely anchored to ensure they do not tip or move if they
encounter wave action, flooding, or high winds; and
         (iii)   Elevated to, at a minimum, three feet above the base flood
elevation.
      (2)   If elevation to a minimum of three feet above the base flood
elevation is not possible, a portable container must be stored on drum spill
containment pallets or equivalent structures that are securely anchored to
ensure they do not tip or move if they encounter wave action, flooding, or high
winds.
      (3)   To the extent possible, every portable container must be stored
indoors to avoid exposure to any anticipated rainfall and flooding conditions.
If indoor storage is not possible, responsible parties must implement measures
to cover, securely anchor or otherwise restrain, elevate, and prevent exposure
of the container to water. Such measures must also be sufficient to protect the
container from high wind exposure.
      (4)   Sufficient aisle space must be available to allow for quick access
and movement of substances from one facility area to another area that is less
susceptible to flooding.
      (5)   During an extreme weather watch, responsible parties must not
permit the delivery of any new hazardous substances until after the extreme
weather watch concludes. Scheduled deliveries of hazardous substances must be
postponed until after an extreme weather watch concludes.
      (6)   Operations using hazardous substances must be suspended and all
hazardous substances must be returned to watertight containers and storage, as
described in subsections (i) through (iv) above no less than 6 hours prior to
an anticipated extreme weather event in accordance with the extreme weather
watch alerts from NWS and/or DEP.
   (d)   Enforcement. 
      (1)   The Department may perform inspections of facilities to determine
if the storage of hazardous substances is in compliance with the requirements
set forth in this section.
      (2)   Failure to comply with the requirements of this section may be
deemed a violation of this section subject to the issuance of a notice of
violation returnable to the Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings
pursuant to Section 1049-a of the Charter. Any such notice of violation shall
be accompanied by an order of the Commissioner directing the responsible party,
within thirty days from the date of the order, to correct the condition
constituting the violation and to file with the Department a certification that
the condition has been corrected.
(Added City Record 10/2/2018, eff. 11/1/2018)
§ 41-15 Penalties.
   (a)   Any person who knowingly or recklessly makes any false statement,
representation, or certification on a facility inventory form, risk management
plan or any other document filed with the Department pursuant to this Rule
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than one thousand
dollars, or imprisonment of up to one year, or both.
   (b)   Any person who fails to file a facility inventory form or risk
management plan or who fails to amend a risk management plan, which has been
submitted to the Department within the time prescribed by the Commissioner, or
who violated the requirements of § 24-711 of the New York City Administrative
Code shall be liable for a civil penalty as follows:
      (1)   for a first violation, in an amount of not less than two hundred
fifty nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars
      (2)   for a second violation, in an amount of not less than one thousand
seven hundred fifty nor more than five thousand dollars
      (3)   for each subsequent violation, in an amount of not less than three
thousand seven hundred fifty nor more than ten thousand dollars.
      (4)   for the purposes of this section, the second and any subsequent
violation shall only be issued after notice of the first violation has been
properly served and an opportunity to cure, not to exceed thirty days, has been
provided.
(Renumbered City Record 10/2/2018, eff. 11/1/2018)
**** Appendix A:
New York City Right-to-Know Facility Inventory Form, Tier Two ****
[Click_here_for_a_printable_PDF_file_of_these_forms_as_they_appeared_in_the
City_Record]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-15798.jpg]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-15801.jpg]
(Amended City Record 2/6/2019, eff. 3/8/2019)
**** Appendix B:
Emergency Response Plan ****
Please use the following symbols, if applicable, on all general site facility
floor and area maps. If it becomes necessary to use any other symbols on any of
the maps you submit, be certain to include a legend (with a definition of the
meaning of the symbol) on the appropriate map, or on your site map's cover
page. Please include the product name, quantity and appropriate hazard class
identification diamond for each storage tank.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-248.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-250.gif] 
Chapter 42: City Environmental Quality Review (CEQR) (City Planning and
Department of Environmental Protection)
§ 42-01 Fee for CEQR Applications.
Except as specifically provided in this section, every application made
pursuant to Executive Order 91 (August 24, 1977) on or after July 18, 1988
shall include a non-refundable fee which shall be submitted to Land Use Review-
Central Intake, 2E, 22 Reade Street, New York, New York 10007-1216, and shall
be in the form of a check or money order made out to the "Department of City
Planning." The fee for an initial application shall be as prescribed in the
following Schedule of Charges. The fee for any formal modification of an
application shall be ten percent of the amount prescribed in the schedule of
charges for an initial application, except that the fee for any formal
modification which increases the square footage of the project by more than 30
percent shall be equal to the fee for an initial application for such
additional square footage. Agencies of the federal, state or city governments
shall not be required to pay fees nor shall any fees be charged if the owner of
the building or property affected is a corporation or association organized and
operated exclusively for religious, charitable, or educational purposes, or for
one or more such purposes, no part of the earnings of which insures to the
benefit of any private shareholder or individual, and provided that the
property affected is to be used exclusively by such corporation or association
for one or more of such purposes. In addition, for applications made on or
after July 1, 1987, no fees shall be charged for the project, or such portion
thereof, if the Director of the Mayor's Office of Housing Coordination, or any
individual succeeding such Director's jurisdiction, certifies that the property
affected, or such portion thereof, is to be used for the construction of
housing affordable to low, moderate or middle income households. A fee
abatement for a portion of such project shall be calculated upon the percentage
of the square footage allocated to the affordable housing and shall
proportionally reduce the standard fee attributable to the square footage of
the entire project, including such affordable housing portion. In no event
shall the portion allocated to the affordable housing part of a project be used
to decrease the total project square footage so as to place the project into a
lower fee category. Fees shall be paid when the application is filed, and these
fees may not be combined in one check or money order with fees required
pursuant to other land use applications submitted to the Department of City
Planning or the City Planning Commission. No application shall be processed by
the Department of City Planning or the Department of Environmental Protection
until the fee has been paid and twenty-five copies of the application have been
filed with the Department of City Planning.
§ 42-02 Schedule of Charges.
   (a)   Projects measurable in square feet (square footage of total project). 
 
                         Fee
Less than 10,000 sq. ft.  $425.00
10,000 – 19,999 sq. ft. $1,250.00
20,000 – 39,999 sq. ft. $2,475.00
40,000 – 69,999 sq. ft. $4,550.00
70,000 – 99,999 sq. ft. $7,025.00
100,000 – 499,999 sq. ft$25,000.00
over 500,000 sq. ft.      $43,000.00
 
   (b)   Projects not measurable in square feet. 
   (Ex: bus franchises, renewals of special permits).....$2,000.00
**** Appendix A:
New York City Water Board – Water and Wastewater Rate Schedule ****
Effective: July 1, 2025.
Introduction
This Water and Wastewater Rate Schedule of the New York City Water Board sets
forth the rates, charges, fees and other service charges for services
furnished, rendered or made available by the water and wastewater systems of
the City of New York. All water and wastewater charges are the legal
responsibility of the property owner. For information on paying charges, please
visit nyc.gov/DEP.
Part I – Definitions
As used herein:
   “Access” means the ability to inspect a Customer’s water and/or wastewater
service and premises in order to ensure the accuracy of charges and includes,
but is not limited to, the ability to inspect, test, install, repair or upgrade
water meters, remote and automated meter reading devices and any appurtenant
system equipment.
   “AMR” or Automated Meter Reading Device means a DEP-approved transmitter
wired to the water meter to read the meter and monitor consumption.
   “Apartment” means that portion of a building consisting of one or more rooms
and occupied by one or more persons as a Dwelling Unit, separate and set apart
from other rooms or groups of rooms within a building. This classification
includes and applies to maisonette apartments, apartment houses, studio
apartments, duplex apartments, kitchenette apartments and dormitories.
   “Attributed Consumption Charges” means charges imposed on a property based
on attributed consumption as calculated in Part V – Section 3.C of this Rate
Schedule.
   “Authorized Representative” means any individual or organization
specifically authorized pursuant to a valid Letter of Authorization to
represent a property owner in connection with water and wastewater billing for
a specific property and the accounts related to that property’s bills,
   “BCS” means the Bureau of Customer Services of DEP, which may be contacted
online at nyc.gov/DEP, by telephone at (718) 595-7000, at a borough office, or
by mail to: DEP/BCS Customer Service, P.O. Box 739055, Elmhurst, NY 11373-9055.
   “Bill Date” means the date a bill was issued on DEP’s billing system.
   “Bill Period” means number of days listed as “Days” on a water and
wastewater bill signifying the “to” and “from” dates that service was provided.
   “Billing Programs” means all of the programs specified in Part IV – Billing
Programs.
   “Boarder, Roomer or Lodger” means a person residing within a household who
pays a valuable consideration for residence and who does not occupy the space
within the household as an incident of employment.
   “City” means the City of New York.
   “Commissioner” means the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental
Protection of the City of New York, or designee.
   “Complete Application” means a written submission in which all requested
information is provided, that is signed by the Customer and notarized, and is
accompanied by all other information and documentation required by the
Commissioner. If an application is incomplete, program eligibility will be
evaluated based on criteria in effect as of the date the customer submits a
Complete Application.
   “Con Edison” means the Consolidated Edison Company of New York, Inc. or any
successor corporation or entity acceding to the wholesale distribution of steam
to retail customers in the City.
   “Customer” means a current property owner or Authorized Representative of a
current property owner.
   “Delinquent Charges” means billed amounts for which payment has not been
received by the Water Board by each of the Due Dates appearing on the
customer’s corresponding water and wastewater bills.
   “Denial of Access” means the failure of a Customer to provide and/or
facilitate Access to DEP in response to a notice that required Access in a time
and in a manner acceptable to DEP.
   “DEP” means the Department of Environmental Protection of the City of New
York and its authorized agents.
   “Deputy Commissioner” means the Deputy Commissioner of the DEP Bureau of
Customer Services, or designee.
   “Dishonored Payment Charge” means a charge applied to a customer account due
to a payment returned unpaid for any cause.
   “DOB” means the New York City Department of Buildings.
   “DOF” means the New York City Department of Finance.
   “Due Date” means the date full payment must be received by the Water Board
and is shown as ‘Payment Due By’ on the face of the bill.
   “Dwelling Unit” means the separate residences of a premises. The number of
separate residences is determined by the Certificate of Occupancy or Use or
other acceptable records of the City. Where necessary, DEP may inspect the
premises to determine the number of separate residences to be used for billing
purposes.
   “Effective Date” means the date a resolution is adopted by the Water Board
or the date otherwise explicitly specified as the Effective Date in this Rate
Schedule or in the authorizing resolution approved by the Water Board.
   “Executive Director” means the Executive Director of the New York City Water
Board, or designee.
   “Fiscal Year” or “FY” means the period from July 1 through June 30.
   “Flat-Rate Account Reconciliation” means a review of flat-rate billing to
validate the fixture and/or billing unit count and to determine that an account
is appropriately billed.
   “HPD” means the New York City Department of Housing Preservation and
Development.
   “Late Payment Charges” or “LPC” means the percentage interest rate charges
applied to an account’s Delinquent Charges.
   “Letter of Authorization” or “LOA” is a specific authorization on file with
DEP signed by the owner of the premises and notarized, designating an
individual or organization as the Authorized Representative. An LOA is valid
for a maximum of three years from the date of notarization, or a lesser period
as explicitly written in the LOA. A valid LOA must contain a statement that the
owner hereby rescinds any previously issued LOA. In cases where an owner has
authorized multiple representatives, DEP shall deem the latest filed LOA to be
valid, superseding any earlier dated LOA(s).
   “Low-consumption Commercial Unit” means a unit in which water will be used
primarily by employees for sanitary purposes with projected annual consumption
of less than 63,000 gallons. Commercial units with laundry, medical, food or
beverage-related businesses are specifically excluded.
   “Metered Premises” is a property or premises that is metered at the point of
entry of each water service pipe or at a location approved by the Commissioner.
   “NYCPC” is the New York City Plumbing Code; the NYCPC is included in the
construction codes published on the DOB website
   “Rate Schedule” means this New York City Water Board Water and Wastewater
Rate Schedule Effective July 1, 2025.
   “Regulated Rate” means the rate per million gallons of water supplied to
users outside of the City for water supplied that does not exceed the allowance
quantity established in accordance with Section 24-360 of the Administrative
Code of the City of New York.
   “Residential Premises” means a property or premises that is classified as a
private dwelling or as a Class A multiple dwelling under the New York State
Multiple Dwelling Law.
   “Retail Steam Customers” means persons, firms and entities that purchase,
directly from Con Edison, steam sold and distributed by Con Edison.
   “Retail Steam Customer Discharges” means discharges to the City’s Wastewater
System at any property served by the Steam System resulting from the
condensation of steam delivered by Con Edison. Retail Steam Customer Discharges
shall not include any Steam System Discharges.
   “Room” means that portion of an Apartment or dwelling legally constructed so
that it may be used for separate occupancy by one or more persons.
   “Service Connection” means a service pipe connecting a property or premises
to a water main. Property owners are responsible for maintaining service
connections.
   “Standard Wastewater Allowances” means the list of Wastewater Allowances in
Part III – Section 7.D.
   “Steam System” means the system owned and operated by Con Edison to
distribute steam to properties in the City.
   “Steam System Discharges” means any discharges to the City’s Wastewater
System from the condensation of steam distributed by Con Edison at any point
along the route of the Steam System up to the property line of properties
receiving steam from such Steam System.
   “Stormwater” means that portion of precipitation that, once having fallen to
the ground, is in excess of the evaporative or infiltrative capacity of soils
or the retentive capacity of surface features and which flows or will flow off
the site by surface runoff.
   “Wastewater Allowance” is a percentage discount that applies to wastewater
charges that otherwise would be assessed on a property or premises.
   “Water Board” or “Board” means the New York City Water Board.
   “Water Supply System” and “Wastewater System” mean, respectively, the water
system and wastewater system of the City of New York.
Part II – Water Rates and Charges
Charges for water furnished by the Board to any premises will be computed in
proportion to the water furnished as ascertained by meter, subject to minimum
service charges, unless stated otherwise in this Rate Schedule. Charges apply
unless the water tap has been destroyed in the street or shut off at the
connection to the water main, by either DEP or a licensed plumber pursuant to
valid permits, disconnecting water service to the premises. Water rates and
charges included in this Part II do not include wastewater service charges,
which are set forth in Part III.
Section 1. Metered Water
   A.   The charge for water billed on the basis of metered consumption is
$5.05 per one hundred cubic feet. One hundred cubic feet is approximately equal
to 748.052 gallons.
   B.   The minimum charge imposed for water service is $0.49 per day per water
meter within a Bill Period. The minimum charge will be imposed for any Bill
Period in which charges based on actual consumption and computed in accordance
with Section 1.A above are less than the minimum charge. There is no minimum
charge for fire sprinkler system water meters.
   C.   All accounts on metered billing must be metered to the satisfaction of
the Commissioner, pursuant to applicable permits.
   D.   Use of Average Daily Flow. If a water meter registers incorrectly,
stops registering, or is removed or bypassed for any cause or reason, a charge
for water will be imposed for water consumed during that period of time based
upon the consumption measured by an accurately functioning meter for a
representative period of time either prior to or subsequent to the period of
meter failure as reasonably determined by DEP, at the appropriate rates in
effect for that period, except for accounts subjected to Attributed Consumption
Charges pursuant to Part V – Section 3.
   E.   Estimated Bills. If DEP cannot read the meter or if the meter reading
appears questionable, DEP may issue estimated bills based on previous
consumption or other reasonable criteria. If not paid when due, estimated bills
are subject to authorized Late Payment Charges and all collection enforcement
options.
   F.   Any property with metered water charges is not permitted to return to
water charges based upon unmetered rates or upon any fixed-rate Billing
Program, unless otherwise authorized.
Section 2. Unmetered Water
Unmetered water rates apply to premises both wholly or partly unmetered and not
billed on the basis of the Multi-family Conservation Program or on metered
consumption. Rates are per year unless otherwise indicated.
Frontage rate billing is not available to properties that (i) are newly
constructed after June 30, 2012, or (ii) were billed on a frontage rate, but
that subsequently underwent a substantial renovation, in which more than 50% of
a building’s structure or assembly, components, or functional systems, such as
lighting, HVAC, electrical, or plumbing, among other standard elements of a
building, are replaced or newly constructed, or (iii) were not already billed
on a frontage rate prior to June 30, 2012.
   A.   Frontage Rates.
      A minimum charge for frontage accounts shall consist of Item 1 – Front
width of building, which includes the first story, one toilet, one bathtub or
shower and one Dwelling Unit. A premises will be subject to the minimum
frontage charge if the premises is vacant and sealed, from the date of
discovery by DEP or the date certified by another agency of the City, provided
that no such adjustment shall exceed the four-year complaint filing period.
      Property owners are responsible for notifying DEP of any removal or
replacement of a water-consuming fixture. As a general rule, DEP will impose
fixture charges through the date the Customer notifies DEP in writing of the
removal or replacement of a water-consuming fixture, as confirmed by DEP
inspection. An exception to the general rule is permitted where fixture charges
are different than the substantiated fixture profile. A substantiated fixture
profile can be demonstrated only by (i) submission by the Customer to DEP of a
valid Certificate of Occupancy which indicates a fixture profile different from
DEP billing records, as confirmed by DEP inspection, or (ii) submission by the
Customer to DEP of a valid work permit issued by DOB that indicates the nature
and date of stated physical changes made to the property or its water consuming
fixtures, as confirmed by DEP inspection. DEP will correct fixture charges
based on a substantiated fixture profile from the date of issuance of the
Certificate of Occupancy or completion of work indicated in (i) or (ii) above,
provided that no such adjustment shall exceed the four-year complaint filing
period.
      The annual frontage rates are as follows:
      1.   Front width of building, which includes the first story, one toilet,
one bathtub or shower and one Dwelling Unit.
         16 feet and under ..... $211.86
         Over 16 feet to 18 feet ..... $264.86
         Over 18 feet to 20 feet ..... $317.87
         Over 20 feet to 22 1/2 feet ..... $370.74
         Over 22 1/2 feet to 25 feet ..... $423.60
         Over 25 feet to 30 feet ..... $529.78
         Over 30 feet to 37 1/2 feet ..... $635.61
         Over 37 1/2 feet to 50 feet ..... $741.65
         Each additional ten (10) feet or part thereof ..... $106.09
      2.   Each story in excess of one per building ..... $52.95
      3.   Rear building on any lot or lots with front building thereon, each
twenty-five (25) feet front or fraction thereof ..... $264.86
         Note: A corner-lot building must pay the rates for front width and
stories of building.
   B.   Extra Dwelling Unit Rate
      Each Dwelling Unit in excess of one Dwelling Unit per building .....
$242.48
   C.   Boarder, Roomer or Lodger Rate
      Each Room in a building or Apartment available for occupancy by a
Boarder, Roomer or Lodger, in excess of the two (2) Rooms permitted a family,
in addition to the Dwelling Unit charge, per person, per Room ..... $35.39
   D.   Fixture Charges and Miscellaneous Rates
      1.   Ash lift. Thirty-can or less capacity per day ..... $158.87
         Each additional thirty-can lift or fraction thereof ..... $106.08
      2.   Bathtub or shower in excess of one (1) per building, or shower not
installed over bathtub, or “sitz” bath, in excess of one (1) per building .....
$158.87
      3.   Bathtub located in a kitchen of a Dwelling Unit that has no other
Room containing a bath ..... $70.57
      4.   Bathtub, in barber shop, public house and bathing establishment
..... $264.86
      5.   Bathtub or shower, outdoors, comprising a section of piping with or
without spray attachment, located outside of a building ..... $264.86
      6.   Bakery. Each oven ..... $423.60
      7.   Barbershop, beauty, hairdressing and manicuring parlor. Up to and
including three (3) chairs or tables ..... $423.60
         Each additional chair or table ..... $52.95
      8.   Barge. Water for domestic use only ..... $264.86
      9.   Boiler, permanent, when used exclusively for a purpose not covered
by any other fixture charge. Per horsepower ..... $114.45
      10.   Café, restaurant, and bar or any store similarly used.
         For each sink ..... $264.86
         For each bar ..... $529.78
      11.   Café, luncheonette, lunch counter, restaurant, or other place where
food is served for consumption on the premises ..... $423.60
      12.   Compressor (portable). For water used by a compressor of any
gasoline-operated apparatus with a return cooling circulating system (rates
given are per month) ..... $52.95
      13.   Dentist. Each fountain cuspidor ..... $52.95
      14.   Fire line or sprinkler system, in a building. Per tap or
connection:
         Each 1 1/2-inch or smaller ..... $52.95
         Each 2-inch ..... $106.08
         Each 3-inch ..... $158.87
         Each 4-inch ..... $211.86
         Each 5-inch ..... $264.86
         Each 6-inch ..... $317.87
         Each 8-inch ..... $423.60
      15.   Florist or conservatory ..... $423.60
      16.   Fountain, ornamental or display ..... $264.86
      17.   Garage, connected to the City water supply, located in a building,
capacity not more than three cars ..... $52.95
      18.   Hose connection, faucet, or other plumbing fixture attached to the
inside or outside of a building or located at any point on a lot, for garden or
lawn watering or street, sidewalk or step washing. Each ..... $264.86
      19.   Hospital business charge per each floor and area where there is a
separate business, including lunch counters, gift shops, newspaper and magazine
stands, employee cafeterias, etc. ..... $423.60
      20.   Hospital developing tank located in a reception room, per faucet
..... $423.60
      21.   Ice machine or air conditioning unit, per quarter ton. Air
conditioning units requiring a minimum rate of flow of water greater than one-
half (½) gallon per minute must be metered ..... $264.86
         a.   If equipped with an approved water conserving device, per quarter
ton ..... $39.67
         b.   Air conditioning equipment with rated capacity in tons will be
charged pro rata from date of installation to date of metering, per year, per
quarter ton ..... $264.86
         c.   Such units, when equipped with an approved water conserving
device, will be charged pro rata from the date installed to the date when the
supply is metered, per year, per quarter ton ..... $39.67
         d.   Air conditioning apparatus not equipped with a refrigerating unit
or using water for other than refrigerating uses, for the cleaning or
conditioning of the air, for the period between the time the unit is installed
and the date when the supply is metered:
            Less than one-half (1/2) gallon per minute ..... $211.86
            1/2 gal. and up to but not including 1 gal./min. ..... $264.86
            1 gal. and up to but not including 2 gal./min. ..... $794.58
            2 gal. and up to but not including 3 gal./min. ..... $1,059.32
            3 gal. or more per minute, per gallon or fraction thereof .....
$529.78
      22.   Laundry. Each washtub, washing machine or apparatus for washing
clothes located in a hospital or the common area of a Residential Premises
..... $423.60
      23.   Laundry. Each washtub, washing machine or apparatus for washing
clothes located within an individual Apartment or intended for use by one
Dwelling Unit ..... $80.78
      24.   Photograph gallery. Each faucet or outlet ..... $423.60
      25.   Soda or mineral water fountain. One sink or glass washing spray
..... $423.60
         Each additional sink or glass washing spray ..... $158.87
      26.   Soda, mineral or carbonic water manufacture. Each machine or
apparatus (retail) ..... $529.78
      27.   Steam presser. For each boiler serving steam to a presser in a
tailoring or other establishment where garments are pressed ..... $106.08
      28.   Store. For each store or other independent portion of a building
used for business purposes:
         Hot and cold water available ..... $423.60
         Hot water only or cold water only available ..... $211.86
      29.   Swimming pool, swimming tank, plunge bath or wading pool. Where
located within building or heated so as to be usable on a year-round basis, per
each ten (10) cubic feet or fraction thereof ..... $52.95
      30.   Swimming pool, swimming tank, plunge bath or wading pool. Where
located outdoors and not heated so as to be usable on a year-round basis or
where located within structures other than buildings but not so as to be usable
on a year round basis:
         Less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) cubic feet ..... $264.86
         Each additional ten (10) cubic feet or fraction thereof ..... $17.56
         Note: Where a swimming pool, swimming tank, plunge bath or wading pool
is conducted as a business enterprise and admission charged, the supply must be
metered.
      31.   Testing of standpipe or other fire line within buildings, per test
..... $52.95
      32.   Toilet or urinal in excess of one (1) per building.
         Ultra low flow toilet, as approved by the Commissioner ..... $48.44
         All other fixtures ..... $106.08
      33.   Unmetered water used in the operation of any machine, apparatus or
other facility not previously specified, including hospital fixtures, is
charged per one hundred cubic feet of water ..... $5.05
      34.   Water motor. Where the capacity is not greater than one-hundredth
(1/l00th) horsepower ..... $106.08
* Section 3. Failure to Install a Meter or Remote *
An annual surcharge will be imposed equal in amount to 100% of the last annual
unmetered water charge when a Customer fails to install a meter or a remote
reading device. The surcharge will be applied from July 1, 2000 until the date
the installation takes place and, where a meter is installed by a private
plumber, the permit for the work has been returned to DEP.
Section 4. Municipalities outside of the City of New York
The Regulated Rate for water supplied to users outside the City from either the
Croton or Catskill / Delaware systems that is within the allowance quantities
set forth in Section 24-360 of the Administrative Code of the City of New York
is $2,228.45 per million gallons.
The rate and charge for water provided to users outside of the City that
exceeds the allowance quantities set forth in Section 24-360 of the
Administrative Code of the City of New York is $6,599.82 per million gallons.
In keeping with the provisions of Part VI, Section 3, Late Payment Charges are
assessed on amounts owed by users located outside of the City on overdue bills
for water supplied from either the Croton or Catskill / Delaware systems, at a
rate equivalent to the highest interest rate applicable to overdue property
taxes for properties located in the City of New York.
Section 5. The City of New York
Water is supplied to properties owned by the City in accordance with the terms
set forth in section 1045-(j) (5) of the New York City Municipal Water Finance
Authority Act.
Part III – Wastewater Rates and Charges
Section 1. General Provisions
The owner of any property connected or required to be connected to the
Wastewater System, including but not limited to property connected with the
Wastewater System by means of a private sewer or drain, and any person
benefiting from the use of, or services furnished, rendered or made available
by the Wastewater System, whether or not the owner of any property connected or
required to be connected to such system, shall pay a wastewater charge for the
use of, or services furnished, rendered or made available by the Wastewater
System. In instances where a property is required to be connected and has not
connected, charges will be assessed retroactive to the date that the property
was required to be connected. In instances where a new sewer is installed,
charges will be assessed six months after notification that the new sewer has
been installed and made available. In instances where a property has connected
to the Wastewater System, charges are assessed from the date of connection.
Section 2. Property Supplied by Water Supply System
The wastewater charge for any property supplied with water from the Water
Supply System is one hundred fifty-nine percent (159%) of the charges for water
supplied to that property from the system, including any surcharges, unless
otherwise provided in this Rate Schedule.
Section 3. Property Supplied with River or Well Water
The wastewater charge for property supplied with river water or water from
private wells is one hundred fifty-nine percent (159%) of the amount that would
be charged for the quantity of water supplied from such sources if the water
were supplied from the Water Supply System at the rates charged for water
supplied to Metered Premises. The Customer must install an accurately
functioning water meter approved by the Commissioner to measure the quantity of
water supplied from such sources. If necessary, the Commissioner may estimate
the quantity of water supplied from such sources and compute the wastewater
charge on the basis of the estimated quantity. If property supplied with river
water or water from private wells is also supplied with water from the Water
Supply System, the wastewater charge for the property is the sum of the charge
computed in accordance with this section and the charges computed in accordance
with Section 2 of this Part III.
Section 4. Stormwater on Parking Lot not Supplied with Water Supply System,
Well or River Water
An annual wastewater charge for Stormwater of $0.0856 per square foot of
property area shall be assessed on all parking lots, where Stormwater may enter
or drain into the Wastewater System from such lot, that are not supplied or
ancillary to an adjacent use that is supplied with water from the Water Supply
System, a river or a well. Parking lots are outdoor spaces or uncovered plots
of ground that have the capacity to hold five or more motor vehicles and are
used to accommodate, store, or keep any motor vehicle. Any such lot which has
implemented Stormwater management practices specified by the Board shall be
exempt from any wastewater charge for Stormwater upon approval by DEP.
Section 5. Miscellaneous Discharges
Any person or entity or the owner of any property who introduces water or
wastewater into the Wastewater System, other than that originating from water
provided by the Water Supply System, private wells, river water or Stormwater,
shall pay a sewer use fee equal to the greater of:
   A.   $572.19; or,
   B.   If the discharge is introduced into a sanitary or combined sewer and
could flow to a treatment plant, 159% of the amount that would be imposed if
the discharge originated from water provided by the Water Supply System; or,
   C.   If the discharge is introduced into a storm sewer or other facility
such that it does not receive treatment services, 38% of the amount that would
be imposed if the discharge originated from water provided by the Water Supply
System.
The Commissioner may estimate the quantity of such water or wastewater
introduced into the Wastewater System and compute a charge based upon the
estimated quantity.
Section 6. Property Connected to the Sewage Network Also Served by a Private
Wastewater Treatment Plant
The wastewater charge for a property that discharges wastewater that is
partially or fully treated by a private wastewater treatment plant that in turn
discharges treated wastewater into either a storm sewer, water body, culvert or
stream is thirty-eight percent (38%) of the charges for water supplied to the
property from the Water Supply System, or if the water supply is provided by a
private well or river water, the wastewater charge will be equal in amount to
thirty-eight percent (38%) of the charge that would have been assessed for the
quantity of water from such source if the water were supplied from the Water
Supply System at the rates charged for water supplied to Metered Premises.
In order to qualify for the wastewater discount in this Section 6, a private
wastewater treatment plant may release at most 25% of the annual wastewater
flow attributable to the associated property into the City of New York
Wastewater System for treatment. In the case of a private wastewater treatment
plant that is shared among multiple properties, at most 25% of the combined
annual wastewater flow attributable to all of the properties connected to the
plant may be released into the City’s Wastewater System. The estimated
percentage release of wastewater by the private plant must be documented, with
supporting diagrams and calculations, in a written report by a professional
engineer licensed in the State of New York. In instances where more than one
property shares a single private wastewater treatment plant, the application
procedure for requesting a billing discount across all connected properties
should follow the procedure described in Part IV, Section 6, Part A, numbered
points 7, 8, and 9, in applying for a Comprehensive Water Reuse billing
discount on a reuse system, particularly with respect to procedures and
documentation requirements for seeking a discount on a collection of properties
connected to a single system, in which the construction of the connected
properties is completed in stages.
Properties receiving a billing discount pursuant to the provisions of this
section are required to respond to any requests by DEP or the Board for re-
certification of compliance with program terms, or to requests for an updated
engineer’s report. A failure to provide updated information as requested by DEP
or the Board may result in the loss of a billing discount by all properties
connected to the private treatment plant.
In order to obtain and continue to receive a wastewater discount pursuant to
this section, applicants must provide evidence that the Private Wastewater
Treatment Plant will obtain and then continue to maintain the necessary
regulatory approvals required to operate such a system, as may be required by
the New York State Department of Health, the New York City Department of
Buildings, the New York City Department of Environmental Protection, and/or the
New York City Administrative Code, in addition to any other governmental body
with oversight authority over such systems.
The engineer’s report provided when applying for this billing discount must
include a diagram and explanation of the metering plan to illustrate how the
discharge of wastewater to the City’s wastewater system will be calculated.
Meters must be installed to the satisfaction of the Commissioner of DEP. DEP
may require the installation of sampling or gauging instruments or approved
wastewater discharge meters on a case-by-case basis, if, in the opinion of the
Commissioner, the equipment is necessary to verify or monitor flows or
discharges for the purpose of determining actual charges or allowances. The
owner is responsible for the cost of such meters or instrumentation, their
installation and their maintenance. Owners shall maintain these meters to
ensure that the meters or instrumentation are registered accurately within
industry standards.
In order to obtain a discount under this section of the rate schedule, an
accountholder must disclose if funds to purchase the private wastewater asset
are being provided by a City of New York governmental agency or body. While
receipt of City funds will not generally disqualify a property from seeking a
billing discount under this section, the Commissioner of DEP maintains the
discretion to determine eligibility when City funds are involved in the
purchase of a private wastewater improvement on a case-by-case basis.
Section 7. Wastewater Allowances for Commercial or Industrial Property
   A.   Wastewater Allowances – General.
      Water consumption that is exclusively used for a commercial or industrial
purpose and separately metered, where the process is such that water supplied
is not discharged entirely into the Wastewater System, may be eligible for a
Wastewater Allowance in accordance with the provisions of this Section.
      A process is eligible for a Wastewater Allowance if the water supply to
the process is fully metered to the satisfaction of DEP. DEP may require the
installation of sampling or gauging instruments or approved wastewater
discharge meters, if, in the opinion of the Commissioner, the equipment is
necessary to verify or monitor flows or discharges for the purpose of
determining actual charges or allowances. The owner is responsible for the cost
of such meters or instrumentation, their installation and their maintenance.
Owners shall maintain these meters to ensure that the meters or instrumentation
are registering accurately within industry standards.
      A Wastewater Allowance previously granted will be revoked if any
delinquent charge remains unpaid after written notice of the delinquency is
provided to the Customer by DEP or the Board. If a Wastewater Allowance is
revoked due to a delinquency, any reinstatement will be prospective only
effective as of the date full payment is received.
   B.   Application for Wastewater Allowances.
      1.   A Wastewater Allowance will be granted upon satisfaction of all of
the following conditions:
         a.   The Customer files a Complete Application, which includes proof
satisfactory to the Commissioner that the system is metered and the meter is
functioning properly;
         b.   The written application includes, among other items that the
Commissioner may specify, a copy of all required licenses necessary for
business operation;
         c.   DEP determines that the application is a Complete Application and
the Customer is eligible for the Wastewater Allowance in accordance with this
Section;
         d.   For such property, DEP determines that there are no delinquent
water or wastewater charges or real property taxes;
         e.   An application for a cooling tower allowance must include written
documentation demonstrating that (i) the cooling tower is registered on New
York City’s Cooling Tower Portal (https://coolingtowers.cityofnewyork.us), and
(ii) is in current compliance with the requirements of both the New York City
Department of Buildings and the New York City Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene.
      2.   DEP may reject any application that, at the time of filing, is
missing one or more items of information or documentation that is required in
order to make the application a Complete Application.
      3.   A Customer whose application has been rejected in accordance with
paragraph (2) above may re-file the application upon inclusion of the
information or documentation that DEP previously determined to be missing.
   C.   Term of Wastewater Allowances. Upon receipt by DEP of a Complete
Application and a determination that the Customer is eligible for a Wastewater
Allowance, DEP will, by written notice to the Customer, grant the allowance,
which will be prospective only, starting from the date the Complete Application
was filed with DEP, and such Wastewater Allowance will expire five years from
such date. The Customer must apply for renewal of a Wastewater Allowance by
submitting a written application before the expiration of the five-year period.
Wastewater Allowances originally awarded with two-year terms prior to July 1,
2022 will be viewed as having five years terms, dated from the date on which
the Wastewater Allowance was first granted.
   D.   Standard Wastewater Allowances.
      The following Standard Wastewater Allowances are authorized for any
property that can demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Commissioner, that
its commercial purpose or process and predominate water use is consistent with
the classification indicated for the allowance.
      A property is not permitted to have more than one Standard Wastewater
Allowance applied simultaneously to a single meter. If a Customer requests more
than one Standard Wastewater Allowance per meter, the Customer must comply with
Section E of this part, Exceptions to Standard Wastewater Allowances.
 Business or Water Use Allowance
    Business or Water Use                                            Allowance
1.  Air Conditioning and Refrigeration See Note 1                    85%
2.  Bakeries (Wholesale): Manufacturers of biscuits, pies, pastries, 40%
    bread, etc.
3.  Beverages: Soda and Soft Drink Manufacturers                     15%
4.  Breweries                                                        30%
5.  Building Construction and Sanitary Purposes (Metered)            90%
6.  Carpet and Rug Cleaning                                          20%
7.  Cemeteries                                                       50%
8.  Chemical Industry (Flavoring Extractors)                         20%
9.  Condiment Manufacturers: Pickles, Relishes, etc.                 20%
10. Confectioners (Wholesale)                                        10%
11. Dry Cleaning Plants and Establishments                           5%
12. Florists and Plant Nurseries (Wholesale and Greenhouses)         50%
13. High Pressure Boilers (for power only)                           10%
14. Ice Cream Manufacturers (Wholesale)                              10%
15. Ice Manufacturers (Wholesale)                                    85%
16. Industrial Wiping Cloth Plants                                   10%
17. Launderettes See Note 2                                          5%
18. Laundries (Flat Finish) See Note 2                               10%
19. Laundries (Wet Wash and Combination) See Note 2                  20%
20. Meat (Wholesale): Processing, Packing and Slaughtering           10%
21. Metal Products (Finished)                                        5%
22. Paint, Varnish and Glue Manufacturers                            10%
23. Plastic Products Manufacturers                                   10%
24. Textile: Yarn, Fur Dyers, Shrinkers and Spongers                 25%
Note 1: Air conditioning or refrigeration systems of 25 tons and more, using
recirculated water, will be authorized a Wastewater Allowance only when the
system is metered to the satisfaction of the Commissioner. The allowance, if
authorized, will be 85% of the registered volume based on an assumed 15% of
water discharged into the Wastewater System for blow-down or bleed-off. This
allowance also applies to Residential Premises.
Note 2: Launderettes are defined as establishments who service a predominately
residential population using primarily coin-operated washers and dryers, which
either allow customers to do their own washing or drying, or offer drop-off and
pick-up service; Laundries (Flat Finish) are defined as establishments that
perform pressing (flat finishing) exclusively; Laundries (Wet Wash and
Combination) are defined as establishments that do washing or drying
exclusively for commercial customers.
   E.   Exceptions to Standard Wastewater Allowances. Exceptions to the
Standard Wastewater Allowances may be authorized in accordance with the
provisions of this Section 7.E.
      1.   An exception to the Standard Wastewater Allowances will be granted
upon satisfaction of all of the following conditions in addition to
satisfaction of those conditions required for the Standard Wastewater
Allowances:
         a.   The Customer must include a certification by a professional
engineer licensed to practice in the State of New York, as to the amount of
fluid and solid material discharged to the Wastewater System (including
wastewater from all sources, such as well water or river water), the amount of
water absorbed by the process (and therefore not discharged), and all
supporting data and analysis. In addition, such data and analysis must
demonstrate any periodic or seasonal variations (including but not limited to
maximum and minimum quantities) in process absorption.
            The certification must also include all of the following:
            i.   A complete detailed description of all connections of the
property and the commercial or industrial processes with the Wastewater System,
and with all private sewers or drains discharging into the Wastewater System or
otherwise;
            ii.   If the property or process is connected to or utilizes
wastewater disposal facilities other than those of the Wastewater System, a
complete detailed description of the facilities;
            iii.   A complete listing and description of every source of water
supplied or connected to the property or process indicating flow at maximum
demand;
            iv.   A written statement that the applicant and owner of the
property or process, and the subject property or process, are in full
compliance with all rules and regulations of DEP, the New York State Department
of Environmental Conservation and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency with
respect to the use and supply of water and use of the Wastewater System, that
any previously cited violations have been satisfied by compliance with the
relevant regulation, and that all penalties associated therewith have been
paid;
            v.   A statement disclosing the names and business addresses of all
persons having ownership interest in the property or enterprise doing business
at the subject premises. If the property or process is owned or operated by a
corporation, the certificate(s) of incorporation must be provided.
         b.   Upon review of the application, DEP must determine that the
application is a Complete Application and that the Customer is eligible for the
exception to the Standard Wastewater Allowances.
         c.   For such property, DEP must also determine that there are no
delinquent water or wastewater charges or real property taxes.
      2.   Upon receipt by DEP of a Complete Application for an exception to
the Standard Wastewater Allowances and a determination that the Customer is
eligible for the exception, DEP will, by written notice to the Customer, grant
the exception, which will be prospective from the date of DEP’s determination.
All such allowances shall be rounded to the nearest integer percentage value;
for example, 5.14% would round to 5.0%, and 17.73% would round to 18.0%. An
exception to the Standard Wastewater Allowances will expire five years from the
date of DEP’s determination unless a renewal application is submitted to DEP. A
renewal application must include a certification of a professional engineer
licensed to practice in the State of New York that states all of the following:
         a.   No new uses of water, or changes in the property or process, or
in the discharge volume have occurred;
         b.   The original certification supplied to DEP is an accurate
representation of current and anticipated conditions at the premises;
         c.   The original certification is available for inspection by DEP.
Section 8. Steam Condensate Discharges
A wastewater charge shall be imposed for steam condensate discharges into the
Wastewater System related to the distribution and sale of steam as an energy
source.
   A.   Charges for Retail Steam Customer Discharges.
      The person or entity who shall be assessed and liable for the payment of
wastewater charges for Retail Steam Customer Discharges shall be the Retail
Steam Customer purchasing the steam that results in such discharges.
      The wastewater rate set forth in Section 2 of this Part III shall be
applied to a calculated volume of water consumption that represents steam
condensate discharges to the Wastewater System. Such volume shall be determined
from steam consumption data of the steam provider, which will be converted from
thousand pounds of steam (Mlbs) to one hundred cubic feet equivalent units of
water by dividing the Mlbs units of steam consumed by 6.2422 and multiplying by
the following percentages based on Retail Steam Customer Classification:
      1.   Steam Classification-1 (SC1-Small Users): 90%
      2.   Steam Classification-2 (SC2-Large Commercial): 67%
      3.   Steam Classification-3 (SC3-Large Residential): 76%
      In cases where the actual discharge of steam condensate to the Wastewater
System differs significantly from the proportions established above for each
customer’s classification, an application for an alternative allowance may be
submitted to DEP under Part III – Section 7.E hereof, Exceptions to Standard
Allowances.
   B.   Charges for Steam System Discharges. The entity who shall be assessed
and liable for the payment of wastewater charges for Steam System Discharges
shall be Con Edison. The wastewater charges shall be equal to 6.3% of all
charges for Retail Steam Customer Discharges.
** Part IV – Billing Programs **
Section 1. General Provisions
The following conditions apply to all Billing Programs in this Part IV:
   A.   Accounts that are delinquent will not be eligible for any Billing
Programs until the Customer pays the total amount due in full or enters into a
payment agreement with either the Board or DEP to pay the total amount due,
provided that delinquencies that are solely based on charges incurred for an
extraordinary leak or disaster will not disqualify the account from program
consideration. If the terms of a valid payment agreement are subsequently
violated, any benefits received under a discretionary billing program after the
date of such agreement will be withdrawn and the account's billing will revert
to its original status.
   B.   Premises in violation of the Certificate of Occupancy or Use, as
determined by DOB, or premises with open DEP violations are not eligible until
the violation is corrected. Upon correction of the violation, the Billing
Program’s benefit will only apply from the date of correction. There will be no
retroactive application of benefits for the period during which the premises
was in violation.
   C.   Credit balances resulting from the application of a Billing Program
will be refunded only if the entire credit balance will not be used under
normal service usage within one year of the date of application of the Billing
Program.
   D.   Information on Billing Programs may be obtained from BCS or the Board
online at nyc.gov/DEP, by telephone at (718) 595-7000, at a borough office, or
by mail to: DEP Bureau of Customer Services, P.O. Box 739055, Elmhurst, NY
11373-9055. Requests for Information on Billing Programs must be made in
writing.
Section 2. Multi-family Conservation Program (MCP)
   A.   Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms have the
respective meanings below:
         “Energy Star” means the program co-sponsored by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency and the U.S. Department of Energy regarding water and energy
efficiency standards for appliances.
         “Substantial Leak(s)” means a water leak from:
            1.   A toilet;
            2.   Any water plumbing fixture that is measured from ten to fifty
gallons per day (GPD) and will cost $250 or less to repair;
            3.   Any water plumbing fixture that is measured at fifty GPD or
greater; or
            4.   Water service lines between two or more buildings in a housing
complex.
         “WaterSense” means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency program
that involves the testing and certification of high-efficiency toilets, faucets
and showerheads.
   B.   Program Overview. The MCP provides qualified multi-family housing of
four or more Dwelling Units with billing based on a fixed charge per unit in
lieu of billing based on metered charges. The program objective is to promote
water conservation in multi-family housing, while giving Customers control over
their water and wastewater costs.
   C.   Annual Charge per Unit. The fixed charges for water and wastewater
services are assessed for the Fiscal Year as follows:
      1.   Dwelling Unit ..... $1,332.65
      2.   Low-consumption Commercial Unit ..... $1,097.15
      3.   Boarder, Roomer or Lodger Unit ..... $377.87
      4.   Additional Charge for Non-Compliance with MCP Requirements –
Suspended through June 30, 2026.
      5.   MCP charge(s) shall be prospective from the date of enrollment.
      6.   Any Wastewater Allowance, including but not limited to air
conditioning and refrigeration allowances, that was previously authorized for a
property shall be discontinued coincident with the effective date of the MCP
charge(s), unless such Wastewater Allowance is solely for the consumption of a
commercial unit that is not a Low-consumption Commercial Unit and is separately
metered and billed by DEP.
   D.   Eligible Property Types. Residential Premises of four or more Dwelling
Units per building may be eligible for the MCP, subject to the following
limitations:
      1.   If such Residential Premises is newly constructed or substantially
renovated, it is and will be subject to rent regulation and rent limitations
under the laws of New York State or Federal regulations.
      2.   If such Residential Premises has combined residential and commercial
use that is measured by an entire premise meter:
         a.   The predominant use of the property must be residential, and
         b.   i.   The commercial water use must be by Low-consumption
Commercial Unit(s), or
            ii.   Any commercial unit that is not a Low-consumption Commercial
Unit must be separately metered and billed by DEP.
            Note: If more than one commercial tenant needs to be metered, one
separate meter must be used for all such commercial tenants together; except
that, if the commercial tenants are not in reasonable proximity to each other
and installing an individual meter for each tenant will be prohibitively
expensive, the owner may make a written request for a variance. The variance
request shall include a schematic sketch that illustrates the incoming water
service, the branch piping to the commercial tenants, and the commercial tenant
meter locations and connections.
   E.   General Requirements.
      1.   DEP-approved meter(s) and AMR device(s) must be installed and
accurately registering consumption for the entire property, or the property
must be an Automatically Enrolled Property as defined in Part IV – Section 2.G.
At the Customer’s expense, DEP may also require the Customer to install and
maintain a meter on the makeup-line of a boiler to monitor condensate or return
water leaks.
      2.   The Customer must:
         a.   Provide and/or facilitate DEP Access to the property;
         b.   Allow DEP to perform interior leak detection surveys, which may
be based on a random sample of at least 25% of the units, and to distribute and
post notification flyers prior to the leak survey;
         c.   If a housing complex of three or more buildings, allow DEP to
complete a perimeter leak detection survey, which is an inspection of the
underground service lines that connect buildings within a multiple-building
complex to one another and the street main;
         d.   Maintain all water using plumbing fixtures, the building shut-off
valve and major piping in good working order;
         e.   Promptly repair any Substantial Leaks; and
         f.   Not become more than 90 days delinquent on any billed charges.
      3.   Any property failing to meet the program requirements may be removed
from the MCP, and the account will be converted to meter-based billing or, if
applicable, Attributed Consumption Charges. Additionally, buildings with
substantial increases in water consumption caused by unaddressed leaks or waste
may be expelled from the program.
   F.   High-efficiency Fixture Requirements. For an existing property to be
eligible for the MCP, at least 70% of each type of the building’s fixtures
(i.e., toilets, showerheads and faucets) must be high-efficiency. The fixture
requirements for all units are as follows.
      1.   For all fixtures installed prior to July 1, 2012, the requirements
are as follows:
         a.   Toilets must:
            i.   Use a maximum of 1.6 gallons per flush; or
            ii.   According to DEP’s records, have been installed pursuant to
DEP’s original Toilet Rebate Program.
         b.   Showerheads must be a high-efficiency type with a fixed
restrictor that allows for no more than 2.5 gallons per minute as measured at
the showerhead.
         c.   Faucets shall flow at 2.5 gallons per minute or less either
through the design of the faucet or by the installation of a “tamper-resistant”
aerator.
      2.   After July 1, 2012, all new fixtures installed in existing buildings
or new construction must meet NYCPC requirements, which are currently found in
Section 604.4. Additionally, in every unit that becomes vacant, the Customer
shall replace all fittings and fixtures with fixtures that meet NYCPC
requirements.
      3.   High-efficiency replacement parts must be used in any repairs. For
gravity-flush toilets, refill devices that will not refill the tank unless the
toilet is flushed or devices that shutoff the water supply if a leak occurs are
strongly recommended, along with a replacement-compatible flapper that is
warranted for corrosion resistance for at least five years. Replacement faucets
must be washer-less (ceramic disk or cartridge models).
      4.   Any building with a common area laundry room shall ensure that all
washing machines are Energy Star-rated for high-efficiency. If they are not,
all common area washing machines must be replaced with Energy Star-rated
machines at the end of the normal replacement cycle if the machines are owned
by the Customer or at the time of the next contract award, renewal, or
extension, if such machines are provided by a vendor. If the building allows
occupants to have their own clothes washers, the building shall place a rider
on all future leases and lease renewals requiring that all new clothes washers
be Energy Star-rated for high-efficiency, unless the Customer demonstrates to
the satisfaction of the Commissioner that such lease rider is legally
impermissible. If the building is a cooperative or condominium, this policy
shall be implemented by amending the cooperative or condominium bylaws or other
appropriate mechanism.
   G.   Automatically Enrolled Properties.
      Automatically Enrolled Properties are those that were automatically
enrolled in the MCP pursuant to the New York City Water Board Water and
Wastewater Rate Schedule Effective July 1, 2012.
      Such Automatically Enrolled Properties must have installed the required
meter(s) and AMR device(s) and/or meet the high-efficiency fixture requirements
in Part IV – Section 2.F by December 31, 2018. If such properties failed to
meet these requirements, they will be billed the Additional Charge that
represents a portion of the increased consumption of non-compliant buildings.
Additionally, such properties must cooperate with DEP with regards to the
requirements of Part IV – Section 2.E.2, or they may be subject to the actions
noted in Part IV – Section 2.E.3.
   H.   Enrollment Pursuant to Application.
      1.   Application Process. Customers billed on metered consumption that
are interested in enrolling in the MCP must submit a Complete Application on
the enrollment form prescribed by DEP, including a copy of the Certificate of
Occupancy and the laundry room contract showing expiration or renewal date, if
applicable. If an application is being submitted by an Authorized
Representative, the Letter of Authorization must include specific authorization
to select the billing basis for that property. A separate application and
Letter of Authorization must be submitted for each building. DEP will approve
or reject applications upon review for completeness and conformance with all
eligibility requirements of the MCP. For any Complete Application, DEP shall be
allowed a period of time not to exceed four weeks between the receipt of a
Complete Application and the issuance of a reply letter, which will note DEP’s
determination of the property’s eligibility.
      2.   Accepted Application. The Customer will be enrolled in the MCP from
the date of DEP’s acceptance letter.
      3.   Rejected Application. Applications are subject to rejection for
circumstances, including but not limited to the following:
         a.   The application is missing information or documentation, contains
illegible printing, or lacks an appropriate signature or notarization.
         b.   The building is not metered or does not have an AMR device.
         c.   The property’s water/wastewater account is not current with
respect to payment of charges due, and the Customer has not executed a valid
installment payment agreement.
         d.   The property is not predominantly residential.
         e.   The property switched from the MCP to metered billing within the
past two years.
         f.   High-use commercial tenants are not metered to the satisfaction
of the Commissioner.
         g.   The installation standards for high-efficiency fixtures have not
been met.
      4.   Provisional Acceptance and Qualification. If an application is not
rejected, it may be provisionally accepted, and MCP charges will commence as of
the date of the provisional acceptance if the applicant completes all
outstanding requirements within the compliance time frame indicated in the
provisional acceptance letter.
   I.   Conversion to and from the MCP Charge. Customers are solely responsible
for analyzing their properties and determining which billing method is best
suited to their specific circumstances. Neither DEP nor the Water Board makes
any claim with regard to whether meter-based billing or the MCP will produce
the lowest charge for a Customer. Neither DEP nor the Water Board will be
liable for any financial loss incurred by a Customer’s choice.
      1.   Electing Metered Billing. A Customer may elect to convert to meter-
based billing at any time. To do so, the Customer must initiate the conversion
process by submitting DEP’s Election of Meter Billing form to DEP/BCS Customer
Service, P.O. Box 739055, Elmhurst, NY 11373-9055. Meter based charges will be
effective upon DEP’s obtaining a meter reading to establish the initial
consumption baseline on the meter and confirming that the meter is registering
accurately. If an Election of Meter Billing form is submitted when a meter is
not installed or operating to the satisfaction of the Commissioner, the
conversion will be effective on a prospective basis only from the date an
approved meter is subsequently installed and read by DEP.
      2.   Mandatory Metered Billing Period.
         Any property that has converted to meter-based billing by election or
because of expulsion from the MCP shall not be eligible to convert back to the
MCP for two (2) years from the start date of metered billing.
         Any property returning to the MCP charge after a period of metered
billing shall submit a new Complete Application.
   J.   Conservation Monitoring.
      Customers with AMR devices installed may sign-up for DEP’s online leak
notification system to help identify leaks. Also, DEP may monitor or audit each
building’s water consumption through AMR or periodic direct inspection to
ensure that conservation requirements are being met and water usage is being
reasonably controlled by the Customer. A Customer’s failure to repair a
Substantial Leak(s) will be deemed sufficient grounds to deny the property
continued eligibility for the MCP. In addition, DEP may issue notices of
violation, which may result in the assessment of fines and penalties.
      For each property in the MCP, DEP will establish an estimate of expected
consumption based on reasonable consumption for a premises of its size and
occupancy. Properties that demonstrate recurring consumption in excess of the
expected consumption will be notified. If the owner fails to reduce consumption
following such notification, the building will be audited or inspected to
survey for leaks, waste and compliance with MCP requirements. If a leak(s) is
found, the owner will be notified and required to repair the leak(s) within a
time frame indicated in the notice.
      Consumption greater than a property’s expected consumption that is
accompanied by one or more of the following conditions, shall be deemed
sufficient grounds to deny the property continued eligibility for the MCP:
      1.   Failure to allow DEP Access to the premises;
      2.   Failure to remain in compliance with any MCP requirement;
      3.   Failure to repair a Substantial Leak(s);
      4.   Failure to take actions to reduce water consumption as directed by
DEP;
      5.   Failure to report to DEP material changes in commercial use.
Section 3. Title Read Letter
   A.   Customers meeting the conditions of this Section may request and
receive a Title Read Letter.
      1.   Prior to the date of the property transfer, a title read must have
been requested by any of: (a) email sent to TitleReadRequests@dep.nyc.gov; (b)
in person at a borough office of BCS; (c) by telephone to the BCS call center;
or (d) by mail to DEP/BCS Customer Service, P.O. Box 739055, Elmhurst, NY
11373-9055;
      2.   The property transfer must be an arm’s length transaction as
indicated on the real property transfer tax form;
      3.   DEP will assess a $25 Title Read Fee to the property;
      4.   DEP will review all accounts associated with the property, adjust
the bills if applicable, and issue a Title Read Letter within 30 days after the
receipt of a Title Read request, or, if applicable, within 10 days after the
field inspection is completed;
      5.   The amount shown on a Title Read Letter shall remain on the account
until paid;
      6.   Provided that the property transfer is an arm’s length transaction,
DEP will not later adjust charges on an account upward for any applicable
period prior to the issuance of a Title Read Letter;
      7.   The provisions of this section shall not apply where the culpable
conduct of the Customer prevents or impedes DEP from securing a meter reading
or inspection of the property.
      8.   A Title Read Letter that is properly requested and issued pursuant
to this Section shall remain in effect for 60 days following the date of its
issuance.
   B.   Customers who request a Title Read Letter after the date of the
property transfer will receive an Off-Cycle Reconciliation Letter.
      1.   DEP will assess a $25 Off-Cycle Read Fee to the property;
      2.   DEP will review all accounts associated with the property, adjust
the bills if applicable, and issue an Off-Cycle Reconciliation Letter within 30
days after the receipt of an Off-Cycle bill request or, if applicable, 10 days
after the field inspection is completed;
      3.   The amount shown on an Off-Cycle Reconciliation Letter shall remain
on the account until paid;
      4.   DEP may later adjust charges on an account, upward or downward, for
any applicable period prior to the issuance of an Off-Cycle Reconciliation
Letter, in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Rate Schedule and
the policies and procedures of DEP;
      5.   The provisions of this section shall not apply where the culpable
conduct of the Customer prevents or impedes DEP from securing a meter reading
or inspection of the property.
Section 4. Metered Bill Cap
   A.   A Residential Premises receiving a large and unexpected bill for
metered water and wastewater service for reasons outside of the customer’s
control is eligible to have its metered water and wastewater charges limited to
a maximum amount, as set forth in this Section. Reasons outside the customer’s
control may include, but are not limited to, the unavailability of timely meter
readings for reasons outside the customer’s control, or the presence of a leak
condition or other cause of excess water use that could not reasonably have
been known by the customer. The maximum metered charge applies to all routine
domestic use of water and wastewater service. This provision will not apply to
premises that have excessive water use related to a known or knowable leak,
irrigation, commercial processes, recreational activities, or other intentional
usage. A proportional cap for an account receiving only water service may be
determined with reference to the rate in effect during the period covered by a
specific bill. A mixed-use premises that has both residential and commercial
use, with a DEP-approved meter on the entire commercial use, may receive a cap
on metered charges only for the separately metered residential portion of the
premises.
   B.   A metered Residential Premises is eligible to have a maximum metered
charge imposed for water and wastewater services if all of the following
conditions are met:
      1.   The Customer has permitted an authorized DEP employee to perform a
leak and waste inspection, residential water survey or water audit, and the
inspection, survey or audit indicates that at the time of inspection no leak or
waste condition exists at the premises. ;
      2.   The Customer has provided and/or facilitated Access to the property
to DEP;
      3.   At least 70% of the toilets at the premises are low-consumption
toilets.
   C.   The maximum metered charge under this section for any qualified
Residential Premises is $3,023.71 per year for the first Dwelling Unit and
$2,015.03 per year per additional Dwelling Unit.
   D.   A Customer must request application of the Metered Bill Cap in writing
or request a review or reduction that has been documented by DEP within 120
days of the Bill Date of the original bill containing the excessive upward
adjustment.
   E.   The Metered Bill Cap will be granted only once to the same Customer for
the same premises in any two-year period from Bill Date of the original bill
containing the upward adjustment.
   F.   The provisions of this Section do not apply when the action or inaction
of a Customer or a third-party caused or contributed to the failure to render
timely or accurate billing. Such action or inaction includes, without
limitation, failure to provide Access to the meter or premises for inspection,
failure of a Customer’s plumber or other authorized party to secure or return a
meter permit and failure of a Customer to properly protect the meter.
Section 5. Forgiving Charges Due to Extraordinary Leaks or Disasters
   A.   A Customer is eligible under the terms of this section for partial
forgiveness of an unusually high metered water and wastewater charges if:
      1.   The unusually high charge was assessed on the basis of the Board's
metered rate schedule; and,
      2.   The unusually high water and wastewater charge is due to a leak, a
disaster or emergency that was declared by the Mayor of the City or recognized
by resolution of the Water Board, or resulted from a fire or other natural
disaster outside the control of the Customer; and,
      3.   The leak is repaired within 120 days of the Bill Date of the
original bill for the high charge. Leak repair may be confirmed by the
transmitted meter readings of a functioning AMR device, or, if such information
is not available, as confirmed by proof in the form of an itemized dated bill
from a licensed plumber, or a similarly verifiable document. DEP may extend the
time period in which the leak may be repaired if the customer submits
acceptable proof from a licensed plumber or a similarly verifiable document
that the leak could not reasonably be discovered within the 120-day repair
period, provided that the extended repair period shall not exceed an additional
180 days; and,
      4.   The Customer has permitted DEP or DEP’s duly authorized contractor
to perform a leak and waste inspection, residential water survey or water audit
upon request by DEP, and the inspection, survey or audit indicates that no leak
or waste condition exists at the premises; or, if the inspection, survey or
audit indicates that a leak or waste condition exists, the leak or waste
condition is repaired within ten (10) days of notification, and the Customer
submits a report from a licensed plumber that the leak or waste condition was
repaired; and,
      5.   The unusually high charge results from an average daily flow (ADF)
that is:
         a.   At least 200% of the ADF of the most recent representative
metered bill based on comparable usage and actual readings for the premises;
or,
         b.   If the most recent representative bill is based on the Board’s
unmetered water rates, the ADF of the unusually high charge is at least 200% of
the previous flat-rate charge for the premises adjusted to cover a number of
days equal to the number of days covered by the unusually high charge, and
adjusted to reflect rate increases; and,
      6.   A Customer must request application of the Leak Forgiveness Program
in writing or request a review or reduction that has been documented by DEP
within 120 days of the Bill Date of the original bill for the high charge.
   B.   A premises meeting the above conditions is eligible for partial
forgiveness of the unusually high water and wastewater charge calculated as
follows:
      1.   The unusually high bill will be reduced by a maximum of one half of
such high bill, provided however, that no revised bill issued will be less than
150% of the charge calculated by multiplying the ADF of the most recent
representative bill by the number of days in the period covered by the
unusually high bill, and multiplying that consumption by the metered water and
wastewater rates in effect during the period covered by the unusually high
bill, except as provided in the Metered Bill Cap Program;
      2.   If the previous bill for the premises was based on the Board's
unmetered water rates, the unusually high bill will be reduced by a maximum of
one half of such high bill, provided however that no revised bill issued will
be less than 150% of the previous flat-rate charge for the premises adjusted to
cover the number of days in the period covered by the unusually high metered
bill, and adjusted to reflect rate increases;
      3.   In the event a premises was fully or partially vacant during the
previous period and the previous ADF does not represent reasonable expected
consumption for the premises, DEP may adjust the ADF of the previous period to
reflect typical per Dwelling Unit consumption, or may use the ADF of as much as
the prior three-year period to represent the expected consumption for the
premises, whichever is higher.
   C.   Forgiveness of a water and wastewater charge will be granted only once
to the same Customer for the same premises in any two-year period from the date
of the original bill for the high charge.
   D.   Nothing contained in this section precludes a Customer from being
eligible for the Metered Bill Cap Program.
* Section 6. Comprehensive Water Reuse *
   A.   Program Requirements. The Comprehensive Water Reuse Program is for
properties that have a Comprehensive Water Reuse System (CWRS). To be eligible
for and enrolled in this program:
      1.   The property meets the provisions of NYCPC Appendix C, “Water
Recycling Systems”.
      2.   The property demonstrates an aggregate annual reduction in demand
for potable water of at least 25% as compared to non-CWRS properties of similar
size and use. If a CWR System is shared among properties, the combined
aggregate annual reduction in demand for potable water must be at least 25% as
compared to non-CWRS properties of a similar size and use. A baseline of 60
gallons per person per day shall be used for residential properties and 10
gallons per employee per day for indoor use in office buildings. Baselines for
other occupancies may be proposed for review by an applicant.
      3.   The property is metered on all Service Connections to the Water
Supply System, as well as on all service lines from the collection reservoir.
      4.   The property is equipped with low-consumption plumbing fixtures that
meet NYCPC requirements, which are currently found in Section 604.4.
      5.   The property complies with all requirements of other governmental
agencies having jurisdiction over the design, construction and operation of its
water and wastewater systems, including DOB, the New York City Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene, New York State Department of Health, New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation and, if appropriate, the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency. All required construction and operating
permits and water quality design and post-monitoring reporting requirements
from such agencies must have been obtained.
      6.   The Customer must file a Complete Application with DEP on such forms
and conditions as DEP prescribes, including a valid system certification from
DOB; and DEP must approve such property for the Comprehensive Water Reuse
Program in writing.
      7.   CWR Systems shared among more than one property may submit a
combined Application. Each property sharing the System must file a complete,
standalone, application, which may be accompanied by a written request for a
combined System review, and an explanation of the overall System profile,
including an engineer’s report explaining the System’s reliance on City water
and wastewater infrastructure, as well as explaining the System’s reuse
characteristics and percentage reductions to water and wastewater flows.
      8.   CWR Systems shared by more than one property are eligible to receive
a billing discount only on those individual buildings that have reached the
completed construction stage. All properties connected to a qualifying shared
CWRS would receive the standard CWRS Water Rate described below in Section B,
based on the overall water reduction achieved by constructed properties
connected to the shared CWRS. The water reduction is measured based on the
aggregate reduction to consumption across the properties constructed and
connected to the system, not at the individual property level.
      9.   Properties sharing a reuse system that receive a discount are
required to respond to any requests by DEP or the Board for re-certification of
compliance with program terms, or to requests for an updated engineer’s report.
A failure to provide updated information as requested by DEP or the Board may
result in the loss of a billing discount by all properties connected to the
reuse system.
         In order to obtain a discount under this section of the rate schedule,
an accountholder must disclose if funds to purchase the CWR System are being
provided by a City of New York governmental agency or body. While receipt of
City funds will not generally disqualify a property from seeking a billing
discount under this section, the Commissioner of DEP maintains the discretion
to determine eligibility when City funds are involved in the purchase of a CWR
System on a case-by-case basis.
   B.   Conservation Incentives for CWRS Properties.
      1.   CWRS Water Rate – The charge for water measured by the meter
supplying water subject to the CWRS is $3.62 per one hundred cubic feet.
      2.   Exception to Standard Wastewater Allowances – All CWRS properties,
even those that are residential or mixed-use, may be granted an Exception to
the Standard Wastewater Allowances utilizing the procedures contained within
Part III – Section 7.E of this Rate Schedule. DEP’s grant to a CWRS property of
an Exception to the Standard Wastewater Allowances does not mean that the CWRS
property is automatically entitled to Standard Wastewater Allowances. In
addition, DEP’s grant of this Exception to the Standard Wastewater Allowances
to residential and mixed-use properties that qualify as a CWRS Building does
not mean that other residential and mixed-use properties that do not qualify as
a CWRS Building may be granted any other Exceptions to the Standard Wastewater
Allowances, unless otherwise explicitly stated in this Rate Schedule.
      3.   The incentives enumerated in this Section B are prospective only,
from and after the date of approval by DEP of a Complete Application,
consistent with the provisions of Section A, in the case of multiple properties
sharing a single reuse System. DEP will not grant any benefits under this
program retroactively.
      4.   The continuation of the incentives enumerated in this Section B is
conditioned on:
         a.   The property’s continued CWRS program eligibility; and,
         b.   The payment in full, on or before the Due Date, of all water and
wastewater charges billed to the property.
         c.   Compliance with any requests by DEP or the Board for additional
documents, such as updated technical reports or written self-certification of
ongoing compliance with Program terms.
      5.   If, at any time,
         a.   DEP determines that either (i) the property in question is no
longer eligible for CWRS program, or (ii) the property has Delinquent Charges,
or
         b.   DEP, after giving reasonable advance notice to the Customer, is
denied Access to inspect the property for the purpose of determining whether it
continues to meet the CWRS program requirements or to confirm any of the
statements or representations made by the Customer in the application for
incentives hereunder, or
         c.   DEP, after giving reasonable advance notice to the Customer, is
denied Access to read any meter or meters at the property, or
         d.   The customer fails to provide written responses to DEP’s request
for updated application materials, updated technical reports, or to provide
written certification of continued compliance with Program requirements,
         the Water Board may, in addition to any other rights or remedies
available to it at law or in equity, terminate the incentives provided to such
property under this Section B, by written notice to the Customer, specifying
the date of termination.
Part V – Miscellaneous Fees and Charges
* Section 1. Service Line Protection Program *
The Water Board has entered into an agreement with American Water Resources
(also d/b/a Oncourse Home Solutions) to make a water and sewer service line
protection program available to DEP and the Board’s residential Customers with
a water service line of 2” or less. American Water Resources is an independent
private entity; it is not a governmental body. Customers choosing to purchase
water and/or sewer service line coverage through AWR will be billed for such
coverage through their DEP water bill at the following annual rates, prorated
from the customer’s date of enrollment:
   A.   Basic Coverage Water Service Line Protection Policy: up to $84.84.
   B.   Basic Coverage Sewer Service Line Protection Policy: up to $143.04.
Terms and conditions of the service line protection program and the specific
list of repair or replacement claims that are eligible, or ineligible, for
coverage are available at awrusa.com/nyc/terms. Customers of DEP and the Board
are free to enroll in either or both of the Basic Coverage service line plans
at any time, and are free to un-enroll at any time as well. Customers who are
enrolled in any of the plans will be automatically un-enrolled from such plans
in the event of a delinquency on their DEP water and wastewater charges that
exceeds $500 of past due charges past due by six or more months.
Section 2. Dishonored Payment Charge
A charge of $20.00 will be imposed on each account where a payment is returned
unpaid for any cause.
Section 3. Denial of Access, Billing Interference and Attributed Consumption
Charges
   A.   Denial of Access Charges. DEP requires Access to inspect a premises and
to install, repair, replace or upgrade water meters and remote reading and AMR
devices in order to ensure the accuracy of charges rendered for services
received and to ensure that all Customers are billed appropriately and in
proportion to other Customers in accordance with this Rate Schedule. It shall
be the Customer’s responsibility as a condition of service to provide and/or
facilitate Access to a premises at a time and in a manner acceptable to DEP. If
a Customer fails to provide and/or facilitate Access as required by DEP, Denial
of Access charges shall be imposed.
      1.   Denial of Access Notice Procedure.
         If a Customer fails to provide and/or facilitate Access as required by
DEP, DEP may issue a first written notice to the Customer that requires the
Customer to provide and/or facilitate Access to DEP within a fixed period of
time. This first written notice shall be sent by regular mail to the owner and
any Authorized Representative at the property address and any other address to
which the Customer receives the bills for water and wastewater charges, to any
Authorized Representative at the address provided to DEP, and to any email
addresses of the Customer or Authorized Representative on file with DEP. If
Access has not been provided and/or facilitated by the expiration date set
forth in the first written notice, the account will be subject to the
imposition of a Denial of Access Account Administration Fee.
         The owner will be notified of the imposition of the Denial of Access
Account Administration Fee through the issuance of a second written notice sent
by regular and certified mail to the owner and any Authorized Representative at
the property address and any other address to which the Customer receives the
bills for water and wastewater charges, to any Authorized Representative at the
address provided to DEP, and to any email addresses of the Customer or
Authorized Representative on file with DEP. This second notice will cite the
Denial of Access Account Administration Fee and require that the Customer
provide and/or facilitate Access to DEP within an additional fixed period of
time. If a Customer fails to provide and/or facilitate Access by the expiration
date set forth in the second written notice, the account will be subject to the
imposition of Attributed Consumption Charges from the expiration date of the
second written notice to the date the Customer provides and/or facilitates
Access in a manner acceptable to DEP.
         The bill containing Attributed Consumption Charges and a third written
notice requiring the Customer to provide and/or facilitate Access to DEP within
a fixed period of time will be sent by regular and certified to the owner and
any Authorized Representative at the property address and any other address to
which the Customer receives the bills for water and wastewater charges, to any
Authorized Representative at the address provided to DEP, and to any email
addresses of the Customer or Authorized Representative on file with DEP. The
third written notice will advise the Customer that if Access is not provided
and/or facilitated by the expiration date set forth in this third notice, the
account will be subject to any and all enforcement options available to DEP,
including those noted in this Rate Schedule or the Water Board’s Regulation
Number 3 – Denial of Access.
         Should DEP not make any of the mailings or email notifications as set
forth in this subsection 1, it shall have no bearing on DEP’s ability to impose
the Denial of Access Account Administration Fee or any Attributed Consumption
Charges, provided that DEP has proof of the Customer’s or Authorized
Representative’s actual knowledge of the Denial of Access condition.
      2.   Denial of Access Account Administration Fee. DEP shall impose a
Denial of Access Account Administration Fee of $500 on each account when a
Customer fails to provide and/or facilitate Access as required by DEP in a
first written notice. DEP will refund the Denial of Access Account
Administration Fee to the Customer by issuing a credit on the Customer’s Water
Board account, under the following circumstances:
         (a)   Access has been provided and/or facilitated;
         (b)   DEP has ceased billing any Attributed Consumption Charges placed
on the Customer’s Water Board account as a result of the Determination of a
Denial of Access because the issue requiring Access has been resolved to DEP’s
satisfaction;
         (c)   Other than the Denial of Access Account Administration Fee and
any related Attributed Consumption charges, there are no other Delinquent
Charges on the Customer’s Water Board account;
         (d)   There has been no Termination of Service as a result of the
Denial of Access;
         (e)   The number of calendar days between the date of the first Demand
for Access and the date when Access is provided and/or facilitated is less than
90 days, unless an appointment for a DEP inspection is not available within 90
days of the first Demand for Access and the Customer provides and/or
facilitates Access to DEP at the first available, scheduled appointment date;
and
         (f)   Notwithstanding whether the Customer meets the requirements of
subsections (a) to (e) above, the Deputy Commissioner, under appropriate,
extenuating circumstances, may agree to refund the Denial of Access Account
Administration Fee.
      3.   Attributed Consumption Charges. DEP shall impose Attributed
Consumption Charges for each applicable service where a Customer fails to
provide and/or facilitate Access as required by DEP in a second written notice.
DEP will stop billing based upon Attributed Consumption Charges once Access has
been facilitated and/or provided to DEP’s satisfaction.
   B.   Billing Interference Charges.
      If DEP observes a Billing Interference condition, DEP shall issue a
Billing Interference Warning Notice. This Warning Notice shall be sent by
regular mail to the owner and any Authorized Representative at the property
address and any other address to which the Customer receives the bills for
water and wastewater charges, to any Authorized Representative at the address
provided to DEP, and to any email addresses of the Customer or Authorized
Representative on file with DEP. The Billing Interference Warning Notice shall
require the Customer to correct any unlawful plumbing arrangement within thirty
days of the notice date and shall require the Customer to promptly provide and/
or facilitate Access to the premises for a confirmation inspection at a time
and in a manner acceptable to DEP. Should the Customer fail to correct the
unlawful condition and request a confirmation inspection within 30 days of the
Billing Interference Warning Notice, or, in the case where DEP has evidence or
a reasonable belief of actual water usage during any time when the billing
interference condition persisted and regardless of whether the illegal plumbing
condition is fixed within the 30 day period, DEP shall issue a Determination of
Billing Interference and a Billing Interference Cease and Desist Order, which
shall impose on the Customer’s account the Billing Interference Account
Administration Fee and Attributed Consumption Charges as indicated in the Rate
Schedule. This Determination and Order shall be sent by regular and certified
mail to the owner and any Authorized Representative at the property address and
any other address to which the Customer receives the bills for water and
wastewater charges, to any Authorized Representative at the address provided to
DEP, and to any email addresses of the Customer or Authorized Representative on
file with DEP.
      Should DEP not make any of the mailings or email notifications as
specified in this Part V, Section 3.B, it shall have no bearing on DEP’s
ability to impose the Billing Interference Account Administration Fee or any
Attributed Consumption Charges, provided that DEP has proof of the Customer’s
or Authorized Representative’s actual knowledge of the Billing Interference
condition.
      Where a Determination of Billing Interference has been made by DEP
pursuant to Water Board Regulation Number 4 – Billing Interference, DEP shall
impose:
      1.   Billing Interference Account Administration Fee of $650 for each
account; and,
      2.   Attributed Consumption Charges for each applicable service. The
account’s charges will be adjusted retroactively based on DEP’s determination.
DEP shall impose Attributed Consumption Charges backdated to the date that DEP
has a reasonable belief that the Billing Interference began up to a maximum of
four years in each case where DEP has issued a Determination of Billing
Interference pursuant to this Regulation. The Attributed Consumption Charges
will continue until the Billing Interference Cease and Desist Order is complied
with as confirmed by DEP inspection.
   C.   Attributed Consumption. Attributed Consumption will be based on the
predominant usage as set forth below:
      1.   Fully or Predominately Residential Service. A predominately
residential service means a service where DEP has reasonably determined that
50% or more of the water consumption is residential. In such case, Attributed
Consumption Charges will be based on an annual consumption rate of 200,000
gallons per year for the first residential unit and 170,000 gallons per year
per unit for each additional unit after the first unit. In predominately
residential service buildings, DEP may assign a residential unit equivalency or
equivalencies for the commercial units at the premises in calculating the
building’s total units.
      2.   Fully or Predominately Non-Residential Service. In cases where DEP
has determined that service at the property is fully or predominately non-
residential, Attributed Consumption Charges will be imposed on each applicable
service based on the meter size, or if there is no authorized meter installed,
the rate will be based on the size of the meter that DEP would require to be
installed on the service line. If neither the meter nor the service line size
is known to DEP, DEP may estimate the service line and meter size most likely
to be installed based on the size and usage of the premises.
Meter Size Attributed Consumption Rate
           (Gallons per Year)
Meter Size                      Attributed Consumption Rate
                                (Gallons per Year)
5/8” and less                 400,000
3/4” or more and less than 1.51,000,000
1.5” or more and less than 3�3,000,000
3” or more and less than 4” 5,000,000
4” or more and less than 6” 10,000,000
6” or more and Less than 8” 25,000,000
8” or more and less than 10”50,000,000
10” or greater                200,000,000
One hundred cubic feet approximately equals 748.052 gallons.
      3.   A premises that is connected or required to be connected to the
Wastewater System, shall be subject to the wastewater charges imposed pursuant
to Part III of the Rate Schedule on any attributed water consumption.
      4.   Nothing contained herein shall limit DEP’s ability to bill the
account on a consumption rate that is higher than the Attributed Consumption
Charges, as otherwise authorized by the Rate Schedule.
   D.   Payment Enforcement. Delinquent Charges are subject to any and all
enforcement options for nonpayment available to DEP by property class,
including but not limited to interest charges on unpaid amounts, sale of the
lien, a collection action, and termination of service in accordance with Water
Board Regulation Number 2 – Termination of Service.
Section 4. Miscellaneous Fees and Charges for Water Service
Backflow Prevention Plan Review – This fee applies when DEP reviews a backflow
prevention plan, and the fee is charged for each Service Connection.
   Fee:   $350.00
Backflow Exemption Approval Fee – This fee applies when DEP reviews an
application for an exemption from the backflow prevention plan requirement, and
the fee is charged for each Service Connection exemption application.
   Fee:   $100.00
Building Purpose Charge – For new construction, alterations or rehabilitations,
which substantially improve or alter the property as defined in Local Law 53 of
1985, a water meter must be installed before any water from the property is
used for building purposes, and charges will be assessed based upon the metered
rates.
Drilling or Excavation – This fee is charged to obtain a permit issued pursuant
to the uniform standards for certain drilling and excavation activity conducted
in close proximity to Department of Environmental Protection water tunnels,
shafts, and other critical infrastructure.
   Fee:   $1,000.00
Hydrant Use Fee – This fee is a daily charge for use of a hydrant to provide
water for various activities, including, but not limited to, mixing cement,
wetting buildings, sandblasting and other forms of construction.
   Fee:   $55.00 for each 30-day period or portion thereof
      $17.08 per day for water use
Note: In any case where the Commissioner determines that a hydrant use fee is
not representative of the amount of water to be used during construction, the
Commissioner may install a temporary construction meter, and charges will be
assessed based upon the metered rates.
Hydrant Flow Test – This fee is for testing conducted to measure pressure
adequacy of hydrants for firefighting purposes.
   Fee:   $500.00
Meter Accuracy Test – This fee is to measure the recording accuracy of a meter
at a Customer’s request.
   Fee:   $180.00
Meter Installation – This fee is for installing a meter, setter, valves, or
reading device in non-pit installation (cut-in or replacement).
   Fee:   DEP’s recent contract prices for similar work or in the absence of a
recent contract price, some other reasonable measure
Meter Installation in Pit at Customer's Request – This fee is for installing a
meter pit at a Customer's request for a new installation, where plumbing
configuration does not require a pit.
   Fee:   DEP’s recent contract prices for similar work or in the absence of a
recent contract price, some other reasonable measure
Meter Permit – This fee is for administrative costs associated with permit
processing and maintaining an accurate meter record.
   Fee:   $35.00 for 5/8" – 2" meter
      $75.00 for 3" meter or larger
Meter Reading – This fee is for each manual meter reading requested by a
Customer.
   Fee:   $25.00
Meter Repair/Replacement Due to Vandalism or Failure to Reasonably Protect
Meter – Charges levied when failure of the meter or components is due to the
Customer’s vandalism or failure to reasonably protect the meter or components.
   Fee:   DEP’s recent contract prices for similar work or in the absence of a
recent contract price, some other reasonable measure
Minor Sales – This fee is charged for the sale of minor materials, such as
elbow joints and water taps, to contractors and utilities to expedite the
completion of a job.
   Fee:   Cost of materials plus 10 percent
Private Water Main Review and Inspection – This fee is for the review and
inspection of private water main constructions.
   Fee:   Water main diameter less than 8" $1.15 per foot or part
      Water main diameter 8" or greater $1.95 per foot or part
Title Read Fee – This fee is to validate water and wastewater charges upon
transfer of property.
   Fee:   $25.00
Service Call – This fee is for a service inspection at the request of the
Customer and the complaint is found to be outside the jurisdiction of DEP.
   Fee:   up to $450.00
Ship Connections – This fee is for tugboats and other vessels connecting to the
City water supply on a pier, wharf or bulkhead.
   Fee:   $60.55, and consumption charges will be assessed based upon metered
rates.
Tap Fees – This fee is for the permit, labor and materials related to the
installation of a water tap connecting the water main to the service pipe of a
newly constructed building or replacing water taps for an existing building.
Fees vary according to tap size and whether or not DEP provides the tap. For
tap sizes larger than 2" see “Wet Connection Fees”.
 
Tap Size DEP Tap Without Tap
3/4”   $258.00 $250.00
1”     $262.00 $250.00
1 1/2” $280.00 $250.00
2”     $295.00 $250.00
Tap Location Fee – This fee is for a tap location through the use of an
electrical indicator.
   Fee:   $375.00
Tap or Wet Connection Plug – This fee is for administrative costs and to
certify that a tap or wet connection is no longer in use.
   Fee:   $200.00
Water Connection Fee – This fee is for administrative costs associated with
allowing a property to connect to the Water Supply System.
   Fee:   $200.00 for water connections
Water Shut Off – This fee is levied when DEP shuts off a Customer's water
service at the tap.
   Fee:   $1,000.00
Wet Connection Fees – This fee is for the permit, labor and materials related
to the installation of a water wet connection connecting the water main to the
service pipe of a newly constructed building or replacing water wet connections
for an existing building. See Wet Connection Fee Schedule below.
   Note: The fee for a tap size not specified in the table below is the fee for
the next largest tap size.
Wet Connection Fees
Size Valve Sleeve Labor & OTPS Total
Wet Connection Fees
Size      Valve Sleeve Labor & OTPS Total
6" x 2"   $56   $261   $1,200       $1,517
6" x 3"   $280  $368   $1,200       $1,848
6" x 4"   $304  $346   $1,200       $1,850
8" x 3"   $280  $308   $1,200       $1,788
8" x 4"   $304  $352   $1,200       $1,856
8" x 6"   $380  $412   $1,200       $1,992
12" x 3"  $280  $301   $1,200       $1,781
12" x 4"  $304  $407   $1,200       $1,911
12" x 6"  $380  $444   $1,200       $2,024
12" x 8"  $550  $696   $1,200       $2,446
16" x 3"  $280  $442   $1,200       $1,922
16" x 4"  $304  $495   $1,200       $1,999
16" x 6"  $380  $537   $1,200       $2,117
16" x 8"  $550  $788   $1,200       $2,538
16" x 12" $895  $788   $1,200       $2,883
20" x 3"  $280  $404   $1,200       $1,884
20" x 4"  $304  $790   $1,200       $2,294
20" x 6"  $380  $828   $1,200       $2,408
20" x 8"  $550  $1,180 $1,200       $2,930
20" x 12" $895  $1,453 $1,200       $3,548
24" x 3"  $280  $481   $1,200       $1,961
24" x 4"  $304  $585   $1,200       $2,089
24" x 6"  $380  $798   $1,200       $2,378
24" x 8"  $550  $1,228 $1,200       $2,978
 
Section 5. Miscellaneous Fees and Charges for Wastewater Service
Dye Test or Engineering Field Inspection – This fee is charged when DEP, at the
request of a Customer, performs a dye test to determine a property's connection
to the Wastewater System or performs an engineering field inspection to verify
the existence and condition of a sewer, catch basin, seepage basin, watercourse
or a watercourse diversion.
   Fee:   $200.00
Manhole, Catch Basin/Basin Connection or Seepage Basin Permits – This fee is
for the issuance of permits for the construction of new manholes, catch basin/
basin connections and seepage basins.
   Fee:   $200.00
Private Drainage Proposal Review and Amended Drainage Plan Review – This fee
applies to the review of private drainage proposals and amended plans as they
relate to work involving public or private wastewater systems.
   Fee:   $1,500.00 for the first 100 linear feet
      $2.00 per linear foot for each foot thereafter
Private Sewer/Drain Plan Review – This fee applies to the review of private
sewer/drain plans submitted for the construction of private wastewater systems.
   Fee:   $1,500.00 for the first 100 linear feet
      $2.00 per linear foot for each foot thereafter
Private Sewer/Drain Field Inspection – This fee is charged for the field
inspection of the construction of private wastewater systems.
   Fee:   $7.00 per linear foot
Sewer Connection Fee – This fee is for the review and administrative costs
associated with allowing a property to connect to the Wastewater System.
   Fee:   $200.00
Sewer Connection Review – 1, 2 and 3 family homes (SD 1 & 2) – This fee is for
the review and administrative costs associated with determining the capability
of the Wastewater System to receive wastewater flow from the new connection.
   Fee:   $200.00
Site Connection Review – Properties other than 1, 2 and 3 family homes – Same
as above; in addition, the review requires that catch basins must meet DEP
specifications for capacity. $325.00 minimum.
   Fee:   $0.02 per square foot for the first 10 acres
      $0.015 per square foot for each square foot after 10 acres
Sewer Plugs – This fee is to certify that a sewer service has been terminated.
   Fee:   $200.00
Section 6. Miscellaneous Credits
   A.   Lead and Copper Monitoring Program. A Customer, whose property meets
DEP’s required plumbing criteria and who is pre-registered for DEP’s lead and
copper monitoring program and has successfully completed all program
requirements to the satisfaction of DEP, will receive a credit of $100 on his/
her next regularly scheduled bill.
   B.   Customers Registered for Monthly eBilling. A Customer whose property is
enrolled in monthly eBilling will be eligible to receive a one-time credit of
$10 after issuance of the third consecutive eBill. Only one $10 credit will be
available for each qualifying account.
   C.   Home Water Assistance Program. Effective July 1, 2024, a Customer
meeting at least one of the following conditions will receive an automatic
single credit of $159.00 on the customer’s DEP account:
      1.   Receives a Home Energy Assistance Program grant administered by the
New York City Human Resources Administration or
      2.   Receives one or more of the following exemptions administered by
DOF:
         a.   Senior Citizen Homeowners' Exemption (SCHE) or
         b.   Disabled Homeowners' Exemption (DHE), including Physically
Disabled Crime Victims or
         c.   Veterans Exemption or
      3.   Is identified by DOF as a senior citizen owner-occupant with less
than $50,000 of annual income.
      If the Customer qualifies for more than one grant and/or exemption, only
one credit will be given per account.
   D.   Multi-family Water Assistance Program. Effective July 1, 2024, a
Customer meeting all of the following conditions will be eligible to receive a
$250 credit per Dwelling Unit (program limited to no more than 65,000 Dwelling
Units prioritized by lowest to highest rent affordable to households earning no
more than 60% of area median income) based on figures for the mostly recently
available fiscal year:
      1.   Is a multi-family affordable housing property identified by HPD with
at least four residential Dwelling Units, and
      2.   Average rent or maintenance is affordable (e.g., 30% of income) for
average household earning no more than 60% of Area Median Income, and
      3.   100% of Dwelling Units are affordable (as restricted by a regulatory
agreement with HPD or the NYC Housing Development Corporation (HDC)), and
      4.   Has an executed agreement with HPD or HDC to preserve affordability
for at least a 15-year period from July 1, 2024 or the date of contract
execution, whichever is later, and
      5.   Is in compliance with all applicable DEP and Water Board
regulations, including conservation requirements for metering and high-
efficiency fixtures.
      For all of the programs in this section, please visit DEP’s website
nyc.gov/DEP for program information, terms, and conditions.
Part VI – Payment and Billing Terms
Section 1. General Provisions
Please visit DEP’s website at nyc.gov/DEP for available payment and billing
options. Bills may be issued annually, quarterly, or monthly. Water and
wastewater charges and all unpaid charges are the legal responsibility of the
owner of a property receiving water and wastewater service. The owner's
responsibility to pay such charges is not affected by non-receipt of bills or
any lease, license or other arrangement, or any assignment of responsibility
for payment of such charges. Water and wastewater charges constitute a lien on
the property and a charge against the owner(s) thereof. This lien is not
removed when property is transferred. As a consequence, property owners and
purchasers are advised to obtain a meter reading or flat-rate account
reconciliation in connection with a transfer of property ownership through the
date of property ownership transfer in accordance with Part IV – Section 3. In
addition to collection action against the owner, failure to pay charges when
due may result in foreclosure of the lien by the City, the property being
placed in a lien sale by the City or any other collection enforcement remedy
available to the Water Board or DEP, including but not limited to termination
of service. All water and wastewater charges must be paid to the Water Board or
authorized agents. Full payment must be received by the Due Date to avoid the
imposition of Late Payment Charges.
Section 2. Owner Registration
Property owners are responsible for ensuring receipt of water and wastewater
bills and related notices. To this end, property owners must file a Customer
Registration Form for Water and Wastewater Billing when a property is acquired
or when a change in the mailing address occurs or for any reason necessary to
ensure receipt of water and wastewater bills and related notices. Original
bills for water and wastewater service and related notices will be mailed to
the owner, at the owner's address specified on DEP's Customer Registration Form
for Water and Wastewater Billing, which may be obtained from BCS online at
nyc.gov/DEP, by telephone at (718) 595-7000, at a borough office, or by writing
to: DEP/BCS Customer Service, P.O. Box 739055, Elmhurst, NY 11373-9055. DEP
will provide a duplicate copy of bills to one other party (such as a managing
agent) if so requested, provided, however, that any failure or delay by DEP in
providing duplicate copies of bills shall in no way relieve the owner from
their liability to pay all outstanding water and wastewater charges.
Section 3. Late Payment Charges
Late Payment Charges are the rate of interest on overdue water and wastewater
bills that are assessed in accord with the provisions of New York State Public
Authorities Law § 1045(j)(5). All billed amounts not paid by the date stated on
each bill are assessed a Late Payment Charge that is based on an annual
percentage rate of interest, or the applicable portion of an annual rate of
interest, when the time period in question is more than, or less than, one
year. The Late Payment Charge percentages are the same as those percentages
used in connection with past due taxes on real property located in the City of
New York. The percentages are established legislatively by the New York City
Council, which takes into account a recommendation presented to the City
Council by the New York City Banking Commission. The City Council and the
Banking Commission typically establish a rate of interest each year during the
springtime, and information about current interest rates can be found on the
websites of the New York City Department of Finance, the City Council, and the
City Banking Commission.
Section 4. Adjustment of Due Date
Due Dates of water and wastewater bills may be adjusted in accordance with the
following:
   A.   If a water and wastewater bill becomes delinquent because an escrow
arrangement for paying water and wastewater bills expired less than twelve (12)
months before the Bill Date of the original bill and DEP was provided notice of
a change in the account's mailing name and address, and if the property owner
brings the correct mailing name and address to the attention of DEP by
submitting an appropriate registration card to DEP within twelve months of the
Due Date of the original bill, then upon written request to DEP by the
Customer, Late Payment Charges will be removed.
   B.   A retroactive water and wastewater bill that covers a Bill Period of
more than one year may have its Due Date extended for six months from the
original Due Date.
   C.   If the installation of an AMR device results in the issuance of a bill
that includes consumption that had not been previously billed due to prior
under-estimated bills (i.e., a "catch-up" bill), Late Payment Charges will be
suspended for ninety days after the Bill Date.
Section 5. Remedies and Penalties for Nonpayment
The provisions of the Administrative Code of the City of New York relating to
the imposition and collection of water and wastewater rates and charges, and
relating to remedies and penalties for nonpayment continue in full force and
effect to the extent not inconsistent with § 1045(j) of the Public Authorities
Law and these regulations.
Section 6. Refunds
Credit balances will be applied to future charges and to charges due on other
accounts of the same owner. Any remaining credit may be refunded upon the
Deputy Commissioner’s approval of a Complete Application and verification of a
valid credit, subject to the limitations in Part IV – Section 1 with respect to
credit balances resulting from the application of a Billing Program. A Customer
must submit verifiable proof of payment, acceptable to DEP, in addition to the
complete refund application. A Customer may elect to transfer an overpayment to
another account in lieu of a refund check. Refund applications can be requested
from BCS online at nyc.gov/DEP, by telephone at (718) 595-7000, at a borough
office, or by mail to: DEP/BCS Customer Service, P.O. Box 739055, Elmhurst, NY
11373-9055. Any credit on an inactive account will expire 6 years after the
account is closed.
Section 7. Back-billing Limits
As used in this section, “Unbilled Service” means service was provided to a
property and no billing transaction(s) for that service period was posted to
the records of either the Water Board, DEP or DOF. “Unbilled Service” does not
mean that a paper bill(s) was not provided, or that the U.S. Postal Service
failed to deliver a bill(s), or that the owner’s name or address was
incorrectly recorded in the billing records with the result that a bill(s) was
not received or was forwarded to an incorrect party or to an incorrect address.
DEP shall not issue a bill for previously Unbilled Service or upwardly adjust
previously issued billing to a property after four years from the time service
was provided to such property. A reasonable administrative delay between the
end date of the service period being billed, or the date of discovery of an
unbilled or under-billed period, and the actual new bill issuance date is
permitted and not inconsistent with this provision. The Executive Director may
establish specific criteria for which a shorter back-billing limit can be
applied.
The provisions of this Section do not apply when the culpable conduct of a
Customer or a third-party caused or contributed to the failure to render timely
or accurate billing. Culpable conduct includes, without limitation, failure to
facilitate and/or provide Access to the meter or premises for inspection,
failure of a Customer’s plumber or other authorized party to secure or return a
meter permit and failure of a Customer to properly protect the meter. Premises
in violation of the Certificate of Occupancy or Use, as determined by DOB, are
not eligible for back-billing limits. The provisions of this Section shall not
apply to billing unbilled periods or upwardly adjusting bills covering specific
periods where such billing periods are contained within a longer period for
which a billing adjustment is sought by the Customer provided that the total
amount rebilled is less than the total amount billed prior to the billing
adjustment. Nothing contained herein shall require DEP to adjust a bill unless
a written complaint is filed within four years of the Bill Date.
Section 8. Exemptions
In accordance with New York State Law (Chapter 696 of the Laws of 1887, as
amended by Chapter 893 and 894 of the Laws of 1980), the premises of certain
qualifying organizations may be eligible for a full or partial exemption from
water and wastewater charges. Such premises must meet the eligibility criteria
established by law and are subject to certain administrative guidelines
established by DEP. Further information including an exemption application is
available from BCS online at nyc.gov/DEP, by telephone at (718) 595-7000, at a
borough office, or by mail to: DEP/BCS Customer Service, P.O. Box 739055,
Elmhurst, NY 11373-9055.
** Part VII – Collection Enforcement **
Section 1. Sale of Liens Arising from Outstanding Water and Wastewater Charges
   A.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Rate Schedule, after a
lien has been sold by or on behalf of the Board, charges comprising such lien
may be canceled or adjusted only with Board officer approval or a final, non-
appealable order from a court of competent jurisdiction requiring the Board to
do so.
   B.   If a lien arising from outstanding water or wastewater charges is sold
by or on behalf of the Board, Billing Programs, including but not limited to
the Cap on Metered Charges and leak forgiveness programs, will be available on
a prospective basis only, limited to charges billed after the date a lien
relating to the property affected is sold.
   C.   If a Customer has filed a complaint, appeal or final appeal of charges
pursuant to Part VIII, Sections 2.A, B or C, and a determination of such
complaint, appeal or final appeal has not been rendered as of the date of the
issuance of the 90-day lien sale list, such Customer’s water and wastewater
charges will be excluded from that lien sale.
* Section 2. Termination of Water and/or Wastewater Service *
In accordance with Sections 1045-(g)(3), 1045-(g)(4), 1045-(g)(17), 1045-h(8),
and 1045-j(5) of the New York State Public Authorities Law, the Board approved
Regulation Number 2, which authorizes DEP to discontinue or disconnect the
supply of water or the provision of wastewater service, or both, for nonpayment
of charges imposed by the Board, failure to facilitate and/or provide Access to
the premises required by DEP, or failure to comply with a Billing Interference
Cease and Desist Order. The regulation sets forth the conditions under which
DEP may terminate service and the procedures to be followed to effect a service
termination.
Section 3. Installment Payment Agreements
A Customer may enter into an installment payment agreement with DEP or the
Water Board for Delinquent Charges. Payment agreement terms may include no
minimum down payment and a repayment period of not more than 120 months for the
balance due, including interest at the rate prevailing for delinquent water/
wastewater charges. Customers can elect to make a down payment and/or a
repayment period of less than 120 months.
The proposed sale of a tax lien or tax liens on a property shall be cancelled
when a Customer enters into an agreement with DEP or the Water Board for the
payment of any such lien. If payments required from a Customer pursuant to such
an installment payment agreement are not made for a period of six months, such
Customer shall be in default of such agreement, and the tax lien or tax liens
on the subject property may be sold, provided, however, that such default may
be cured upon such Customer’s bringing all installment payments and all current
charges that are outstanding at the time of the default to a current status,
which shall include, but not be limited to, any outstanding interest and fees,
prior to the date of sale. If such default is not cured prior to the date of
sale, such Customer shall not be eligible to enter into an installment
agreement for the subject property for five years, unless there is a finding of
extenuating circumstances by the Commissioner or the Executive Director of the
Board. In addition, if a Customer defaults on the payment agreement or fails to
remain current on future charges, DEP or the Board may exercise all available
collection enforcement options, including but not limited to termination of
service.
The Commissioner or the Executive Director of the Board may prescribe either
more stringent or less stringent alternate payment agreement guidelines which
would apply as appropriate to cases including but not limited to instances
where a Customer has defaulted on a prior payment agreement and seeks to avoid
a subsequent collection enforcement action or otherwise has exhibited bad
faith, or upon a showing of cause or financial hardship demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Commissioner or Executive Director. DEP or the Water Board
may terminate payment agreements if a lien is sold by or on behalf of the City
for unpaid property taxes.
Part VIII – Customer Account Information and Complaint Resolution
Section 1. Customer Account Information
Customers are advised to review all charges carefully and promptly upon receipt
of a bill for service. A Customer may request an explanation of a bill or
charge from BCS online at nyc.gov/DEP, by telephone at (718) 595-7000, at a
borough office, or by mail to: DEP/BCS Customer Service, P.O. Box 739055,
Elmhurst, NY 11373-9055. If a Customer is not satisfied with the explanation, a
written complaint must be filed within four years of the Bill Date in
accordance with Part VIII – Section 2 below.
Customers are also encouraged to establish a My DEP Account on DEP’s website,
which will enable them to manage their account online and sign up for DEP
services such as paperless billing and direct debit payments. Customers with an
AMR device installed on their meter will also be able to monitor their
consumption through a My DEP Account.
Section 2. Complaint Resolution and Appeal Process
The following procedures are available to Customers to dispute a water and
wastewater bill until such time as a lien arising from such bill has been sold
by or on behalf of the Board. After a lien has been sold, a Customer
challenging the bills comprising such lien must challenge the bills through the
entity that owns such sold liens or its agents.
   A.   Complaint Resolution. The Customer must file a written complaint of a
disputed water and wastewater bill, which specifically sets forth the basis for
such claim, within four years of the Bill Date to DEP/BCS Customer Service,
P.O. Box 739055, Elmhurst, NY 11373-9055 or by email to
customerservice@dep.nyc.gov, provided that the time and date stamp of the email
when received by DEP and the Board will be the definitive record of the
submission time and date, and provided further that emails to other addresses
whether within or outside of DEP and the Board’s email system will not be
considered as a written submission of the complaint. To submit such complaint,
the customer may also use DEP’s Customer Dispute Form, which is available on
DEP’s website atnyc.gov/DEP or may be obtained from DEP by mail by calling
(718) 595-7000. DEP will not adjust a disputed bill unless the written
complaint is filed within four years of the Bill Date. DEP will make best
efforts to render a written decision within 90 days of receipt of the
complaint. DEP will conduct a review of the entire account and all charges
assessed within the preceding four years of the date of the written complaint.
   B.   Appeal. A Customer may appeal the decision or resolution of a Customer
complaint. An appeal must be made no later than 120 days after the date DEP
provides a written response to the complaint. Petitions for an extension of
this 120-day deadline may be presented before an appeal’s due date and will be
granted upon a showing of reasonable cause. An appeal of the charges must be
made through a written request to the Deputy Commissioner of BCS, 59-17
Junction Blvd., 13th Floor, Flushing, NY, 11373-5108 or by email to
customerservice@dep.nyc.gov, provided that the time and date stamp of the email
when received by DEP and the Board will be the definitive record of the
submission time and date, and provided further that emails to other addresses
whether within or outside of DEP and the Board’s email system will not be
considered as a written submission of the appeal. The appeal must include the
identification of the property (street address, account number) and charge or
charges that the Customer is disputing, and a statement of the reason or
reasons why the Customer believes the DEP decision is incorrect. The Deputy
Commissioner will make best efforts to render a written decision as to whether
the DEP decision is correct or incorrect, including a statement of the reasons
for the decision, within 90 days of receipt of the Customer's appeal. If
circumstances within the control of the Customer, including but not limited to
a failure to facilitate and/or provide Access to a premises or a meter,
prohibit the Deputy Commissioner from making a decision, the Customer will be
notified in writing stating why a decision cannot be rendered and indicating
what actions the Customer must take to enable the Deputy Commissioner to render
a decision. If the Deputy Commissioner determines that the DEP decision was
correct, the contested charges are due and payable as set forth on the bill or
delinquency notices. If the DEP decision is determined to be incorrect,
appropriate remedial action will be taken, including the issuance of
cancellations or corrected bills, and providing information relating to
refunds.
   C.   Final Appeal. If a Customer disagrees with the decision rendered by the
Deputy Commissioner in accordance with Part VIII – Section 2.B above, the
Customer may appeal the decision by submitting a written request to the
Executive Director of the Water Board, 59-17 Junction Blvd., 8th Floor,
Flushing, NY, 11373-5108 or by email to nycwaterboard@dep.nyc.gov, within 60
days of the date of the denial by the Deputy Commissioner, provided that the
time and date stamp of the email when received by DEP and the Board will be the
definitive record of the submission time and date, and provided further that
emails to other addresses whether within or outside of DEP and the Board’s
email system will not be considered as a written submission of the appeal.
Petitions for an extension of this 60-day deadline may be presented before an
appeal’s due date and will be granted upon a showing of reasonable cause. The
Final Appeal must include: the identification of the property (street address,
account number, or borough, block and lot number) and charge or charges that
the Customer is disputing; the Customer’s bases for disputing such charges; a
statement of the reason or reasons why the Customer believes the Deputy
Commissioner’s decision was incorrect; a copy of the Customer’s initial appeal
to the Deputy Commissioner, including any documentation submitted with that
initial appeal; and the decision of the Deputy Commissioner; and the Final
Appeal may include additional documentation to support the reversal of the
appeal. The Water Board will conduct a review of the Deputy Commissioner’s
decision. Final Appeals to the Executive Director must establish at least one
of the following conditions to be considered: (1) new or additional information
is presented; (2) the Customer demonstrates that factual information stated in
the decision of the Deputy Commissioner is incorrect; (3) the Deputy
Commissioner has not correctly interpreted or applied a Water Board rule or
rules; (4) the material facts are not as described in the decision. Final
Appellants should be aware that the Executive Director is not empowered to
overrule Water Board rules and regulations. Arguments based on hardship,
inability to pay, or lack of knowledge of rules and regulations do not
constitute a basis for overturning a previous decision. The Deputy
Commissioner’s decision will not be reversed unless the Customer can
demonstrate that an error has been made or presents additional facts relevant
to Water Board rules. The Executive Director will make best efforts to render a
decision in writing within 60 days of receipt of the final appeal. If
circumstances within the control of the Customer, including but not limited to
failure to facilitate and/or provide Access to a premises or a meter, prohibit
the Executive Director from making a decision, the Customer will be notified in
writing stating why a decision cannot be rendered. If the Executive Director
determines that the Deputy Commissioner’s decision was correct, the contested
charges are due and payable as set forth on the bill or delinquency notices. If
the Deputy Commissioner’s decision is determined to be incorrect, appropriate
remedial action will be taken, including the issuance of cancellations or
corrected bills, and providing information relating to requests for refunds or
credits.
   D.   Disposition of Late Payment Charges During the Complaint Resolution
Process.
      1.   Customers are advised to pay all charges and appeal afterward.
During the complaint resolution process, LPC on unpaid charges continue to
accrue until the charges are paid in full.
      2.   If a Customer decides not to pay a charge and in the case of an
appeal being decided in favor of a Customer, LPC in connection only with the
erroneous charge(s) will be waived.
      3.   If a Customer decides not to pay a charge and in the case of the
appeals process taking longer than the time periods specified, unless due to
circumstances within the control of the Customer as noted above, all LPC in
connection with the disputed charge may be waived for the period of the
additional delay beyond the time periods set forth above, provided that the
Executive Director does not find any such appeal to be frivolous.
      4.   If a Customer decides not to pay a charge and the questioned charges
are determined to be correct, LPC will continue to accrue from the original Due
Date of the charge until the charge is paid in full.
Part IX – Use of Meters
Section 1. Universal Water Metering Program
   A.   The Commissioner is authorized to install, cause to be installed, or
authorize owners to have installed, water meters on all Service Connections to
the Water Supply System. DEP approved water meters will be used to determine
water charges on all such premises unless stated otherwise in this Rate
Schedule.
   B.   The Commissioner is directed to develop programs to ensure the
installation of water meters on all Service Connections to the Water Supply
System. These programs may include, but are not limited to reimbursable
metering programs and may be implemented through the adoption of appropriate
rules, regulations and policy guidelines by the Commissioner.
Section 2. Maintenance and Repair of Meters
The Commissioner is responsible for the maintenance and repair of all water
meters that are connected to the Water Supply System and used by DEP for
billing purposes, except for meters used exclusively to measure Wastewater
Allowances, meters in upstate communities under separate contract with the
City, sub-meters installed or maintained as private property, and meters that
are required to be installed, repaired or maintained by the Customer to be
eligible for a reduction in charges pursuant to a Billing Program, Wastewater
Allowance, or any other modification to standard billing rates, and meters
illegally removed, vandalized, or not properly protected. The Commissioner’s
responsibility for the maintenance and repair of water meters used for billing
purposes does not extend to the building’s plumbing system, including but not
limited to service lines, control valves, check valves, and internal piping
that are the responsibility of the property owner. Accordingly, owners are
responsible for ensuring that the building’s plumbing system is in an adequate
state of repair so as to enable DEP to repair, upgrade or replace the meter.
**** Appendix B:
Regulation No. 1 – Reimbursable Metering Program ****
Effective: September 20, 1988 , as subsequently amended through this current
Amendment effective July 1, 2025.
Statement of Basis and Purpose
The regulation is authorized by Sections 1045-g(3), 1045-g(4), 1045-g(17), and
1045-j(1) of the New York Public Authorities Law, which generally provide that
the New York City Water Board (the “Board”) may adopt rules and regulations to
establish, fix and revise, from time to time, fees, rates, rents or other
charges for the use of, or services furnished, rendered or made available by,
the sewerage system or water system, or both.
The Board has previously adopted, and subsequently extended, this Regulation
No. 1 relating to reimbursement for meters installed by property owners under a
private installation program (the “Reimbursable Metering Program”), whereby
owners of unmetered properties and owners with outdated or malfunctioning water
meters are allowed the opportunity to have their meters installed/replaced by
licensed plumbers of their own choosing and to receive reimbursement from the
Board for the costs incurred, generally in the form of a credit on the owner’s
water and wastewater account.
This Regulation was initially adopted effective September 20, 1988, and has
been subsequently amended, most recently before this current amendment, by
Resolution of the Board, dated September 24, 2010. This current version of
Regulation No. 1 was considered at public hearings held on May, 27, 28 and 29,
and June 2 and 3, 2025, was approved by the Water Board on June 6, 2025. The
amounts specified in the reimbursement schedule have generally been increased
and are retroactive to July 1, 2024.
Section 1.
The Reimbursable Metering Program shall be governed by the procedures set forth
in the NYC Department of Environmental Protection’s Reimbursable Metering
Program Information Booklet. A copy of the Information Booklet is annexed
hereto as Appendix A and made a part hereof.
Appendix A
Reimbursable Metering Program
Private Installation / Replacement of Water Meters with Reimbursement
New York City Environmental Protection Bureau of Customer Services
July 1, 2025
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/979bd29bb4f170916c0ef2cd6e5bc4ddd7bcf3db/
IMAGES/0-0-0-19658.bmp]
REIMBURSABLE METERING PROGRAM OVERVIEW
All NYC properties with water service lines must also have a water meter attached that is properly
functioning. Water meters measure how much water is used at your property and
they are owned and maintained by the NYC Department of Environmental Protection
(DEP).
Water Meter Installations / Replacements
To have DEP install a new water meter or replace or repair a water meter at your property, call 
(718) 595- 7000.
Some property owners choose to use their own NYC licensed master plumbers to
install or replace their
water meters. Although rare, some property owners may be directed to hire a NYC licensed master plumber
if DEP cannot perform necessary meter installation or replacement work due to
issues with a property’s water service line.
If a licensed master plumber installs a new water meter or replaces a water meter at your property, you may
be eligible for reimbursement through DEP’s Reimbursable Metering Program
(RMP).
For water/wastewater billing assistance, call (718) 595-7000 during normal
business hours.
What to Do and Submit to Obtain a Reimbursement
1.   The “Property Owner’s Certification and Application for Reimbursement”
must be submitted to a DEP Bureau of Customer Services Borough Office (a
“Borough Office”) by the NYC Licensed Master Plumber 
(“NYC Licensed Plumber”) along with the permit application.
2.   The NYC Licensed Plumber or property owner must return the original
completed meter
permit and a final reading for the old meter in the case of meter replacements/
repairs to a Borough Office within ten (10) business days. The property owner
is responsible for ensuring that their NYC Licensed Plumber performs this task.
3.   The NYC Licensed Plumber must complete and sign the “Itemized Bill for
Reimbursement” and the property owner must complete and sign the “Property
Owner’s
Affidavit of Work Completed” forms included in the Reimbursable Metering Booklet and
submit them within 30 days of completion of the meter installation work.
4.   As soon as the meter work is completed, the property owner or their agent
must contact the Borough Office 
(phone numbers on page 9) and schedule an inspection to be held within 45 days.
An Automated Meter Reading (“AMR”) device will be installed during this
inspection. If the NYC Licensed Plumber must perform any corrective work, the
property owner must contact DEP when the work is completed for a confirmatory
inspection.
* A.   Glossary and Acronyms *
AMR Device: Automated Meter Reading Device, the meter-reading radio transmitter
wired to a water meter used to send reads automatically to DEP. Also known as a
“Meter Transmission Unit” or “MTU”.
BCS: Bureau of Customer Services
Branch Meter:
 A meter for an individual, usually commercial, tenant, which is billed by DEP.
Also called “business portion” (BP) meter.
Completed Permit: 
A meter permit returned to DEP within a required time period that includes the
meter manufacturer/model, size, type, serial number, installation date and
manufacturer test document for the new meter and the final reading for the old
meter (for replacement or eligible repair). The permit is signed/sealed by the
Licensed Plumber.
DEP: New York City Department of Environmental Protection
Domestic Water Service:
 Water piping associated with all water uses except fire protection. Compare
with: Fire Service Meter
EP Meter:
 A meter used by DEP for billing an entire premises, located at the point where the
water service enters the property. Sometimes called a “master meter”.
Electromagnetic or Electronic Meter:
 A water meter with no moving parts that operates on “Faraday’s Principle”.
Fire Service Meter:  A heavy-
duty water meter used on combined services of 3” and larger serving both
domestic needs and sprinkler or other fire protection systems.
Local Law 53/1985:
 Requires the installation of a water meter as part of major building
renovation projects or new construction
NYC Licensed Plumber:  A plumber licensed by the City of New York.
Meter Repair: 
The complete replacement of the measuring element and register of an approved
turbine, single-jet or other meter approved by DEP as qualified for repair.
Pit Meter:
 A water meter installed in an outside pit. Does not include a meter installed in an
indentation in the concrete in a basement or garage.
RCNY 
Title
 
15
 
Chapter
 
20: Rules of the City of New York; “Rules and Regulations Governing and
Restricting the Use and Supply of Water”.
RMP: Reimbursable Metering Program
Submeters: Owner meters for tenants or for specific end uses (e.g., cooling
towers).
* B.   Changes in this edition *
Rates in the Meter Repair Reimbursement Schedule have been increased and are
applicable retroactively to July 1, 2024.
DEP staff names have been updated and minor copy editing has been performed.
All original
documents should be submitted to the respective Borough Office. Copies
are submitted to the RMP Unit at Lefrak (page 7)
* C.   What is the RMP? *
Private meter installation with reimbursement is designed to provide property
owners the opportunity to have their water meters installed or replaced by a
NYC Licensed Plumber of their own choosing and to be reimbursed, at least in
part, with the exception of new or renovated construction. DEP also has
contractors available to perform this work, unless the
property has received a “meter refusal” surcharge for failing to meter an unmetered
property.
Meter replacement / installation reimbursements are available only for meters
used directly by DEP for billing. New construction, meters installed under the
requirements of Local Law 53/1985 (major renovations), submeters or branch
meters, bypass meters on backflow devices, meters for a specific end use 
(e.g., cooling towers or other end uses that qualify for a wastewater allowance
or exemption), meters removed illegally or without a permit, and meters
installed primarily to qualify for billing programs do not qualify.
If you choose to have your own NYC Licensed Plumber meter your building, any reimbursement
received will be in the form of a credit on your property’s DEP account. After
the credit is posted, it will automatically apply to your next water and
wastewater bill. If you prefer to have a refund check issued to you less any
water or wastewater debts owed, you may submit a request through My DEP Account
or call 718-595-7000 for a refund application form. Any such refund check will
only be made out to the property owner listed on the DEP account. Reimbursement
is for the cost of the meter and the pipe work necessary for its installation
only, up to a maximum reimbursement amount as stated in the Reimbursement
Schedules in this booklet. The cost of any other work required to
correct deficiencies or improve a building’s piping is not included.
Please see pages 11-
14 for the Reimbursement Schedule and maximum reimbursement amounts. It is
the property owner’s responsibility to ensure that the NYC Licensed Plumber has
submitted all required documentation to DEP.
* D.   What Properties Qualify for RMP Installation of Original Meters? *
Your property must be residential, mixed-use, or an exempt property and:
   ∙   Currently unmetered and receiving frontage or Multiple-
family Conservation Program (MCP) billing, or,
   ∙   A Homeowner’s Association (HOA) or condominium up through six stories
that is
currently master metered and wishes to install individual DEP meters for each dwelling
unit. The HOA or condominium must have separate tax lots and water/wastewater
accounts for each unit.
All the domestic service lines on your property must be metered, regardless of size. You will
be reimbursed for new meter installations that match the requirements herein.
Owners of 1-
3 family properties other than HOAs or condominiums must complete and submit a
“Customer Certification Statement” to DEP. This form can be found towards the
back of this booklet. The NYC Licensed Plumber must not proceed with the work
on such a 1-3 family property until the customer has signed this document. The
property owner should not sign any contract with a NYC Licensed Plumber nor
make any payment until the property owner reads, understands, and signs the
“Customer Certification.”
HOAs or Condominiums through Six Stories (Not Co-ops):
Please review the complete Guidelines and Requirements incorporated herein as an
Appendix.
A DEP Inspector needs to confirm that each condominium or HOA dwelling unit has its own
domestic hot water heating and space heating systems.
   Currently unmetered: For HOAs or low-rise condominiums where there is a
single water supply pipe for each dwelling unit, each unit has its own domestic
hot water and space
heating systems, and each unit has sufficient room to install a 3/
4” or 1” meter under DEP’s specifications and regulations, each dwelling unit
shall be individually metered. If no dwelling units have single domestic water
service entry points, each structure (cluster of attached units) shall be
metered. The HOA or condominium governing body may decide to install one meter
for each structure as an alternative to individual metering in cases where some
of the dwelling units in a structure cannot be individually metered.
   Currently master metered: If the HOA or condominium structure currently has
a master meter and domestic hot water and space heating systems in each unit,
the HOA or
condominium may install individual meters for each dwelling unit under the RMP, provided
that all of the owners in each affected structure or cluster agree to be
individually metered and the HOA or condominium enacts necessary bylaw changes.
A “Guidelines and Requirements” document for such properties is provided at the
end of this booklet. In all cases, additional piping work and any general
construction work (e.g., sheetrock, carpentry, moving appliances, etc.)
required for meter installation shall not be included in the reimbursement. No
reimbursements will be provided to any owner until all residential units
furnish proof of having a meter installed and all bills on the master meter
have been paid.
Owners and Licensed Plumbers are advised to contact the DEP Reimbursable Metering Unit
before proceeding with such a project.
* E.   What Properties Qualify for RMP Replacement of Existing Meters? *
A reimbursement will be provided for the replacement of a meter in any building
class that DEP would otherwise replace itself using its Contractors or
Inspection staff. These include inoperable meters of any age, meters 1 1/2” or
larger more than seven (7) years old, or a meter smaller than 1 1/2” that is
more than 10 years old. Additional qualification requirements are noted above
in Section C. If the existing installation does not meet current installation
regulations as described by RCNY
Title 15 Chapter 20 and the List of Approved Water Meters, the
replacement must be brought up to specifications, and for turbine meters, a meter manufacturer’s
strainer and test tee or faucet must be installed. Separate reimbursement
amounts are provided for replacement of the meter and for the replacement
or installation of any required strainer for a turbine meter if a strainer is
not already present. Additionally, an AMR device meeting DEP standards must be
installed by DEP.
The NYC Licensed Plumber must report the final reading from the old meter on the completed
permit.
* F.   Application and Process Steps *
   1.   The owner of an unmetered residential property decides to install a
water meter(s) for the property on their own or the owner of any type of
property decides to replace a meter that meets the criteria listed in Section
E, above. The owner calls one or more NYC Licensed Plumbers to obtain bids for
the work. The NYC Licensed Plumber should survey the property and provide the
owner with a cost proposal. Owners are cautioned against taking
bids from contractors who have not surveyed the property and are also cautioned that there is
always the possibility that complications will result in costs which were not
included in the estimate. The NYC Licensed Plumber should clearly indicate to
the customer any cost that exceeds the DEP reimbursement or costs that are not
covered by the DEP reimbursement, which the owner will have to pay. The owner
should also ask the NYC Licensed Plumber about insurance coverage and the
length of their warranty on labor. For information, DEP’s contractors provide
the City with a one-year warranty on labor, starting on the date DEP inspects
and approves an installation. DEP will not assume maintenance responsibility
for an RMP meter until one year after successful inspection of the meter
installation. An owner should not sign any contract or agree to any cost
proposal from a NYC Licensed Plumber unless the plumber has surveyed the
property, provided a detailed cost proposal, and indicated any costs above the
reimbursement amount. If it is a 1-3 family property, the customer must also
read and sign the "Customer Certification Statement" for submission to DEP.
   2.   The owner completes the “Property Owner’s Certification and Application
for the RMP”, and the NYC Licensed Plumber submits such form with a meter
permit application at a Borough Office, which issues the permit. Meter permits
are required for original and replacement meter installations and repairs. A
“break seal” permit is required for the replacement of a meter register. The
NYC Licensed Plumber should make sure that the clerk at the Borough Office
stamps the permit “Reimbursable Metering,” but a failure by DEP staff to do
this shall not disqualify an application. In the case of outdoor pit meter
installations, DEP must pre-
inspect the site to confirm that an outdoor pit meter installation
is appropriate, or the owner risks the possibility that DEP will only approve
reimbursement for an indoor installation.
   3.   The NYC Licensed Plumber installs the meter and the associated
equipment, valves, and fittings, and then submits the following documents to
the Borough Office:
      a.   The original completed permit must be submitted to a Borough Office within 10
business days of the meter installation or replacement, preferably the Borough
Office where the work was performed.  Borough Office addresses are listed on
page 9.
      b.   The following documents must be submitted to a Borough Office within
30
calendar days of the meter work. Borough Office addresses are listed on page 9.
         ∙   “Property Owner’s Certification and Application for RMP”
         ∙   “Itemized Bill for Reimbursement” 
         ∙   “Owner’s Affidavit of Work Completed”
         ∙   “Customer Certification” (for 1-3 family properties only)
   4.   DEP reserves the right to inspect each completed installation; therefore, as soon as the meter
work is completed and the permit is returned to a Borough Office, the property
owner must contact that Borough Office to schedule an inspection that must
occur within 45 days of the completion of the meter work. Failure to schedule
and/or keep this appointment will disqualify the work from RMP reimbursement.
DEP will install and/or program the AMR device during that inspection. To note,
the NYC Licensed Plumber is responsible for the meter installation’s compliance
with all codes and regulations. DEP will not be responsible for any additional
installation costs resulting from errors in the Licensed Plumber’s original
work.
      Upon submission of the completed permit, the Borough Office will attribute the meter to the
building’s water/wastewater account.
   5.   Once the meter has been attributed to the property’s account and the
work has passed
Borough Office inspection, DEP’s Reimbursable Metering Unit will apply a credit to the
property’s water /
wastewater account to reimburse the owner for the meter installation costs.
   6.   After the credit is posted, it will automatically apply to your next
water and wastewater bill. If you prefer to have a refund check issued to you
less any water or wastewater debts owed, you may submit a request through My
DEP Account or call 718-595-7000 for a refund application form. Any such refund
check will only be made out to the property owner listed on the DEP account.
* G.   Common Sources of Delays for Reimbursements and Approvals *
   1.   The NYC Licensed Plumber fails to return the completed sealed permit to
the Borough
Office from which it was issued or fails to include the meter number, final reading for the old meter,
new meter make/models, or the set date of the new meter on the permit. Neither
can the meter be set up on the water / wastewater account, nor can an
inspection be scheduled until the sealed permit is properly returned. The
permit must be returned within ten business days of completion of the work or
the NYC Licensed Plumber will be issued a Notice of Violation.
   2.   The NYC Licensed Plumber fails to install wires from the meter register to the exterior
of the building properly so that DEP can install the AMR device.
   3.   The NYC Licensed Plumber fails to drill holes in the flanges for seal wire 
(1 1/2” and larger).
   4.   Documents are mailed to a general DEP address, instead of a specific
unit.
   5.   The NYC Licensed Plumber charges the
customer sales tax. Meter installations are not  subject to sales tax for the
customer.
   6.   The reimbursement is requested for a meter that was illegally removed
or for a meter that is
being replaced only because the owner has increased the size of the water service.
Neither of these replacements is eligible for the RMP, unless the water service
is being replaced with a larger service and the original meter was not
operating properly; if the original meter was
not operating properly and the water service is replaced with a larger service, reimbursement
for the original meter size can be issued.
* H.   Important Notification to Licensed Plumbers *
DEP maintains a log of inspection failures or other repeated problems and will make a list
of
Licensed Plumbers with chronic work problems that will be made available to the public on
request. The following problems will be logged:
   ∙   Installing a pit meter when an indoor meter installation was appropriate
or telling a
customer that an indoor installation will lead to a reimbursement for an outdoor pit meter
   ∙   Poor work quality or installation work that violates Codes or DEP
specifications
   ∙   Failure to return permits to the Borough Office or furnishing incorrect information on
permits
   ∙   Failure to submit reimbursement forms in a timely manner, resulting in a delay in the
customer receiving their bill credit
   ∙   Misleading or false advertising, including anyone other than a plumbing
company
advertising plumbing services, offering unsecured guarantees of savings, or making other
claims that are not consistent with RMP rules or procedures
   ∙   Failure by the NYC Licensed Plumber to provide a labor warranty of at least one year
from the date of DEP acceptance
* I.   Sources of Additional Information *
The following documents are available at DEP’s website, nyc.gov/dep, at the
following link: https://www.nyc.gov/site/dep/pay-my-bills/resources-for-
property-managers.page.
   ∙   “List of Approved Meters and Related Equipment”
   ∙   “RCNY 
Title 15 Chapter 20”
Meter Technical Issues (Meter and Installation Specifications)
Chief Inspector, Meter Test Facility: (718) 326-8383
Chief Inspector, Manhattan Office: (212) 643-2205
Chief Inspector, Bronx Office: (718) 466-8441
Chief Inspector, Brooklyn Office: (718) 923-2603
Chief Inspector, Queens Office: (718) 595-4592
Chief Inspector, Staten Island: (718) 876-6807
Reimbursement Metering Program (General Non-Technical Questions)
Sharandeo Singh: (718) 595-4695; email: shsingh@dep.nyc.gov
Mailing Address:
   DEP BCS Account Maintenance Unit
   59-17 Junction Blvd, 7th Floor
   Elmhurst NY 11373-9055
Bureau of Customer Services Borough Offices
Manhattan:   55 West 125th Street – 9th Floor, 10027
Bronx:   1932 Arthur Avenue – 6th Floor, 10457-6374
Brooklyn:   345 Adams Street – 9th Floor 11201-3739
Queens:   59-17 Junction Blvd – 9th Floor, 11373
Staten Island   60 Bay Street – 6th Floor, 10301-2514
Permit Issues
Manhattan Permit Supervisor: (212) 643-2201
Bronx Permit Supervisor: (718) 466-8481
Brooklyn Permit Supervisor: (718) 923-2601
Queens Permit Supervisor: (718) 595-4595
Staten Island Permit Supervisor: (718) 876-6802
* J.   Reimbursable Metering Reimbursement Schedule *
REIMBURSABLE METERING REIMBURSEMENT SCHEDULE (1)
New Residential Meters for Unmetered Properties Only
Effective for Permits Returned After July 1, 2024
Type and Size of MetScheduled Reimbursement
REIMBURSABLE METERING REIMBURSEMENT SCHEDULE (1)
New Residential Meters for Unmetered Properties Only
Effective for Permits Returned After July 1, 2024
Type and Size of MetScheduled Reimbursement
Displacement Meters
5/8” or 3/4”      $1,550
1”                   $1,700
1.5”                 $2,325
2”                   Use Single-jet or Electromagnetic meter
Turbine Meters
1.5"                   $2,775
2”                   $3,875
3”                   $6,175
4”                   $8,500
6”                   $12,350
8”                   $23,175
10”                  $30,900
12”                  $35,550
Electromagnetic Meters
2”                   $4,625
3”                   $6,175
4”                   $7,725
6”                   $11,600
8”                   $20,100
10”                  $30,900
12”                  $35,550
Single-Jet Meters
¾"                    $1,550
1"                     $2,000
1½"                   $2,775
2"                     $4,025
3"                     $5,400
4”                   $7,725
6”                   $11,600
 
REIMBURSABLE METERING REIMBURSEMENT SCHEDULE (1)
New Residential Outdoor Pit Meters For Unmetered Properties Only
Effective for Permits Returned After July 1, 2024
REIMBURSABLE METERING REIMBURSEMENT SCHEDULE (1)
New Residential Outdoor Pit Meters For Unmetered Properties Only
Effective for Permits Returned After July 1, 2024
Displacement Meters Installed in Outside Pits ( See Note 2)
3/4”                                                      $4,625
1”                                                        $5,400
1-1/2”                                                    $6,175
2”                                                        $6,950
Turbine or Electromagnetic Meters Installed in Pits (See Note 2)
2”                                                        $18,225
3”                                                        $19,425
4”                                                        $20,975
6”                                                        $31,050
Single-Jet or Electromagnetic Meters Installed in Pits (See Note 2)
2”                                                        $19,125
3”                                                        $21,025
4”                                                        $23,375
6”                                                        $33,950
All Other Meters Installed in Pits or in Above-Ground Enclosures (See Note 2)
Over 6” in Outdoor Vault, Any Size in Above-Ground Individually
Enclosure                                                   negotiated
 
REIMBURSABLE METERING REIMBURSEMENT SCHEDULE
Replacement Meters Only
Effective for Permits Returned After July 1, 2024
REIMBURSABLE METERING REIMBURSEMENT SCHEDULE
Replacement Meters Only
Effective for Permits Returned After July 1, 2024
Replacement of Displacement Meters
5/8"                     $1,075
3/4"                     $1,275
1"                       $1,325
1.5"                     $2,325
2" with 2” Single-Je$2,625
Replacement of Small Single-Jet Meters
3/4”                   $1,275
1”                     $1,325
1.5”                   $2,325
Replacement of Turbine Meters with Turbine or Electromagnetic Meters
Replacement of 1.5" - $3,100
4"                       $4,475
6"                       $6,175
8"                       $9,275
10" / 12"                $15,450
16”                    $20,100
Replacement of Compound, Single-Jet or Electromagnetic Meters with Single-
Jet, Sensus OMNI C2 or Electromagnetic Meters (See Note 7)
2" / 3"                  $4,025
4"                       $5,400
6"                       $10,825
8"                       $12,350
Replacement of Fire Service Meter with New Fire Service Meter 
(Combined Services Only where one Fire Service Meter covers the entire service)
3”                     $12,350
4”                     $13,125
6”                     $15,450
8”                     $18,550
10”                    $23,175
12”                    $30,900
Replacement of Hot Water Meters (See Note 8)
3/4"                     $1,225
1"                       $1,325
1.5"                     $2,325
2"                       $2,625
 
REIMBURSABLE METERING REIMBURSEMENT SCHEDULE
Meters Repairs Only
Effective for Permits Returned After July 1, 2024
REIMBURSABLE METERING REIMBURSEMENT SCHEDULE
Meters Repairs Only
Effective for Permits Returned After July 1, 2024
Rebuild of Turbine or Single-Jet Meters (See Note 11)
1.5” – 3”                                   $1,075
4”                                               $1,550
6” – 8”                                      $2,325
10” – 12”                                    $4,625
Furnishing and Installing Strainers (only where existing turbine meter lacks a strainer)
3"                                                 $800
4"                                                 $1,025
6"                                                 $1,375
8"                                                 $2,000
10"                                                $2,575
12"                                                $2,900
Replacement of Meter Register Head(s) Only
Displacement Meters, Turbine Meters, Single-Jet $225 (Displacement or horizontal turbine),
Meters                                             $475 (Metron-Farnier Hawkeye to Innov8),
                                                   $1,550 (Sensus OMNI)
* K.   Notes, Terms, and Conditions *
   1.   Reimbursement amounts shown are for the cost of the meter, fittings,
and pipe work necessary for its installation and/
or replacement only. Except for the installation of a strainer in meter
replacement projects, the cost of any other work that may be necessary to
correct deficiencies or improve a building’s piping or general construction
work is not included in the scheduled amounts and will not be reimbursed. The
reimbursement will be equal to the scheduled amount for each size and type of
meter installed or the actual amount paid to a
plumber, whichever is less. The NYC Licensed Plumber shall provide the owner with a one-
year warranty on labor.
   2.   Meters installed in outdoor pits are only allowed for locations when a
meter location indoors is not possible as determined and approved in writing by
DEP. Failure to have DEP pre- inspect possible outdoor pit meter locations
exposes the owner to the possibility that DEP will determine that an indoor
installation could have been performed and that only reimbursement for an
indoor installation will be provided. Outdoor pit installations are
generally limited to a) homes that have finished basements where the water service enters the
home and b) confined locations where neither a positive displacement nor a
single-jet meter can be installed indoors. The reimbursement amounts indicated
above include the cost of the meter, all required appurtenances, and the meter
pit itself, which must conform to the DEP’s regulations and specifications for
meter pit installations that are contained in the “List of Approved Water
Meters and Related Equipment with Typical Water Meter Setting Details”.
The “pit meter” reimbursement amounts apply only to pits dug outside. They do
not apply to the expansion of concrete pits inside a basement, garage, or home.
   3.   All work must comply with the most recent version of “Rules and Regulations Governing
and Restricting the Use and Supply of Water” (Rules of the City of New York,
Title 15, Chapter 20) and DEP’s “List of Approved Water Meters and Related
Equipment”.
   4.   As noted in Section C, the following meters and applications do not
qualify for reimbursement: new construction meters required to comply with
Local Law 53/1985 (substantial renovations or new construction), fire
service meters on dedicated fire services,
submeters of any kind, meters for an end use which may qualify for a wastewater allowance
or billing program under the Water and Wastewater Rate Schedule, or the
replacement of meters that were removed illegally.
   5.   The NYC Licensed Plumber and applicant shall follow the specific application
procedures described in the Department’s Booklet, “Reimbursable Metering
Program”.
   6.   The reimbursement for strainers applies only if the existing meter lacks a strainer. The
NYC Licensed Plumber must submit photos of the “before” and “after” conditions.
   7.   Existing compound meters must be replaced with single-
jet, advanced turbine (Sensus OMNI C2 or T2), or electromagnetic meters.
Turbine meters will generally be replaced with either another approved turbine
meter or an electromagnetic meter. A single-jet meter may be used to replace a
turbine only if the maximum flow rate (in gallons per minute) on any building
house pump does not exceed the maximum continuous flow rate for the meter. This
must be reviewed and approved by the BCS Bureau Engineer.
   8.   Please refer to the Approved Meter List for circumstances under which
hot water meters will be replaced with reimbursement. Only large consumers of
hot water within flat-rate accounts will be considered.
   9.   This reimbursement schedule shall supersede all previous reimbursement schedules for permit
applications submitted after the effective date.
   10.   DEP reserves the right to photograph installations.
   11.   Reimbursement for meter repairs shall be limited to those
manufacturers that offer complete
replacement measuring element kits for their products. A “repair” shall include replacement
of the register head(s), measuring element(s), seals, gaskets, strainer basket,
and any other additional parts included in the manufacturer’s “kit”. The
completed permit must include a final reading from the old meter. “Repair” does
not include conversion of a meter with mechanical or other non-magnetic
couplings to modern functionality. Meters of such age must be replaced. Meter
Repairs do not involve any repairs other than those specified here.
* Property Owner’s Certification and Application for Reimbursement *
Reimbursable Metering Program
I certify that I am the property owner or the HPD-
registered managing agent of a multiple dwelling, that I have obtained a
current copy of DEP’s Reimbursable Metering Program Booklet and that I
understand the requirements and my obligations for obtaining a reimbursement
for the metering work.
Print Name: _____________________________________________
Property Address: ________________________________________
Borough: _________________ Block: __________ Lot: __________
Signature: _______________________________ Date: __________
Notary:
 
* Itemized Bill for Reimbursement *
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
BUREAU OF CUSTOMER SERVICES
Billed to: _______________________________________________
Address: _______________________________________________
Meter Location: __________________________________________
Borough: ________________ Block: __________ Lot: __________
Meter Set Date: _________________ Meter Serial No. __________
Size: ______ Meter Type (circle): __ Displ. __ Turbine __ Single-Jet __
Electromagnetic
Old Meter No. ____________________ Final Reading: __________
(For replacements/repairs)
Reimbursable Material Used:
List of Items Used Quantity Cost
TOTAL MATERIAL COST $
TOTAL LABOR COST    $
TOTAL INSTALLED COST$
NOTE: METER INSTALLATIONS ARE SALES TAX EXEMPT
Plumber Information:
Name (Print): ______________________ Signature: ______________________
License No. _______________________ Permit No. ______________________
 
* Property Owner’s Affidavit of Work Completed *
REIMBURSABLE METERING PROGRAM
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
BUREAU OF CUSTOMER SERVICES
I, ______________________ do hereby certify that the attached Itemized Bill for
Reimbursement accurately reflects the cost of and amount paid for the meter
installation/replacement at the property designated on the City Tax Map as
Borough ______________________ Block __________, Lot __________,
(Property Address ____________________________________________)
____________________________________________________________
Owner’s Signature
Date: _______________
 
Sworn to before this __________ day of __________, 20__.
Notary Public
 
* Customer Certification *
REIMBURSABLE METERING PROGRAM
NEW YORK CITY DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
BUREAU OF CUSTOMER SERVICES
(Required for all 1-
3 family installations, except multifamily homeowner associations or
condominiums)
PLEASE TYPE OR PRINT
Owner’s Name:
Installation Address:
City:             State: Zip Code:
Mailing Address (if different):
City:             State: Zip Code:
Account Number (from Water/Wastewater Bill):
Borough:          Block: Lot:
Home Phone: (  �Business Phone: (   )
Customer Certification
   1.   I certify that I am the owner of the above-
referenced property and have the legal authority to enter into a contract with
a New York City-NYC Licensed Plumber to install or replace a water
meter at this property. I certify that I have read DEP’s “Reimbursable Metering
Booklet.”
   2.   I recognize that the NYC Licensed Plumber that I hire to conduct this
work is my contractor. I recognize that the NYC Licensed Plumber is not a
contractor of the New York City Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) or
the New York City Water Board 
(NYCWB), and that DEP and the NYCWB do not “approve,” “endorse,” or “certify”
the licensed plumbing contractor. I recognize that any and all disputes or
complaints between the contractor and myself must be resolved as a contractual
matter between the contractor and myself and that DEP has no role in mediating
or arbitrating these disputes.
Professional complaints concerning the licensed plumbing contractor may be referred to the
New York City Department of Buildings. Claims for any alleged damages are a
matter for the licensed plumber’s insurance carrier.
   3.   I recognize that DEP will provide me with a credit on my water/
wastewater account which shall be equal to the amount listed in the
Reimbursable Metering Reimbursement Schedule or “Reimbursable Metering Pit
Installation Reimbursement,” as applicable, or the plumber’s actual
installation price, whichever is less. I am responsible for any costs above the
listed reimbursement amount.
   4.   The credit shall be applied to my water/wastewater account after the
installation has been inspected and approved and the meter has been established
on my account by the DEP Borough Office. Through his license responsibilities,
the NYC Licensed Plumber certifies that the installation has been performed
under the applicable Codes and Regulations.
   5.   Before making any final payment to the NYC licensed plumber I have confirmed that the
NYC licensed plumber has returned the permit to DEP and has also completed the
“Itemized Bill for
Reimbursement,” and provided me with the original of that document, or submitted the
original to DEP, while providing me with a copy.
   6.   If this is an original meter installation, I recognize that I will be placed on
metered billing within several weeks after the meter installation is inspected
and approved.
   7.   If this is an original meter installation, I also recognize that DEP
will place a credit on my water/wastewater account for the unused portion of
this year’s frontage (flat-rate) water/wastewater bill.
That credit shall be applied against future metered water/wastewater bills.
_______________________________________________________
Print Name Legibly or Type
_______________________________________________________
Signature
Date: _______________
Notary:
 
* Appendix A: Guidelines and Requirements for Individual Metering in
Condominiums up Through Six Stories Tall *
Requirements
   1.   The building must be a legally established condominium with each individual condominium
unit having a domestic hot water heater and space heating unit within the
dwelling unit and only one cold water connection into the condominium unit.
   2.   Individual water meters that are on the current DEP List of Approved
Water Meters must be installed at or very near the point of entry of the main
water service for the building. The meters must be installed according to DEP
specifications including inlet and outlet isolation valves, test port, outward
facing register face, electrical continuity (or setter) and other requirements
set forth in Title 15 Chapter 20-05 and associated sketches. If the individual
meters are not yet installed, or if existing meters must be replaced, they may
qualify for the
Water Board’s Reimbursable Metering Program. Existing meters more than twelve years old
shall be replaced by the condo with new approved meters meeting DEP’s current
meter sizing and other criteria. Pre-existing submeters must meet current DEP
requirements as described in this paragraph. DEP will not install or replace
meters itself for this purpose.
   3.   The condominium Board of Directors must pass and provide to DEP a resolution or bylaw
amendment that commits the condominium to the issues listed below under
“Required Contents of Condominium Resolution or Bylaw Amendment”.
   4.   DEP “Customer Registration Forms” for each individual condominium unit
must be submitted listing the owner’s name, condominium lot and block number,
service address including apartment number, mailing address 
(if different), email address and phone number. All owners of all individual
condominium units must agree to individual DEP metering before AMR devices will
be installed and individual meter billing can begin.
   5.   All accounts must be registered with “My DEP Account” for leak alert
notifications and
consumption monitoring. If the owner does not have an email address, the email address of a
managing agent or someone else in the employ of the owner or the condominium
may be substituted.
   6.   The condominium must be current with its existing bill and/
or current with any payment agreement.
   7.   An entire premises meter must be installed. The meter will be placed on “monitor only”
status once the individual meters are activated.
   8.   If there is a separate irrigation connection or other service, it shall have its own meter
(s) associated with the condominium’s common account.
Required Contents of Condominium Board Resolution or Bylaws Amendment
   1.   The condominium acknowledges and agrees that each individual
condominium unit will be separately charged and billed for water/
wastewater services for that individual condominium unit under the terms and
conditions of the Water and Wastewater Rate Schedule of the New York City Water
Board. Unpaid charges are a lien against the individual condominium unit and
could be sold in a tax lien sale which could ultimately result in the owner
losing their property if they do not pay what they owe.
   2.   The condominium acknowledges and agrees to the “Requirements” section
of
the “Guidelines and Requirements for Optional Individual Metering in Certain Condominiums of
Four or Five Stories” listed above.
   3.   The condominium understands and agrees with the proposed permanent mounting location
for the AMR devices.
   4.   The condominium will require any purchaser of a condominium unit to complete and submit
to DEP a Customer Registration Form at or within one week of closing on that
unit.
Note on AMR Device Mounting
The AMR device must be located above ground level and must almost always be
mounted on the exterior of the building. A minimum of six inches of space must
be available between adjacent AMR devices. There may be several different
possible mounting locations or arrangements, and DEP
will provide an inspector to survey and discuss alternatives. The final location
(s) are dependent on DEP receiving transmissions from the AMR devices.
**** Appendix C:
Regulation Number 2 – Termination of Service ****
Effective: July 1, 1999, as subsequently amended through the Fourth Amendment
effective July 1, 2025.
Statement of Basis and Purpose
The regulation is authorized by Sections 1045-g(3), 1045-g(4), 1045-g(17),
1045-h(8), and 1045-j(5) of the New York Public Authorities Law, which provide
that the rules and regulations of the New York City Water Board (the “Board”)
may provide for the discontinuance or disconnection of the supply of water or
the provision of wastewater service, or both, for nonpayment of charges imposed
by the Board.
The regulation 1 authorizes the New York City Department of Environmental
Protection (“DEP”) to terminate water and wastewater services to customers
because of nonpayment of assessed charges, failure to provide and/or facilitate
Access to the premises required by DEP, or failure to comply with a Billing
Interference Cease and Desist Order. The regulation sets forth the conditions
under which DEP may terminate service, the notice requirements to which DEP
shall adhere, the days of the week and the times of day during which DEP may
Terminate Service, special procedures to be followed in the case of medical
emergencies and the procedures for avoiding service termination by making
payment of all Delinquent Charges, or entering into a payment agreement
covering all Open and Delinquent Charges.
This Regulation was considered at a public hearing held on June 17, 1999, was
approved by the New York City Water Board at its meeting of June 22, 1999, and
became effective July 1, 1999. Subsequently, a First Amendment was approved by
the Water Board in May 2002 and became effective July 1, 2002, a Second
Amendment was approved by the Water Board in November 2007 and became effective
November 9, 2007, a Third Amendment was approved by the Water Board in February
2008 and became effective February 29, 2008, and this Fourth Amendment was
considered at public hearings held on May 27, 28, 29, and June 2 and 3, 2025,
and was approved by the Water Board on June 6, 2025. This Fourth Amendment
changes the title of this Regulation to reflect, as was always the case, that
termination may be the consequence of a Determination of Denial of Access or a
Determination of Billing Interference in addition to nonpayment; consolidates
all termination-related provisions in this Regulation; provides email and mail
addresses for the submission of proof of an exemption from termination; adds
Physician Assistants to the list of professionals who may certify a medical
exemption; extends the length of the validity of initial and renewal medical
exemption certifications, and other miscellaneous changes.
1.   This Fourth Amendment of Regulation No. 2 changes the title of the
Regulation from “Discontinuance of Water Supply and/or Sewer Service Because of
Nonpayment” to “Termination of Service.” Since its adoption in 1999, Regulation
No. 2 has always applied to termination for non-payment, as well as a failure
to provide and/or facilitate Access to the meter pursuant to a Demand for
Access or failure to comply with a Billing Interference Cease and Desist Order.
However, the previous name of Regulation No. 2 could suggest that termination
of service was limited to nonpayment not involving Denial of Access or Billing
Interference. The Board adopts the broader title, “Termination of Service,” to
more accurately describe the contents of this Regulation. No substantive change
of this Regulation was meant by the change in the name of the Regulation.
* Section 1. Definitions *
As used in this Regulation, the following terms 2 shall have the respective
meanings ascribed to them below:
2.   Terms used in this Regulation, which are not defined herein, shall have
the meanings set forth in New York City Water and Wastewater Rate Schedule then
in effect for the period during which Termination of Service was at issue.
Should the same term be defined both in this Regulation and the Rate Schedule,
for purposes of this Regulation, the definition herein shall govern.
   (1)   “Attributed Consumption Charges” are the charges authorized pursuant
to the Rate Schedule in addition to any Denial of Access Account Administration
Fee or Billing Interference Account Administration Fee, upon DEP’s issuance of
a Determination of Denial of Access or a Determination of Billing Interference,
respectively.
   (2)   “Authorized Representative” means any individual or organization who
has an original ‘Letter of Authorization’ (“LOA”) on file with DEP, signed by
the owner of the premises and notarized, designating that individual or
organization as the Authorized Representative. If such LOA fails to state a
specific end date, DEP will deem it to expire one year from the date of
notarization. A valid Letter of Authorization must contain a statement that the
owner hereby rescinds any previously issued LOA. In cases where an owner has
authorized multiple representatives, DEP shall deem the latest dated LOA to be
valid, superseding any earlier dated LOA.
   (3)   “Billing Interference Account Administration Fee” is the fee
authorized pursuant to the Rate Schedule upon DEP’s issuance of a Determination
of Billing Interference.
   (4)   “Billing Interference Cease and Desist Order” means the notice
provided to a Customer by DEP stating that the Billing Interference Account
Administration Fee and Attributed Consumption Charges have been imposed on the
Customer’s account.
   (5)   “Billing Interference Regulation” means Water Board Regulation No. 4,
Billing Interference, effective July 1, 2009, as subsequently amended by the
Board on June 6, 2025.
   (6)   “Board” or “Water Board” shall mean the New York City Water Board.
   (7)   “Charges” shall mean fees, rents or other charges imposed by the Board
and/or DEP.
   (8)   “Child” or “Children” shall mean a person under six years of age.
   (9)   “City” shall mean The City of New York.
   (10)   “Customer” means a current property owner or Authorized
Representative of a property owner.
   (11)   “Days” unless otherwise stated shall mean calendar days.
   (12)   “Delinquent Charges” means Charges which remain unpaid after the due
date thereof.
   (13)   “Demand for Access” means the issuance of a notice by DEP to a
Customer which requires the Customer to provide and/or facilitate Access to the
Customer’s premises to DEP at a time and in a manner acceptable to DEP.
   (14)   “Denial of Access” means a failure of the Customer to provide and/or
facilitate Access to DEP as required in the Demand for Access.
   (15)   “Denial of Access Account Administration Fee” is the fee authorized
pursuant to the Rate Schedule upon DEP’s issuance of a Determination of Denial
of Access.
   (16)   “Denial of Access Regulation” means Water Board Regulation No. 3,
Denial of Access, effective July 1, 2002, as subsequently amended through the
amendment effective July 1, 2025.
   (17)   “DEP” shall mean the New York City Department of Environmental
Protection.
   (18)   “Determination of Billing Interference” means DEP’s written notice of
a finding of Billing Interference. When this Regulation refers to any prior
Determination of Billing Interference, such reference shall include any prior
determination under the Theft of Service Regulation, as the Billing
Interference Regulation was known prior to this Amendment dated June 6, 2025.
   (19)   “Determination of Denial of Access” means a written notice by DEP
that a Customer has failed to provide and/or facilitate Access to the
Customer’s premises in accordance with a Demand for Access notice.
   (20)   “Determination of Termination Complaint” or “Determination” means the
written determination by the Executive Director of the Board in response to a
Termination Complaint submitted by a Customer.
   (21)   “Nonpayment” shall mean the failure or refusal, by a Customer, to pay
Charges on or before the date they are due, thereby rendering them, Delinquent
Charges.
   (22)   “Notice of Determination” shall mean the notice provided to a
Customer stating that the Executive Director of the Board has issued a
Determination of Termination Complaint.
   (23)   “Notice of Termination” shall mean the notice sent to a Customer
pursuant to Section 3.2 at least fifteen (15) days prior to the earliest date
on which DEP will effect Termination of Service.
   (24)   “Open Charges” means Charges that have been billed to the Customer,
but which remain unpaid after the due date thereof.
   (25)   “Termination Complaint” shall mean a written complaint submitted in
response to a Notice of Termination and in accordance with the procedures set
forth in Section 4 hereof.
   (26)   “Termination of Service”, “Terminate Service”, “Terminating Service”,
“Terminate”, “Termination”, and all such similar word forms shall mean the
discontinuance or disconnection of the supply of water and/or the provision of
wastewater service to any Customer.
   (27)   “Termination of Service Regulation” or “this Regulation” means this
Water Board Regulation No. 2, Termination of Service, effective February 29,
2008, as subsequently amended through the amendment effective July 1, 2025.
   (28)   “Water Board Regulations” means collectively, the Termination of
Service, Denial of Access and Billing Interference Regulations.
* Section 2. General *
2.1   Authorization to Terminate Service. DEP is hereby authorized by the
Board, to Terminate the supply of water and/or the provision of wastewater
service to any Customer for nonpayment, failure to provide and/or facilitate
Access to the premises required by DEP, or failure to comply with a Billing
Interference Cease and Desist Order, in such circumstances as are specified in,
and subject to the requirements of, this Regulation.
2.2   No Alteration of Rights, Powers and Privileges of DEP and Board. Nothing
contained herein shall be deemed to alter, amend or modify the rights, powers,
or privileges of DEP or the Board otherwise conferred by law, or to subject DEP
or the Board to the jurisdiction of any other governmental agency, authority,
board, bureau, department or other body with respect to any Termination of
Service.
2.3   Termination in Addition to Other Remedies. Anything in this Regulation to
the contrary notwithstanding, Termination of Service shall be in addition to,
and not in lieu of, any other right or remedy available to DEP or the Board
with respect to Delinquent Charges or Open Charges, including (without
limitation) the imposition and enforcement of a lien on real property or a
collection action to the extent permitted by applicable law.
2.4   Delivery of Notices. Unless otherwise specified, delivery of notices as
provided herein shall be made by regular mail.
2.5   Partial Payments. Notwithstanding any provision of 3.1 hereof, in the
event a Customer receives a Notice of Termination pursuant to Section 3.2,
payment of a portion of the amount giving rise to such Notice of Termination
shall not prevent DEP from Terminating Service to any account unless either (1)
all Charges have been paid in full or (2) a valid payment agreement has been
executed in accordance with the terms and conditions set forth herein.
2.6   Termination of Service due to Public Health Concerns. Nothing contained
herein is intended to, nor should it be interpreted as, limiting any powers of
DEP to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City by
entering a premises without notice to prevent a contamination of the Water
Supply System or other threat to the public health, safety and welfare,
including, but not limited to, situations involving a cross-connection of a
property's plumbing system, back-flow to the Water Supply System or a leaking
water consuming fixture, water supply or wastewater transport pipe.
* Section 3. Termination of Service *
3.1   (a)   Classes of Accounts Where Service May Be Terminated for Nonpayment.
Subject to Section 4 below, service may be Terminated for all classes of
accounts if there exists:
      (i)   At least one Delinquent Charge for at least six months and total
Delinquent Charges amounting to at least $500.00;
      (ii)   At least one Delinquent Charge for at least three months and total
Delinquent Charges amounting to at least $5,000.00; or
   (b)   Classes of Accounts Where Service May Be Terminated for Denial of
Access or Failure to Comply with a Billing Interference Cease and Desist Order.
If a Customer fails to provide and/or facilitate Access to the meter pursuant
to a Demand for Access or fails to comply with a Billing Interference Cease and
Desist Order, and the Customer has any Delinquent Charges, DEP may commence
Termination of Service pursuant to this Regulation on any class of accounts.
   (c)   Additional Criteria for Prioritizing Termination of Service. DEP may,
but shall not be obligated to, establish additional criteria within each such
class of account, to further prioritize and select accounts where service will
be Terminated. Such criteria may include, but shall not be limited to: the
dollar amount of Delinquent Charges; the length of time the Delinquent Charges
have remained open and unpaid; the expected effectiveness and cost of other
collection methods; the type of property which is receiving service; the
current use of such property; a prior Determination of Denial of Access; a
prior Determination of Billing Interference; the imposition of Attributed
Consumption Charges resulting from a prior Determination of Denial of Access or
a prior Determination of Billing Interference; and the eligibility of such
property for inclusion in any program for the sale or other transfer of liens
held by the Board as security for the payment of Delinquent Charges.
3.2   Notice of Termination.
   (a)   Time Period for Notice of Termination. Except as provided in Sections,
3.4(e), 4.4 and 6.3 below, prior to any Termination of Service under this
Regulation, DEP shall, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the earliest date on
which DEP will effect such Termination of Service, serve a written Notice of
Termination on the following parties:
      (i)   the subject Customer; and
      (ii)   the owner of the premises which will be affected by such
Termination of Service.
   (b)   Posting of Notice of Termination. DEP shall also affix a copy of such
Notice of Termination on the entranceway of the premises served. Such Notice of
Termination in every case shall be served either personally on the person, firm
or corporation to which it is directed, or by mailing the same via overnight
mail to such person or entity. In the case of service on the owner of the
affected premises, DEP shall be entitled to rely on the name and address of the
record owner as reflected in the records of the New York City Department of
Finance, as of the date the notice is served. In the case of service on the
Customer in the event the Customer is not the owner, DEP shall be entitled to
rely on the billing name and address of the Customer as registered in DEP’s
records.
   (c)   Contents of Notice of Termination. Each Notice of Termination served
pursuant to Section 3.2(a) above shall clearly state and include:
      (i)   the earliest date on which Termination of Service may occur;
      (ii)   the reasons for Termination of Service, including
         (aa)   in the case of nonpayment, the total amount required to be paid
to the Board to avoid Termination of Service, and the date by which such
payment must be made; or
         (bb)   in the case of Denial of Access, a list of attempts to gain
Access, the issuance of prior notices and imposition of the Denial of Access
Account Administration Fee and associated Attributed Consumption Charges; or
         (cc)   in the case of failure to comply with a Billing Interference
Cease and Desist Order, a description of the documented Billing Interference
condition observed at the property, the issuance of prior notices and
imposition of the Billing Interference Account Administration Fee and
associated Attributed Consumption Charges;
      (iii)   a description of the actions which the customer must take to
avoid Termination of Service;
      (iv)   the address and telephone number of a DEP representative that the
Customer may contact in reference to the subject account;
      (v)   a description of the procedures specified in Section 4 below, which
are available to the Customer to register a complaint about the subject
account, and to have such complaint considered before Termination of Service;
      (vi)   a summary of the exemptions set forth in Section 5 below, together
with a notice that any Customer eligible for any such exemption should contact
DEP at the telephone number indicated and provide an email address or URL to
send the required documentation establishing entitlement to an exemption;
      (vii)   a statement that any payment of Charges due with a check or draft
that is subsequently dishonored does not constitute payment, and shall entitle
the Board and DEP to Terminate Service on the account without further demand or
notice;
      (viii)   an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement with DEP in
accordance with this Regulation; and
      (ix)   a description of the process for service restoration.
   (d)   Amount to Be Paid. Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 3.1
hereof, the total amount specified in any Notice of Termination as being
required to be paid to prevent Termination of Service may include all
Delinquent Charges.
3.3   Additional Notice for Multiple Dwellings. If any Termination of Service
would result in the discontinuation of water service to an entire multiple
dwelling (as defined in the New York Multiple Dwelling Law or the New York
Multiple Residence Law), DEP shall, in addition to serving the Notice of
Termination required by Section 3.2(a) above, also post and/or mail all
additional notices required under Section 116 of the New York Public Service
Law, in the manner specified in such Section.
3.4   Physical Termination of Service.
   (a)   Timing of Termination.
      (i)   DEP shall effect Terminations of Service only on the days of the
week and during the times of day permitted under Section 89-b of the New York
Public Service Law.
      (ii)   DEP shall not Terminate Service on a date which is more than
ninety (90) days after the date of service of the related Notice of Termination
required under Section 3.2 above, unless it has, since such date of service,
issued a new Notice of Termination in the manner required by Section 3.2 above.
   (b)   Verification Prior to Termination.
      (i)   in the case of nonpayment, DEP shall verify that as of 5:00 PM on
the day prior to the date on which Termination of Service is scheduled to take
place, payment on the subject account in the full amount required to avoid
Termination of Service has not been posted to the account or a valid payment
agreement has not been executed or DEP has not granted an exemption from
Termination pursuant to Section 5 of this Regulation; or
      (ii)   in the case of Denial of Access, DEP shall verify on the day
Termination of Service is scheduled to take place that the Customer has not
provided or facilitated Access to the meter serving the subject premises as of
the beginning of such business day or DEP has not granted an exemption from
Termination pursuant to Section 5 of this Regulation; or
      (iii)   in the case of failure to comply with a Billing Interference
Cease and Desist Order, DEP shall determine whether the Customer has corrected
the Billing Interference condition as of the beginning of such business day or
DEP has not granted an exemption from Termination pursuant to Section 5 of this
Regulation.
   (c)   Discontinuance of Termination. Prior to the time that Termination is
to take place, DEP shall discontinue Termination of Service if (i) the customer
has filed a Termination Complaint in accordance with Section 4 with respect to
any charges, a Denial of Access Determination, or a failure to comply with a
Billing Interference Cease and Desist Order, giving rise to such Termination,
(ii) such complaint is received after service of, and in the manner specified
in, the related Notice of Termination, and (iii) such complaint remains under
consideration by DEP. DEP shall also discontinue termination, in the case of
Denial of Access, where the Customer has provided and/or facilitated Access to
the premises at the time of termination in a manner acceptable to DEP. DEP
shall also discontinue termination, in the case of a failure to comply with a
Billing Interference Cease and Desist Order, where the Customer has remedied
the condition giving rise to a Billing Interference determination to DEP’s
satisfaction.
   (d)   Temporary Discontinuance of Termination of Service. At the time that
Termination of Service is to take place, DEP shall temporarily discontinue such
Termination of Service if:
      (i)   the Customer claims that payment in full of all Delinquent Charges
giving rise to the Termination has been made, produces a written record of
payment, and a DEP representative confirms that sufficient payment has been
recorded on the subject account; or
      (ii)   the Customer claims that a valid payment agreement covering all
Open Charges and Delinquent Charges has been executed, produces a written
record of payment, and a DEP representative confirms that a valid payment
agreement has been recorded with respect to the subject account; or
      (iii)   the Customer has a valid exemption to Termination of Service and
produces a written record that documentation in support of such exemption has
been submitted to DEP and that DEP has not yet approved the exemption; or
      (iv)   the Customer asserts that a Termination Complaint with respect to
the subject account was filed with the Executive Director of the Board in
accordance with Section 4 hereof, and a DEP representative confirms that the
Customer has filed a Termination Complaint and that a Determination has not yet
been issued by the Executive Director.
   (e)   Invalid Payment. If a payment is made pursuant to a Notice of
Termination and such payment, whether by check, draft or other media, is
dishonored or refused by a bank or paying agent, DEP may require any subsequent
payment made to prevent Termination of Service to be made by certified check,
money order or guaranteed electronic funds transfer.
* Section 4. Termination Complaints *
4.1   Challenge to Notice of Termination. After receiving a Notice of
Termination, a Customer may submit a Termination Complaint in accordance with
the procedures set forth in Section 4.3 below. Any complaint that was submitted
by the Customer about the Charges prior to receiving a Notice of Termination
shall also be resolved in the Determination of Termination Complaint as set
forth in Section 4.4 and 4.5 herein.
4.2   Retention of Rights if Not Submitting a Termination Complaint. If a
Customer declines to submit a Termination Complaint and pays the amount set
forth in the Notice of Termination to prevent Termination of Service, such
Customer retains any rights to challenge the Charges under the Rate Schedule.
4.3   Contents of a Termination Complaint. A Termination Complaint must:
   (a)   be submitted in writing;
   (b)   include the identification of the property (street address, account
number, or borough, block and lot number) and, (i) in the case of termination
for nonpayment, the Charge or Charges that the customer is disputing and a
statement of the reason(s) why the Customer believes the Charges are incorrect,
or, (ii) in the case of Denial of Access, a statement of the reason(s) why the
Customer believes the DEP’s Demand for Access is unwarranted and that the
Denial of Access Determination has not been the subject of a final
Determination of the Water Board upholding the finding of a Denial of Access,
or, (iii) in the case of a failure to comply with a Billing Interference Cease
and Desist Order, a statement of the reason(s) why the Customer believes the
Billing Interference Cease and Desist Order is unwarranted and that the Billing
Interference Determination has not been the subject of a final Determination of
the Water Board upholding the finding of a Billing Interference;
   (c)   include a return address other than a Post Office Box address;
   (d)   include a telephone number, a fax number and an e-mail address, if
available;
   (e)   be addressed to and received by the Executive Director of the Board
within ten (10) days from the date of the subject notice of termination issued
by DEP; and
   (f)   if the Customer is not the owner, a Letter of Authorization from the
owner authorizing the Customer to file a Termination Complaint must be included
in accordance with Section 1(2).
4.4   Submission of an Incomplete Termination Complaint. The failure by a
Customer to comply with all provisions of Section 4.3 may be deemed by DEP to
constitute a failure by the Customer to make use of the Termination Complaint
procedures. Upon providing notice to the Customer that its Termination
Complaint is incomplete, DEP may Terminate Service on the account without
further demand or notice no earlier than ten (10) days after such notice of an
incomplete Termination Complaint has been issued by DEP via overnight mail,
unless the Customer cures the incomplete Termination Complaint to DEP’s
satisfaction within the ten-day period.
4.5   Determination of Termination Complaint. DEP may not terminate service
earlier than ten (10) days after a Determination of Termination Complaint has
been issued by the Executive Director of the Board. Such Determination shall be
sent by electronic mail to the address specified, if any, in 4.3(d) above. If
no electronic mail address is specified, the Determination shall be sent by
overnight mail to the address specified in 4.3(c) above. In the event that such
Determination is not in favor of the Customer sufficient to prevent Termination
of Service, DEP shall affix a Notice of Determination to the entranceway of the
premises served at least ten (10) days prior to Termination of Service.
4.6   Process After Receiving a Determination. A Determination of Termination
Complaint shall be the only written response a Customer shall receive from
either DEP or the Board in response to a Termination Complaint as well as any
complaint submitted by the Customer prior to receiving a Notice of Termination,
if applicable. Such Determination shall be considered a Final Agency
Determination.
* Section 5. Termination of Residential Service – Special Procedures *
5.1   Significant Medical Conditions.
   (a)   Suspension of Termination. DEP shall not terminate or refuse to
restore service to a residential premises when DEP is notified, by email to
watershutoff@dep.nyc.gov or by regular mail to Department of Environmental
Protection, 59-17 Junction Boulevard, 13th Floor, Flushing, New York 11373,
Attn: Collections, in accordance with this Section that a significant medical
condition exists and such condition would be aggravated by a Termination of
Service. A significant medical condition exists when a resident of such
premises suffers from a serious illness or medical condition that severely
affects his or her well-being. The Customer or such resident shall provide
written certification by a licensed medical doctor, licensed nurse
practitioner, licensed physician assistant or the New York City Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene (“NYCDOHMH”) that Termination of Service or failure
to restore service will aggravate an existing significant medical condition
suffered by a resident of the premises.
   (b)   Procedures for Initial Certification.
      (i)   Qualifications for Certification. Initial certification of a
significant medical condition may be made to DEP by a licensed medical doctor,
licensed nurse practitioner, licensed physician assistant or the NYCDOHMH
either in writing or by telephoning the Deputy Commissioner, Bureau of Customer
Services.
      (ii)   Effective Date. Initial certification is effective for ninety (90)
days from the date DEP receives it.
      (iii)   Written Acknowledgement. If the initial certification is made by
telephone, DEP must receive a written certification from the licensed medical
doctor, licensed nurse practitioner, licensed physician assistant or the
NYCDOHMH within ten (10) days or the initial certification by telephone will be
void.
      (iv)   Written Notice. Within ten (10) days of receipt of written
certification, DEP shall provide the Customer and such resident with a written
notice that:
         (aa)   DEP received such certification and such certification is
effective for ninety (90) calendar days;
         (bb)   advises the Customer and such resident of the procedures
required for renewal of certification, including specifically a statement that
if the customer or such resident does not renew the certification before the
ninety (90)-day period expires or arrangements for payment acceptable to DEP
are not made, DEP may proceed with Termination.
   (c)   Procedures for Renewal of Certification.
      (i)   Renewal. If the significant medical condition is likely to continue
beyond the expiration of any written certification, the certification may be
renewed, provided that before the expiration of the initial certification a
licensed medical doctor, licensed nurse practitioner, licensed physician
assistant or official of the NYCDOHMH submits a new written certification that
also states the expected duration of the significant medical condition and
explains the reasons why Termination of Service would aggravate the significant
medical condition.
      (ii)   Effective Date. A renewed certification remains in effect for 90
days, except for cases certified as chronic by a licensed medical doctor,
licensed nurse practitioner, licensed physician assistant or official of the
NYCDOHMH. Such renewed certification for those chronic cases shall be in effect
for 180 days or longer if documentary evidence supports such longer period. Any
request for a renewed certification shall be made in writing to the Deputy
Commissioner, Bureau of Customer Services, who shall be authorized to approve
such longer period stating any special conditions to be met by the Customer.
      (iii)   Resumption of Termination. DEP may only Terminate Service to a
Customer who has submitted a certification of a significant medical condition
after written notice, sent via overnight mail, has been provided to the
Customer and if applicable, such resident, of DEP’s determination that the
certification of a significant medical condition is no longer in effect. In
such instances, DEP shall affix a notice to the entranceway of the premises
served at least ten (10) days prior to termination.
5.2   Customers or Residents who are Elderly, Children, Blind or Disabled.
   (a)   Suspension of Termination. DEP shall not Terminate Service or refuse
to restore service to a residential premises where the Customer or any other
remaining residents of the households are known or identified to DEP, by email
to watershutoff@dep.nyc.gov or by regular mail to Department of Environmental
Protection, 59-17 Junction Boulevard, 13th Floor, Flushing, New York 11373,
Attn: Collections, within the previous six months as being blind, disabled, a
Child or 62 years of age or older without complying with the procedures set
forth in this section.
   (b)   A customer receiving a second or subsequent Notice of Termination more
than six months after providing proof of eligibility for the exemption provided
by this section 5.2 shall submit proof of continuing eligibility for the
exemption by email to watershutoff@dep.nyc.gov or by regular mail to Department
of Environmental Protection, 59-17 Junction Boulevard, 13th Floor, Flushing,
New York 11373, Attn: Collections, because one or more persons in the residence
is blind, disabled, a Child or a person 62 years of age or older and continues
to reside in the household.
5.3   Procedures During Cold Weather Periods for Premises with Heat Related
Service.
   (a)   Suspension of Termination. During Cold Weather Periods, before
Terminating Service to any residential premises with Heat Related service, DEP
shall first make an attempt to determine whether a resident of the subject
premises may suffer serious impairment to health or safety as a result of
termination, in accordance with the procedures set forth below. Doubts as to
whether a person may suffer serious impairment to health or safety as a result
of Termination of Service must be resolved in favor of making such a finding.
As used in this Section 5.3, the following terms shall have the respective
meanings assigned to each below:
      (i)   A “Cold Weather Period” shall mean that period of time from
December 21 to the last day of February of any year and at such other times
subject to the approval of the Commissioner of DEP considering temperature and
health and safety conditions.
      (ii)   “Heat Related Service” shall mean water service which is necessary
for the on-going operation of a Customer’s primary heating system.
   (b)   Impairment to Health and Safety. For the purposes of this Section 5.3,
a person may suffer serious impairment to health or safety as a result of
Termination of Service when there is evidence of any of the following:
      (i)   dependency on such service due to age, poor physical condition or
mental incapacitation;
      (ii)   use of life support systems;
      (iii)   significant medical condition as set forth in Section 5.1 hereof;
or
      (iv)   disability or blindness.
   (c)   Procedures. DEP shall not Terminate Service to Customers known to be
receiving Heat Related Service during Cold Weather Periods, unless DEP has made
an effort to contact personally the Customer or an adult resident at the
subject premises at least 72 hours before the intended termination , and if
unsuccessful, at the time of Termination of Service, in order to determine
whether a resident may suffer a serious impairment to health or safety as a
result of Termination of Service, to fully explain the reasons for Termination
of Service and to provide the Customer with information on the protections
available under this Section 5.3.
   (d)   Continuation of Termination. Where DEP determines that a resident may
suffer a serious impairment to health or safety as a result of Termination, DEP
shall not Terminate Service unless:
      (i)   DEP notifies the NYC Human Resources Administration/Department of
Social Services (“NYCHRA”) orally and in writing within ten (10) days of an
intended service termination, that a resident may suffer a serious impairment
to health or safety as a result of termination; and
      (ii)   such office, after an investigation, informs DEP that the reported
condition is not likely to result in a serious impairment to health or safety,
or that an alternative means for protecting the person’s health or safety has
been arranged.
      (iii)   if DEP has notified such office under Section 5.3 (d)(i) it must
inform the Customer of the referral and explain its purpose.
   (e)   Termination of Service
      (i)   if DEP Terminates Service to a Customer under this Section 5.3, and
the Customer or an adult resident of the subject premises was not personally
contacted by DEP before Termination of Service and the Customer has not
contacted DEP for the purpose of requesting reconnection before 12 noon on the
day following Termination of Service, DEP must, by onsite personal visit with
the Customer or other adult resident, immediately attempt to determine whether
there is continuing occupancy and whether a serious impairment to health or
safety may result if service remains terminated. If DEP determines that a
serious impairment to health or safety may result, it must immediately restore
service. If DEP is unable to make an onsite personal visit with the Customer or
an adult resident, and does not have reasonable grounds to believe that the
premises have been vacated, DEP must immediately refer the name and address of
the Customer to the NYCHRA.
      (ii)   if DEP discovers that a premises water supply and/or wastewater
service lines and/or appurtenances do not comply with City regulations
governing such service lines and appurtenances, DEP may decide to Terminate
Service to a residential premises because of an unsafe water supply or public
health condition arising out of such non-compliant service lines and equipment.
DEP shall determine, in accordance with this Section, whether a resident of the
subject premises may suffer a serious impairment to health or safety as a
result of termination. If DEP determines that a resident may suffer a serious
impairment, it must follow the procedures set forth in subdivisions (b) and (c)
above; provided however, that continued service is not required if it is
impractical for DEP to eliminate such unsafe condition. In any cases where a
resident of the subject premises may suffer a serious impairment to health or
safety and DEP Terminates Service to preclude the continuation of an unsafe
condition, DEP shall notify the NYCHRA on the same day Service is Terminated
and request an immediate consideration of the case.
* Section 6. Payment Agreement *
6.1   General. DEP shall offer each Customer issued a Notice of Termination the
opportunity to enter into a payment agreement in lieu of immediate payment of
the full amount demanded by such Notice of Termination. Execution of such an
agreement by a Customer and DEP in accordance with the terms set forth herein
will enable the Customer to avoid Termination of Service provided that the
Customer shall at all times remain in full compliance with all terms of such
agreement. Each offer of a payment agreement shall: inform the Customer of the
availability of an agreement; state the minimum terms which would be accepted
by DEP in such agreement; explain any alternate terms that may be available;
state the date by which the Customer must contact DEP and execute an agreement
in order to avoid termination of service; indicate the name and telephone
number of a DEP representative that the Customer may call to discuss an
agreement; and state what action DEP will take if a payment agreement is not
executed and returned by its due date.
6.2   Terms of Agreement. Any such payment agreement shall set forth:
   (a)   the total amount and dates of the Open Charges and Delinquent Charges
covered by such agreement;
   (b)   the time period over which such total amount shall be paid;
   (c)   the number, due date and amount of each periodic payment due under the
agreement;
   (d)   the amount of the required down payment or initial installment, which
shall be due and payable upon execution of the agreement by the Customer; and
   (e)   the interest rate to be charged on the unpaid balance under the
agreement, which shall be equal to the interest rate authorized by the New York
City Water Board Water and Wastewater Rate Schedule then in effect.
6.3   Reservation of Rights to Terminate. Anything in this Regulation to the
contrary notwithstanding, including but not limited to Sections 3.1, 3.2 and
6.2, DEP reserves the right to Terminate Service to any Customer who/which has
executed a payment agreement in response to a Notice of Termination without
further notice if the Customer fails to pay any installment or other amount
owing under such payment agreement when the same is due including but not
limited to Charges issued subsequent to such payment agreement. DEP shall issue
a notice of default to the Customer by overnight mail and affix such notice to
the entranceway of the premises served at least ten (10) days before
Termination of Service.
6.4   Defaulted Payment Agreement. In the event a Customer has failed to pay an
installment under a payment agreement or other amount owing under such payment
agreement when the same is due or has otherwise defaulted on a payment
agreement DEP shall not be required to offer a subsequent payment agreement for
a period of three years with respect to any other Notice of Termination issued
to the Customer.
* Section 7. Fee for Termination of Service *
The Board may establish, and may from time-to-time revise, fees to be charged
to Customers in connection with (i) any Termination of Service to a Customer
under this Regulation, and (ii) for any restoration of service to such
Customer. Such fees for termination and restoration of service shall be due and
payable to the Board upon performance of the work by DEP and upon issuance of
the charge. If any such fee is not paid when due, it shall be deemed a
delinquent charge and shall, to the fullest extent permitted by law, become a
lien and charge against the subject real property.
* Section 8. Restoration of Service *
Once service is terminated pursuant to this Regulation, in the case of
nonpayment, it shall not be restored unless and until any Delinquent Charges
are paid in full or have been accounted for in a payment agreement acceptable
to DEP and the Board. Once service is terminated pursuant to this Regulation,
in the case of Denial of Access, it shall not be restored unless and until
Access to the premises has been provided and any outstanding amounts owing to
the Board for the Denial of Access Account Administration Fee and associated
Attributed Consumption Charges are paid in full or have been accounted for in a
payment agreement acceptable to DEP and the Board. Once service is terminated
pursuant to this Regulation, in the case of a failure to comply with a Billing
Interference Cease and Desist Order, it shall not be restored unless and until
the Customer complies with the Billing Interference Cease and Desist Order and
any outstanding amounts owing to the Board for the Billing Interference Account
Administration Fee and associated Attributed Consumption Charges are paid in
full or have been accounted for in a payment agreement acceptable to DEP and
the Board.
* Section 9. Public Service Law *
In accordance with the requirements of the New York City Municipal Water
Finance Authority Act, all Terminations of service Shall be carried out in
accordance with the provisions of Subdivisions three-a, three-b and three-c of
Section 89-b and Section 116 of the Public Service Law, as applicable.
**** Appendix D: Regulation Number 3 – Denial of Access ****
Effective: July 1, 2002, as subsequently amended through the Second Amendment
effective July 1, 2025.
Statement of Basis and Purpose
This regulation is authorized by Sections 1045-g(3), g(4), g(17) and j(5) of
the New York Public Authorities Law, which provide that the New York City Water
Board (the “Board”) shall establish, fix, revise, charge, collect and enforce
the payment of all fees, rates, rents and other service charges for the use of,
or services furnished, rendered or made available by the water system and
wastewater utility systems of the City of New York (the “System”) and that
rules and regulations of the Board may provide for the enforcement of fees and
service charges and the discontinuance or disconnection of the supply of water
or the provision of wastewater service, or both, for non-payment of charges
imposed by the Board.
Pursuant to an Agreement of Lease, dated as of July 1, 1985, as amended (as so
amended, the “Lease”), between the City of New York (the “City”) and the Board,
the City leased the System to the Board. The Lease provides that the City shall
continue to operate and maintain such System and to enforce the rules and
regulations of the Board and of the City relating to the use thereof. This
function is performed by the New York City Department of Environmental
Protection, an executive agency of the City (“DEP”).
On metered accounts, DEP requires access to the premises to obtain and validate
meter readings to measure water consumption and in order to avoid estimated
charges, which may not reflect the actual quantity of services provided. For
the Multi-Family Conservation Program and grandfathered frontage billing
accounts, DEP must have the ability to inspect the building’s physical profile
and water-consuming fixtures. DEP also may require access on demand for cause
when necessary to inspect, test, upgrade, repair or replace meters, remote
meter reading devices or other meter appurtenances that may be malfunctioning,
have stopped registering or whose condition or reliability appears to be
uncertain. Access for cause is also necessary where meters are discovered to
have been removed or are disconnected or missing, or when the installation of a
meter bypass device or meter tampering is suspected and in all such similar
instances where a possible billing interference condition may exist. Finally,
DEP must be able to obtain access when deemed necessary or appropriate to
ensure for the proper operation and maintenance of the System and the
protection of public health, or the exercise by DEP or the Board of their
powers or duties under law.
This regulation is intended to assist DEP in the maintenance and operation of
the vast systems providing water and wastewater services to its customers and
in enforcing payment for services received when water and wastewater customers,
after reasonable notice, fail to provide and/or facilitate access to their
premises thereby preventing DEP or its agents from inspecting water and
wastewater service at the premises. To that end, this regulation authorizes DEP
to impose a Denial of Access Account Administration Fee and Attributed
Consumption Charges and to pursue all available enforcement actions for
customers that fail to provide and/or facilitate access to their premises as
required by DEP. A customer can lessen the impact of adverse denial of access
actions authorized by the Board’s Rate Schedule and this Regulation by simply
providing and/or facilitating access to the customer’s premises to DEP at a
mutually agreeable time, subject to DEP scheduling, and in a manner acceptable
to DEP.
Remedies
When DEP identifies a need for access to a customer’s premises either to obtain
an actual meter reading or on demand for cause, it shall follow the three-step
sequential notice protocol set forth in the Board’s Rate Schedule. DEP shall
impose a Denial of Access Account Administration Fee on each account where a
customer fails to provide and/or facilitate access as required by DEP in a
first written notice. DEP shall, in addition to the Denial of Access Account
Administration Fee, impose Attributed Consumption Charges on each applicable
account where a customer fails to provide and/or facilitate access as required
by DEP in a second written notice in accordance with the Rate Schedule. If an
owner fails to provide and/or facilitate access to a premises as required by
DEP in a third written notice, the account will be subject to any and all
enforcement actions available to DEP by property class, including but not
limited to sale of the lien for unpaid charges. In addition, as a last resort
and pursuant to the Termination of Services Regulation, DEP may issue a 15-day
Notice of Termination of Services to the premises for failure to facilitate
and/or provide access, and notwithstanding the foregoing, DEP may terminate
service to any account which fails to pay any charges imposed pursuant to this
Regulation in connection with denial of access if such charges are not paid by
their due date.
This regulation was considered at public hearings held on April 17, 18, and 19,
2002, was approved by the New York City Water Board at its meeting of May 3,
2002, and became effective July 1, 2002. Subsequently, a First Amendment was
approved in May 2009, and became effective on July 1, 2009. This Second
Amendment 1 was considered at public hearings held on May 27, 28, 29, and June
2 and 3, 2025, was approved by the New York City Water Board on June 6, 2025,
and became effective July 1, 2025. This Second Amendment removes provisions
relating to termination of service as a result of a Denial of Access, which
have been consolidated into the Termination of Service Regulation; revises
notice and mailing provisions for Denial of Access notices; raises the Denial
of Access Account Administration Fee from $250 to $500, but makes the Fee
refundable in certain circumstances; and other miscellaneous changes.
1.   Prior to the effective date of this Second Amendment, Regulation No. 3
previously included provisions relating to Termination of Service as a result
of a Denial of Access condition. Because those provisions were duplicative of
existing provisions in Regulation No. 2, Termination of Service, this Second
Amendment removes those provisions and refers to Regulation No. 2 regarding
termination as a result of a Denial of Access.
* Section 1. Definitions *
As used in this Regulation, the following terms 2 shall have the respective
meanings ascribed to them below:
2.   Terms used in this Regulation, which are not defined herein, shall have
the meanings set forth in New York City Water and Wastewater Rate Schedule then
in effect for the period during which Denial of Access was at issue. Should the
same term be defined both in this Regulation and the Rate Schedule, for
purposes of this Regulation, the definition herein shall govern.
   (1)   “Access” means the ability to inspect a Customer’s water and/or
wastewater service and premises in order to ensure the accuracy of charges and
includes, but is not limited to the ability to inspect, test, install, repair
or upgrade water meters, remote reading devices and any appurtenant System
equipment.
   (2)   “Attributed Consumption Charges” are the charges authorized pursuant
to the Rate Schedule in addition to the Denial of Access Account Administration
Fee upon DEP’s issuance of a Determination of Denial of Access.
   (3)   “Authorized Representative” means any individual or organization who
has an original ‘Letter of Authorization’ (“LOA”) on file with DEP, signed by
the owner of the premises and notarized, designating that individual or
organization as the Authorized Representative. If such LOA fails to state a
specific end date, DEP will deem it to expire one year from the date of
notarization. A valid Letter of Authorization must contain a statement that the
owner hereby rescinds any previously issued LOA. In cases where an owner has
authorized multiple representatives, DEP shall deem the latest dated LOA to be
valid, superseding any earlier dated LOA.
   (4)   “Billing Interference Regulation” means Water Board Regulation No. 4,
Billing Interference, effective July 1, 2009 as subsequently amended through
the amendment effective July 1, 2025.
   (5)   “Board” means the New York City Water Board.
   (6)   “Charges” means fees, rates, rents or other charges imposed by the
Board and/or DEP pursuant to the Rate Schedule.
   (7)   “City” means The City of New York.
   (8)   “Customer” means a current property owner or Authorized Representative
of a property owner.
   (9)   “Days” unless otherwise stated means calendar days.
   (10)   “Delinquent Charges” means Charges which remain unpaid after the due
date thereof.
   (11)   “Demand for Access” means the issuance of a notice by DEP to a
Customer which requires the Customer to provide and/or facilitate Access to the
Customer’s premises to DEP at a time and in a manner acceptable to DEP.
   (12)   “Denial of Access” means a failure of the Customer to provide and/or
facilitate Access to DEP as required in the Demand for Access.
   (13)   “Denial of Access Account Administration Fee” is the fee authorized
pursuant to the Rate Schedule upon DEP’s issuance of a Determination of Denial
of Access.
   (14)   “Denial of Access Regulation” means this Water Board Regulation No.
3, Denial of Access, effective July 1, 2002, as subsequently amended through
the amendment effective July 1, 2025.
   (15)   “DEP” means the New York City Department of Environmental Protection
or any authorized agents of DEP.
   (16)   “Determination of Denial of Access” means a written notice by DEP
that a Customer has failed to provide and/or facilitate Access to the
Customer’s premises in accordance with a Demand for Access notice.
   (17)   “Open Charges” means Charges that have been billed to the Customer,
but which remain unpaid after the due date thereof.
   (18)   “Rate Schedule” means the Board’s Water and Wastewater Rate Schedule
then in effect when the Denial of Access occurred.
   (19)   “System” means the Water Supply System and the Wastewater System
collectively.
   (20)   “Termination of Service”, “Terminate Service”, “Terminating Service”,
“Terminate”, and all such similar word forms mean the discontinuance or
disconnection of the supply of water and/or the provision of wastewater service
to any Customer.
   (21)   “Termination of Service Regulation” means Water Board Regulation No.
2, Termination of Service, effective February 29, 2008, as subsequently amended
through the amendment effective July 1, 2025.
   (22)   “Water Board” means the New York City Water Board.
   (23)   “Water Board Regulations” means collectively, the Termination of
Service, Denial of Access and Billing Interference Regulations.
   (24)   “Water Supply System” and “Wastewater System” means, respectively,
the water system and wastewater system under the control and jurisdiction of
the Board.
* Section 2. General *
2.1   Authorization to Pursue Enforcement Actions. Upon a Determination of
Denial of Access, DEP is hereby authorized to pursue all actions in accordance
with the Rate Schedule including the imposition of a Denial of Access Account
Administration Fee and Attributed Consumption Charges and all such other
enforcement actions as authorized by the Rate Schedule and the Water Board
Regulations. Customers that disagree with the imposition of the Denial of
Access Account Administration Fee or Attributed Consumption Charges imposed
pursuant to this Regulation may utilize the Board’s complaint and appeal
process as provided for in the Rate Schedule.
2.2   Authorization to Terminate Service. DEP is hereby authorized by the Board
to Terminate the supply of water and/or the provision of wastewater service to
any Customer for Denial of Access, in such circumstances as are specified in,
and subject to, the requirements of the Termination of Services Regulation.
2.3   No Alteration of Rights, Powers and Privileges of DEP and Board. Nothing
contained herein shall be deemed to alter, amend or modify the rights, powers,
or privileges of DEP or the Board otherwise conferred by law, or to subject DEP
or the Board to the jurisdiction of any other governmental agency, authority,
board, bureau, department or other body with respect to any Determination of
Denial of Access.
2.4   Termination in Addition to Other Remedies. Anything in this Regulation to
the contrary notwithstanding, Termination of Service, pursuant to the
Termination of Service Regulation, shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of,
any other right or remedy available to DEP or the Board with respect to
Delinquent Charges or Open Charges, including (without limitation) the
imposition and enforcement of a lien on real property or a collection action to
the extent permitted by applicable law.
2.5   Delivery of Notices. Unless otherwise specified, delivery of notices as
provided herein shall be made by regular mail.
* Section 3. Denial of Access Notice Procedures, Fee, and Attributed
Consumption Charges *
3.1   Denial of Access Notice Procedure. If a Customer fails to provide and/or
facilitate Access as required by DEP, DEP may issue a first written notice to
the Customer that requires the Customer to provide and/or facilitate Access to
DEP within a fixed period of time. This first written notice shall be sent by
regular mail to the Owner and any Authorized Representative at the property
address and any other address to which the Customer receives the bills for
water and wastewater charges, to any Authorized Representative at the address
provided to DEP, and to any email addresses of the Customer or Authorized
Representative on file with DEP.
   If Access has not been provided and/or facilitated by the expiration date
set forth in the first written notice, the account will be subject to the
imposition of a Denial of Access Account Administration Fee. The owner will be
notified of the imposition of the Denial of Access Account Administration Fee
through the issuance of a second written notice sent by regular and certified
mail to the owner and any Authorized Representative at the property address and
any other address to which the Customer receives the bills for water and
wastewater charges, to any Authorized Representative at the address provided to
DEP, and to any email addresses of the Customer or Authorized Representative on
file with DEP. This second notice will cite the Denial of Access Account
Administration Fee and require that the Customer provide and/or facilitate
Access to DEP within an additional fixed period of time. If a Customer fails to
provide and/or facilitate Access by the expiration date set forth in the second
written notice, the account will be subject to the imposition of Attributed
Consumption Charges from the expiration date of the second written notice to
the date the Customer provides and/or facilitates Access in a manner acceptable
to DEP.
   The bill containing Attributed Consumption Charges and a third written
notice requiring the Customer to provide and/or facilitate Access to DEP within
a fixed period of time will be sent by regular and certified mail to the owner
and any Authorized Representative at the property address and any other address
to which the Customer receives the bills for water and wastewater charges, to
any Authorized Representative at the address provided to DEP, and to any email
addresses of the Customer or Authorized Representative on file with DEP. The
third written notice will advise the Customer that if Access is not provided
and/or facilitated by the expiration date set forth in this third notice, the
account will be subject to any and all enforcement options available to DEP,
including those noted in the Rate Schedule or this Water Board’s Regulation
Number 3 – Denial of Access.
   Should DEP does not make any of the mailings or email notifications set
forth in this Section 3.1, it shall have no bearing on DEP’s ability to impose
the Denial of Access Account Administration Fee or any Attributed Consumption
Charges, provided that DEP has proof of the Customer’s or Authorized
Representative’s actual knowledge of the Denial of Access condition.
3.2   Denial of Access Account Administration Fee. DEP shall impose a Denial of
Access Account Administration Fee of $500 on each account when a Customer fails
to provide and/or facilitate Access as required by DEP in a first written
notice. DEP will refund the Denial of Access Account Administration Fee to the
Customer by issuing a credit on the Customer’s Water Board account, under the
following circumstances:
   (a)   Access has been facilitated and/or provided;
   (b)   DEP has ceased billing any Attributed Consumption Charges placed on
the Customer’s Water Board account as a result of the Determination of a Denial
of Access because the issue requiring Access has been resolved to DEP’s
satisfaction;
   (c)   Other than the Denial of Access Account Administration Fee and any
related Attributed Consumption charges, there are no other Delinquent Charges
on the Customer’s Water Board account;
   (d)   There has been no Termination of Service as a result of the Denial of
Access;
   (e)   The number of calendar days between the date of the first Demand for
Access and the date when Access is facilitated and/or provided is less than 90
days, unless an appointment for a DEP inspection is not available within 90
days of the first Demand for Access and the Customer facilitates and/or
provides Access to DEP at the first available, scheduled appointment date; and
   (f)   Notwithstanding whether the Customer meets the requirements of
subsections (a) to (e) above, the Deputy Commissioner of DEP’s Bureau of
Customer Services, under appropriate, extenuating circumstances, may agree to
refund the Denial of Access Account Administration Fee.
3.3   Attributed Consumption Charges. DEP shall impose Attributed Consumption
Charges, as calculated and specified in the Rate Schedule, for each applicable
service where a Customer fails to provide and/or facilitate Access as required
by DEP in a second written notice. DEP will stop billing based upon Attributed
Consumption Charges once Access has been facilitated and/or provided to DEP’s
satisfaction. Should any inspection of the Customer’s premises reveal
conditions constituting a Billing Interference condition, as provided for in
the Billing Interference Regulation and following the procedures specified
therein, DEP may impose the Billing Interference Account Administration Fee, as
defined in the Billing Interference Regulation, and may impose Attributed
Consumption Charges based upon the Billing Interference condition,
notwithstanding a prior imposition of Attributed Consumption Charges resulting
from a Denial of Access. However, in no event, shall DEP impose Attributed
Consumption Charges during the same period for both Denial of Access and
Billing Interference.
* Section 4. Termination of Service *
4.1   (a)   Classes of Accounts Where Service May Be Terminated. Subject to the
procedures set forth in the Termination of Services Regulation, service may be
Terminated to any class of accounts for Denial of Access.
   (b)   Additional Criteria for Prioritizing Termination of Service. DEP may,
but shall not be obligated to, establish additional criteria within each such
class of account to further prioritize and select accounts where service will
be Terminated. Such criteria may include, but shall not be limited to: the
length of time the Customer has failed to facilitate and/or provide Access to
the premises; the dollar amount of Delinquent Charges; the length of time the
Delinquent Charges have remained open and unpaid; the type of property which is
receiving service; the current use of such property; and the eligibility of
such property for inclusion in any program for the sale or other transfer of
liens held by the Board as security for the payment of delinquent Charges.
   (c)   Exemptions. A Customer may be eligible for an exemption to
Termination, where a resident living at the subject property (i) has a
significant medical condition, (ii) is blind, (iii) is disabled, (iv) is a
child under the age of 6, or (v) is 62 years of age or older. The procedure to
claim such an exception is set forth in Section 5 of the Termination of
Services Regulation.
* Section 5. Denial of Access Complaints *
5.1   Challenges to Notice of Denial of Access. If a Customer receiving a
Notice of Denial of Access wishes to submit a complaint about such notice, such
Customer shall comply with the procedures set forth in the Complaint Resolution
and Appeal Process set forth in the Rate Schedule.
* Section 6. Restoration of Service *
In the case of a Denial of Access where service has been Terminated pursuant to
the Termination of Service Regulation, such service shall not be restored
unless and until Access to the premises has been facilitated and/or provided
and any outstanding fees owing to the Board for the Denial of Access Account
Administration Fee and any other fees imposed as a result of the Termination
pursuant to the Termination of Service Regulation, or for the restoration of
service, shall have been paid to the Board in full or have been accounted for
in a payment agreement acceptable to DEP and the Board.
**** Appendix E: Regulation Number 4 – Billing Interference ****
Effective: July 1, 2009, as subsequently amended through the amendment
effective July 1, 2025.
Statement of Basis and Purpose
This regulation is authorized by Sections 1045-g(3), g(4), g(17) and j(5) of
the New York Public Authorities Law, which provide that the New York City Water
Board (the “Board”) shall establish, fix, revise, charge, collect and enforce
the payment of all fees, rates, rents and other service charges for the use of,
or services furnished, rendered or made available by the water system and
wastewater utility systems of the City of New York (the “System”) and that
rules and regulations of the Board may provide for the enforcement of fees and
service charges and the discontinuance or disconnection of the supply of water
or the provision of wastewater service, or both, for non-payment of charges
imposed by the Board.
Pursuant to an Agreement of Lease, dated as of July 1, 1985, as amended (as so
amended, the “Lease”), between the City of New York (the “City”) and the Board,
the City leased the System to the Board. The Lease provides that the City shall
continue to operate and maintain such System and to enforce the rules and
regulations of the Board and of the City relating to the use thereof. This
function is performed by the New York City Department of Environmental
Protection, an executive agency of the City (“DEP”).
It is evident that when a customer receives System services it should be billed
a fair and equitable amount in proportion to the quantity of services provided
and received and in proportion to other users of the System. When actions taken
by a customer interfere with or have the potential to interfere with the
accurate measurement of service usage to the extent that the usage measurement
devices may reflect less than the quantity of services actually received, the
charges rendered for such usage accordingly may be understated. Such billing
interference by a customer, whether by direct action or by the toleration of
actions taken by others, negatively affects the Board’s ability to levy and
collect rates and charges in a fair and equitable manner from all properties
connected to the System and imposes additional costs on every responsible
customer of the System. This Regulation is intended to recover those costs
directly from the parties responsible for or benefiting from the impairment of
System revenue. In addition, water and wastewater charges are a lien on the
premises served and all charges issued pursuant to this regulation will, if
unpaid, constitute a lien on the property served and a charge against the owner
thereof.
When system services are tampered with, a reasonable inference can be made that
the party receiving the tampered service received more services than was
previously charged and collected. Therefore, the charges imposed for the period
of suspected billing interference should be in excess of the average recorded
usage for the property. Because billing interference implies impeding the
ability of service usage measurement devices to record actual usage, it is
impossible to know with certainty the precise quantity of services received. In
order to properly recover the appropriate revenue a reasonable approximation of
the usage level must be made. This estimation should serve to both recover the
revenue associated with the amount of services which could have been received
and at the same time act as a rational disincentive to other and future billing
interference. Accordingly, the Board will impose an attributed consumption
charge that will be equivalent generally to usage by high consumers in the
building usage class associated with the property in question for the
applicable period of prospective and retroactive billing. In addition, this
Regulation will impose charges to recover the fixed costs associated with
investigating and determining that services and revenue were compromised and
that the tampered service has been corrected by imposing a fixed account
administration fee on each account where a determination of billing
interference has been made by DEP. Customers that disagree with the imposition
of the account administration fee or attributed consumption charge may utilize
the Board’s existing appeal process as provided for in the Rate Schedule.
DEP procedures require that, upon installation of a meter connected to the
water supply system, DEP must inspect and seal the meter. Sealing of the meter
indicates DEP approval of the installation and prevents tampering. Whenever it
inspects a meter, DEP always inspects to make sure that the meter is sealed and
that the seal remains intact. If the seal is broken, it becomes possible for
anyone to tamper with the meter and to falsify readings. Accordingly, having an
unsealed meter in place constitutes billing interference.
This regulation was considered at public hearings held on April 27, 28, 29, and
30, 2009, was approved by the New York City Water Board at its meeting of May
15, 2009, and became effective July 1, 2009. This First Amendment was
considered at public hearings held on May 27, 28, 29, June 2, and 3, 2025, was
approved by the New York City Water Board on June 6, 2025, and became effective
July 1, 2025. This First Amendment changes the title of this Regulation from
“Theft of Service” to “Billing Interference;” 1 adds a provision for the
issuance of a Billing Interference Warning Notice issued prior to the
imposition of the Billing Interference Account Administration Fee and
Attributed Consumption Charges; explicitly lists conditions that have always
been one of the predicates for a Determination of Billing Interference, though
previously not listed by name in the Regulation; explicitly excludes conditions
that do not constitute Billing Interference; revises notice and mailing
provisions for Billing Interference Warning Notices and Billing Interference
Cease and Desist Orders; and other miscellaneous changes.
1.   Since its adoption in 2009 and by its very terms, Regulation No. 4 has
always applied to both intentional and unintentional, but otherwise culpable,
conduct that impedes DEP’s ability to accurately bill water consumption and/or
imposes costs on the System. The use of the term Billing Interference more
accurately describes the content of Regulation No. 4. Any reference to a prior
determination of Billing Interference in this Regulation, Water Board
Regulation No. 2, Termination of Service, Water Board Regulation No. 3, Denial
of Access, and the Rate Schedule, includes any prior determination of Theft of
Service pursuant to this Regulation No. 4 prior to the effective date of this
current version of Regulation No. 4.
* Section 1. Definitions *
As used in this Regulation, the following terms 2 shall have the respective
meanings ascribed to them below:
2.   Terms used in this Regulation, which are not defined herein, shall have
the meanings set forth in New York City Water and Wastewater Rate Schedule then
in effect for the period during which Billing Interference was at issue. Should
the same term be defined both in this Regulation and the Rate Schedule, for
purposes of this Regulation, the definition herein shall govern.
   (1)   “Access” means the ability to inspect a Customer’s water and/or
wastewater service and premises in order to ensure the accuracy of charges and
includes, but is not limited to the ability to inspect, test, install, repair
or upgrade water meters, remote reading devices and any appurtenant System
equipment.
   (2)   “Attributed Consumption Charges” are the charges authorized pursuant
to the Rate Schedule in addition to the Billing Interference Account
Administration Fee following DEP’s issuance of a Determination of Billing
Interference.
   (3)   “Authorized Representative” means any individual or organization who
has an original ‘Letter of Authorization’ (“LOA”) on file with DEP, signed by
the owner of the premises and notarized, designating that individual or
organization as the Authorized Representative. If such LOA fails to state a
specific end date, DEP will deem it to expire one year from the date of
notarization. A valid Letter of Authorization must contain a statement that the
owner hereby rescinds any previously issued LOA. In cases where an owner has
authorized multiple representatives, DEP shall deem the latest dated LOA to be
valid, superseding any earlier dated LOA.
   (4)   Billing Interference” means such circumstances as set forth in Section
3.1 of this Regulation.
   (5)   “Billing Interference Account Administration Fee” is the fee
authorized pursuant to the Rate Schedule upon DEP’s issuance of a Determination
of Billing Interference.
   (6)   “Billing Interference Cease and Desist Order” means the notice
provided to a Customer by DEP stating that the Billing Interference Account
Administration Fee and Attributed Consumption Charges have been imposed on the
Customer’s account.
   (7)   “Billing Interference Regulation” means this Water Board Regulation
No. 4, Billing Interference, effective July 1, 2009 as subsequently amended
through the amendment effective July 1, 2025.
   (8)   “Billing Interference Warning Notice” means the notice provided to a
Customer by DEP warning that, if the Customer fails to act within 30 days to
correct the illegal plumbing condition or, in the case where DEP has evidence
of actual water usage during any time when the billing interference condition
persisted and regardless of whether the illegal plumbing condition is fixed
within the 30 day period, DEP will impose the Billing Interference Account
Administration Fee and Attributed Consumption Charges on the Customer’s account
pursuant to a subsequently issued Billing Interference Cease and Desist Order.
   (9)   “Board” means the New York City Water Board.
   (10)   “Charges” means fees, rates, rents or other charges imposed by the
Board and/or DEP pursuant to the Rate Schedule.
   (11)   “City” means The City of New York.
   (12)   “Customer” means a current property owner or Authorized
Representative of a property owner.
   (13)   “Days” unless otherwise stated means calendar days.
   (14)   “Delinquent Charges” shall mean Charges which remain unpaid after the
due date thereof.
   (15)   “Demand for Access” means the issuance of a notice by DEP to a
Customer which requires the Customer to provide and/or facilitate access to the
Customer’s premises to DEP at a time and in a manner acceptable to DEP.
   (16)   “Denial of Access” means a failure of the Customer to provide and/or
facilitate access to DEP as required in the Demand for Access.
   (17)   “Denial of Access Regulation” means Water Board Regulation No. 3,
Denial of Access, effective July 1, 2002, as subsequently amended through the
amendment effective July 1, 2025.
   (18)   “DEP” means the New York City Department of Environmental Protection
or any authorized agents of DEP.
   (19)   “Determination of Billing Interference” means DEP’s written notice of
a finding of Billing Interference.
   (20)   “Rate Schedule” means the Board’s Water and Wastewater Rate Schedule
then in effect when the Billing Interference occurred.
   (21)   “System” means the Water Supply System and the Wastewater System
collectively.
   (22)   “Termination of Service”, “Terminate Service”, “Terminating Service”,
“Terminate”, and all such similar word forms mean the discontinuance or
disconnection of the supply of water and/or the provision of wastewater service
to any Customer.
   (23)   “Termination of Service Regulation” means Water Board Regulation No.
2, Termination of Service, effective February 29, 2008, as subsequently amended
through the amendment effective July 1, 2025.
   (24)   “Water Board” means the New York City Water Board.
   (25)   “Water Board Regulations” means collectively, the Termination of
Service, Denial of Access and Billing Interference Regulations.
   (26)   “Water Supply System” and “Wastewater System” mean, respectively, the
water system and wastewater system under the control and jurisdiction of the
Board.
* Section 2. General Provisions *
2.1   No Alteration of Rights, Powers and Privileges of DEP and Board. Nothing
contained herein shall be deemed to alter, amend or modify the rights, powers,
or privileges of DEP or the Board otherwise conferred by law, or to subject DEP
or the Board to the jurisdiction of any other governmental agency, authority,
board, bureau, department or other body with respect to any Determination of
Billing Interference.
2.2   Delivery of Notices. Unless otherwise specified, delivery of notices as
provided herein shall be made by regular mail.
2.3   Termination in Addition to Other Remedies. Anything in this Regulation to
the contrary notwithstanding, Termination of Service, pursuant to the
Termination of Service Regulation, shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of,
any other right or remedy available to DEP or the Board with respect to
Delinquent Charges, including (without limitation) the imposition and
enforcement of a lien on real property or a collection action to the extent
permitted by applicable law.
* Section 3. Determination of Billing Interference *
3.1   Definition of Billing Interference.
   (a)   The Customer is responsible for safeguarding the meter and meter
appurtenances and ensuring the integrity of the property’s plumbing system. DEP
shall make a Determination of Billing Interference upon a finding by DEP that
any of the following conditions are present on a premises and that such
conditions reasonably are associated with the taking of System services and the
impairment of the billing therefor:
      i.   Unauthorized bypass of the meter;
      ii.   Tampering with the meter;
      iii.   Breaking, picking or damaging the meter seal;
      iv.   Removing, disabling or adjusting meter registers;
      v.   Removing the meter or removing and installing the meter backwards;
      vi.   Moving the meter without permission;
      vii.   Installing or replacing a meter without a permit from DEP or
installing or replacing a meter and failing to return the completed permit to
DEP or having a meter in place without DEP sealing the meter;
      viii.   Extending authorized flat-rate residential services to any
unauthorized commercial users;
      ix.   Extending authorized flat-rate residential services to any
additional unauthorized residential services;
      x.   Unauthorized connections to water lines, hydrants, valves or other
appurtenances not owned by the Customer;
      xi.   Tampering with any equipment designed to supply or to prevent the
supply of any System services either to the public or to the Customer’s
premises;
      xii.   Use of sprinkler system water service for any purpose other than
fire protection;
      xiii.   Obstructing, defacing or destroying the meter to prevent a meter
reading;
      xiv.   Any unauthorized direct or indirect connection to the meter or
water supply system;
      xv.   Any unauthorized direct or indirect connection to the sewer system;
or
      xvi.   Any other action or inaction that may reasonably result in costs
to the System or the loss of revenue to the Board.
   (b)   The following conditions shall not be deemed to constitute Billing
Interference:
      i.   Having a tee connection before the meter, for which the customer
received approval from DEP and for which there is no evidence of water usage
from the unmetered leg of the tee connection; and
      ii.   Removing a meter without a permit, where the water service was
previously plugged or the tap connecting the service line to the water main has
been destroyed pursuant to a DEP permit.
3.2   Observation of Billing Interference. If DEP observes a Billing
Interference condition, DEP shall issue a Billing Interference Warning Notice.
This Warning Notice shall be sent by regular mail to the owner and any
Authorized Representative at the property address and any other address to
which the Customer receives the bills for water and wastewater charges, and to
any email addresses of the Customer or Authorized Representative on file with
DEP. The Billing Interference Warning Notice shall require the Customer to
correct any conditions identified therein within thirty days of the notice date
and shall require the Customer to promptly provide and/or facilitate Access to
the premises for a confirmation inspection at a time and in a manner acceptable
to DEP. Should the Customer fail to correct the unlawful condition and request
a confirmation inspection within 30 days of the Billing Interference Warning
Notice, or, in the case where DEP has evidence or a reasonable belief of actual
water usage during any time when the billing interference condition persisted
and regardless of whether the illegal plumbing condition is fixed within the 30
day period, DEP shall issue a Determination of Billing Interference and a
Billing Interference Cease and Desist Order, which shall impose on the
Customer’s account the Billing Interference Account Administration Fee and
Attributed Consumption Charges as indicated in the Rate Schedule. This
Determination and Order shall be sent by regular and certified mail to the
owner and any Authorized Representative at the property address and any other
address to which the Customer receives the bills for water and wastewater
charges, to any Authorized Representative at the address provided to DEP, and
to any email addresses of the Customer or Authorized Representative on file
with DEP.
   Should DEP not make any of the mailings or email notifications set forth in
this section 3.2, it shall have no bearing on DEP’s ability to impose the
Billing Interference Account Administration Fee or any Attributed Consumption
Charges, provided that DEP has proof of the Customer’s actual knowledge of the
Billing Interference condition.
3.3   Suspicion of Billing Interference. DEP may suspect Billing Interference
in any situation where DEP has a reasonable basis to believe a Billing
Interference condition exists, including but not limited to stagnant or low
meter readings for the property type or a Denial of Access. In such
circumstances, DEP may issue to the Customer a Demand for Access to the meter
and the premises. The Demand for Access notice shall be sent by regular and
certified mail to to the owner and any Authorized Representative at the
property address and any other address to which the Customer receives the bills
for water and wastewater charges, to any Authorized Representative at the
address provided to DEP, and to any email addresses of the Customer or
Authorized Representative on file with DEP. The Demand for Access shall provide
the Customer with information on how to arrange an inspection with DEP. The
Customer must provide and/or facilitate Access within fourteen (14) days of the
notice.
   (a)   Customer Provides Access – No Billing Interference. If the Customer
provides and/or facilitates Access to the premises within fourteen (14) days of
the notice and the inspection confirms there is no Billing Interference or
suspected Billing Interference, the account will not be subject to the Billing
Interference Account Administration Fee and Attributed Consumption Charges, but
may be subject to any upward or downward adjustment of charges otherwise
authorized pursuant to the Rate Schedule.
   (b)   Customer Provides Access – Determination of Billing Interference. If
the Customer provides and/or facilitates Access to the premises within fourteen
(14) days of the Demand for Access notice and the inspection confirms a Billing
Interference condition, DEP shall issue a Billing Interference Warning Notice
as set forth in Section 3.2.
   (c)   Customer Does Not Provide Access. If Access is not provided and/or
facilitated within fourteen (14) days of the date of the Demand for Access
notice, DEP is authorized to pursue all enforcement actions authorized by the
Water Board Regulations and the Rate Schedule.
* Section 4. Fees and Charges *
4.1   Billing Interference Account Administration Fee and Attributed
Consumption Charges. DEP shall impose the Billing Interference Account
Administration Fee and Attributed Consumption Charges backdated to the date
that DEP has a reasonable belief that the Billing Interference began up to a
maximum of four years as indicated in the Rate Schedule in each case where DEP
has issued a Determination of Billing Interference pursuant to this Regulation.
DEP will continue billing based upon Attributed Consumption Charges will
continue until the Billing Interference Cease and Desist Order is complied with
as confirmed by DEP inspection.
4.2   Meter Repair or Replacement. Pursuant to the Rate Schedule, the Customer
is responsible for the actual replacement or repair cost to any meter or DEP
equipment that has been damaged.
4.3   Customer Appeal of Fees or Charges. Customers that disagree with the
imposition of the Billing Interference Account Administration Fee or Attributed
Consumption Charges imposed pursuant to this Regulation and the Rate Schedule
may utilize the Board’s appeal process as provided for in the Rate Schedule.
* Section 5. Enforcement *
5.1   Lienable Charges. All Billing Interference charges and fees are Charges
and if they are not paid are a lien on the premises served pursuant to
Section1045-j of the New York State Public Authorities Law.
5.2   Termination of Service for Failure to Comply with a Billing Interference
Cease and Desist Order. If a Customer fails to comply with a Billing
Interference Cease and Desist Order, DEP may commence Termination of Service
pursuant to Water Board Regulation No. 2, Termination of Service.
Chapter 43: Air Code Penalty Schedule
§ 43-01 General.
   1.   Unless otherwise indicated, all citations are to the New York City
Administrative Code.
   2.   Sections marked with an asterisk (*) indicate that the conduct or
activity is subject to an aggravated penalty for excess profit, equal to twice
the amount of money saved by respondent as a result of its failure to comply.
When an aggravated penalty is sought, it will be indicated on the face of the
summons and no stipulation will be offered. The respondent will be required to
appear.
   3.   "Stipulation" is abbreviated as "Stip."
   4.   "N/A" means not applicable.
   5.   Except in connection with violations of § 24-163, a second or third
offense means a violation of any section of the Air Code by the same respondent
within two years of the date of occurrence of the prior violation, at the same
premises (if premises-related), and involving the same equipment. In connection
with violations of § 24-163, a second or third or subsequent offense is a
violation by the same respondent within three years of the date of occurrence
of the prior violation(s) and involving the same vehicle, where the prior
violation(s) was for a violation of § 24-163.
   6.   "(Mitigation: 01)" A zero penalty may be imposed for a first offense
following a respondent's timely submission to DEP (within 45 days of the return
date indicated on the Notice of Violation) of acceptable certification of
compliance and admission of liability.
   7.   Each summons shall provide that a respondent may admit to such
violation and pay the corresponding penalty amount set forth in 15 RCNY §
43-02.
(Added City Record 4/11/2016, eff. 5/11/2016; amended City Record 3/27/2023,
eff. 4/26/2023; amended City Record 12/16/2024, eff. 1/15/2025)
§ 43-02 Air Code Penalty Schedule.
   When a respondent is found in violation of any of the following provisions
of the New York City Administrative Code, Rules of the City of New York, or New
York Codes, Rules and Regulations, any civil penalties imposed by a Hearing
Officer under 48 RCNY §
6-17(a) and/or any default penalties imposed under 48 RCNY §
6-20(b) in accordance with Section 1049-a(d)(1)(d) of the Charter, and/or any
civil penalties imposed for admissions of violation(s) under 48 RCNY §
6-09(a) or late admissions under 48 RCNY §
3-17, will be imposed in accordance with the following penalty schedule:
 
                               1st                             2nd           3rd
                               Offense                         Stip. 3rd and and
Section Violation              Stip.   1st     Default 2nd     or    Subsq.  Subsq.
of Law  Description Compliance or      Offense Penalty Offense Admit Offense Stip.
                               Admit   ($)     ($)     ($)           ($)     or
                               ($)                             ($)           Admit
                                                                             ($)
                                                                                          2nd           3rd
                                                                                          Stip. 3rd and and
                   Violation                   1st Offense      1st     Default   2nd     or    Subsq.  Subsq.
Section of Law     Description   Compliance    Stip. or Admit   Offense Penalty   Offense Admit Offense Stip.
                                               ($)              ($)     ($)       ($)           ($)     or
                                                                                          ($)           Admit
                                                                                                        ($)
                   Failure to
Admin. Code        allow DEP to  Allow access  200              200     800       400     400   600     600
§ 24-108(c)       obtain        forthwith
                   samples
                   Location of
                   key to boiler Post sign/
Admin. Code        room not      provide key - 200              200     800       400     400   600     600
§ 24-108(f)       posted or no  forthwith
                   key on
                   premises
                   Spraying
Admin. Code        insulation    Register for
§ 24-109(a)(1)    material      spraying -    800              800     3,200     1,600   1,600 2,400   2,400
                   without       forthwith
                   registration
                   Building      Register
Admin. Code        demolition    demolition    800              800     3,200     1,600   1,600 2,400   2,400
§ 24-109(a)(2)    without       site -
                   registration  forthwith
                   Unregistered
                   boiler or     Obtain
Admin. Code        water heater- registration  400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
§ 24-109(a)(3)    350,000 -     - 60 days
                   4,200,000
                   btu/hr
                   Unregistered
                   boilers or
Admin. Code        water         Obtain
§ 24-109(a)(4)    heaters-      registration  400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
                   aggregate     - 60 days
                   350,000+ btu/
                   hr
                   Unregistered
                   fuel burning
                   equipment or  Obtain
Admin. Code        portable      registration  400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
§ 24-109(a)(5)    equipment-    - 60 days
                   350,000 -
                   4,200,000
                   btu/hr
                   Unregistered  Obtain
Admin. Code        emergency     registration  400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
§ 24-109(a)(6)    generator -   - 60 days
                   40 kw+
                   Unregistered  Obtain
Admin. Code        portable      registration  400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
§ 24-109(a)(7)    generator -   - 60 days
                   40 kw+
                   Unregistered  Obtain
Admin. Code        portable      registration  400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
§ 24-109(a)(8)    engine -      - 60 days
                   50 - 600 hp
                   Unregistered  Obtain
Admin. Code        stationary    registration  400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
§ 24-109(a)(9)    generator -   - 60 days
                   40 - 450 kw
                   Unregistered  Obtain
Admin. Code        stationary    registration  400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
§ 24-109(a)(10)   engine -      - 60 days
                   50 - 600 hp
                   Unregistered
                   engine used   Obtain
Admin. Code        at            registration  400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
§ 24-109(a)(11)   construction  - 60 days
                   site - 50 hp
                   +
                   Unregistered
                   equipment
                   with          Obtain
Admin. Code        environment   registration  400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
§ 24-109(a)(12)   al rating of  - 60 days
                   C -
                   100 - 2,000
                   cfm
                   Unregistered
                   cogeneration  Obtain
Admin. Code        system -      registration  400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
§ 24-109(a)(13)   350,000 -     - 60 days
                   4,200,000
                   btu/hr
Admin. Code        Unregistered  Obtain
§ 24-109(a)(14)   flare         registration  400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
                                 - 60 days
                   Unregistered  Obtain
Admin. Code        gasoline      registration  400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
§ 24-109(a)(15)   dispensing    - 60 days
                   station
Admin. Code        Unregistered  Obtain
§ 24-109(a)(16)   commercial    registration  400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
                   char broiler  - 60 days
                   Unregistered
Admin. Code        equipment-    Obtain
§ 24-109(a)(17)   all other     registration  400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
                   emission      - 60 days
                   sources
                   Failure to
                   notify        Notify of
Admin. Code        regarding     change -      400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
§ 24-109(f)       change in     forthwith
                   registration
                   information
                   Operating     Obtain
Admin. Code        emission      renewal of
§ 24-109(g)       source with   registration  400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
                   expired       - 60 days
                   registration
                   Failure to
                   cancel
                   existing      Cancel
Admin. Code        registration  existing      400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
§ 24-109(h)       upon          registration
                   registration  - forthwith
                   of new
                   equipment
                   Failure to
                   notify and    Notify and
Admin. Code        cancel        cancel
§ 24-109(i)       registration  registration  400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
                   when removing - forthwith
                   registered
                   equipment
                   Interference  Stop
Admin. Code        with or       interference
§ 24-111          obstruction   with          400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
                   of DEP        personnel -
                   personnel     forthwith
                   Making /      Submit
                   filing false  accurate/
Admin. Code        or misleading truthful      No               400     1,600     800     No    1,200   No
§ 24-112          statements /  documented
                   documents     information -
                                 forthwith
                   Permit,       Post permit,
Admin. Code        certificate,  certificate,
§ 24-113          or            or            200              200     800       400     400   600     600
                   registration  registration
                   not displayed - forthwith
                   Installation
                   of refuse     Remove
Admin. Code        burning       prohibited
§ 24-118          equipment     equipment -   No               1,600   6,400     3,200   No    4,800   No
                   other than    forthwith
                   permitted
                   types
                   Equipment     File plans
Admin. Code        installed /   and
§ 24-120          altered       application - 800              800     3,200     1,600   No    2,400   No
                   without work  30 days
                   permit
                   Operating
                   permitted     Obtain
Admin. Code        equipment     operating     800              800     3,200     1,600   1,600 2,400   2,400
§ 24-122(a)       without       certificate -
                   operating     90 days
                   certificate
                   Operating
                   fuel burning  Obtain
Admin. Code        equipment     operating     800              800     3,200     1,600   No    2,400   No
§ 24-122(b)(1)    without       certificate -
                   operating     90 days
                   certificate
                   Operating
                   process       Obtain
Admin. Code        equipment     operating     800              800     3,200     1,600   No    2,400   No
§ 24-122(b)(2)    without       certificate -
                   operating     90 days
                   certificate
                   Operating
                   portable      Obtain
Admin. Code        equipment     operating     800              800     3,200     1,600   No    2,400   No
§ 24-122(b)(3)    without       certificate -
                   operating     90 days
                   certificate
                   Operating
                   permitted
                   types of      Obtain
Admin. Code        refuse        operating
§ 24-122(b)(4)    burning       certificate - 800              800     3,200     1,600   No    2,400   No
                   equipment     90 days
                   without
                   operating
                   certificate
                   Operating     File for
                   without       renewal of
Admin. Code        renewal of    operating     800              800     3,200     1,600   No    2,400   No
§ 24-123(d)       expired       certificate -
                   operating     30 days
                   certificate
                   Failure to
                   comply with   Comply with
Admin. Code        conditions of conditions -  200              200     800       400     400   600     600
§ 24-131          work permit   forthwith
                   or operating
                   certificate
Admin. Code        Improper      Recertify
§ 24-135          transfer of   application - 400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
                   work permit   forthwith
                   Spraying
                   asbestos onto
                   building or   Stop spraying
Admin. Code        structure     asbestos -    400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
§ 24-140          during        forthwith
                   construction,
                   alteration or
                   repair
Admin. Code        Emission of   Stop odorous
§ 24-141          odorous air   emission -    400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
                   contaminant   forthwith
                   Emission of   Operate
Admin. Code        air           without
§ 24-142          contaminant   further       400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
                   (smoke)       emissions -
                                 forthwith
                   Emission of   Operate
Admin. Code        air           without
§ 24-143          contaminant   further       200              200     800       400     400   600     600
                   from motor    emissions -
                   vehicle       forthwith
                                 Prevent
Admin. Code        Emission of   particulates
§ 24-145          particulates  from becoming 800              800     3,200     1,600   1,600 2,400   2,400
                                 airborne -
                                 forthwith
                   Dust allowed  Keep dust
Admin. Code        to become     from becoming 400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
§ 24-146(b)       airborne      airborne -
                                 forthwith
                   Dust          Keep dust
Admin. Code        resulting     from becoming
§ 24-146(c)       from          airborne -    400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
                   construction  forthwith
                   activity
                   Failure to    Take
                   take          precautions
Admin. Code        precautions   to prevent
§ 24-146(d)       to prevent    dust from     400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
                   dust from     becoming
                   lots covered  airborne -
                   by ZR 12-10   forthwith
                   Spraying of
                   insulation    Take proper
Admin. Code        material      precautions
§ 24-146(e)       without       for spraying  800              800     3,200     1,600   1,600 2,400   2,400
                   proper        - forthwith
                   required
                   precaution
                   Failure to    Take proper
Admin. Code        take required precautions
§ 24-146(f)       precautions   for           800              800     3,200     1,600   1,600 2,400   2,400
                   during        demolition -
                   demolition    forthwith
                                 Reduce
                   Emission of   nitrogen
Admin. Code        nitrogen      oxides        800              800     3,200     1,600   1,600 2,400   2,400
§ 24-147          oxides from   emissions to
                   boiler        legal limits
                                 - forthwith
                   Use of        Stop use of
Admin. Code        prohibited    prohibited    800              800     3,200     1,600   1,600 2,400   2,400
§ 24-148          architectural coating -
                   coating       forthwith
                   Causing or
                   permitting    Stop use of
Admin. Code        air           open fire -   200              200     800       400     400   600     600
§ 24-149          contaminant   forthwith
                   from open
                   fire
                   Burning       Stop use of
Admin. Code        improper fuel improper fuel 400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
§ 24-149.1(a)     in outdoor    - forthwith
                   wood boiler
                   Impermissible
Admin. Code        smoke         Stop emission
§ 24-149.1(b)     emission from from boiler - 400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
                   outdoor wood  forthwith
                   boiler
                   Improperly
                   operating     Stop improper
Admin. Code        outdoor wood  operation of  400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
§ 24-149.1(c)     boiler under  boiler -
                   250,000 btu/  forthwith
                   hr
                   Operating     Stop
Admin. Code        outdoor wood  operating
§ 24-149.1(d)     boiler over   boiler -      400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
                   250,000 btu/  forthwith
                   hr
                   Operating     Stop
Admin. Code        fireplace as  operating
§ 24-149.2(b)     primary       fireplace -   400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
                   source of     forthwith
                   heat
                   Operating new Use proper
Admin. Code        fireplace     fuel -        400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
§ 24-149.2(c)     with improper forthwith
                   fuel
                   Operating
Admin. Code        existing      Use proper
§ 24-149.2(d)     fireplace     firewood -    400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
                   with improper forthwith
                   firewood
                   Operating
                   fireplace not Stop using
Admin. Code        in compliance fireplace -   400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
§ 24-149.2(e)     with federal  forthwith
                   emissions
                   standards
                   Operating
                   wood burning  Stop
Admin. Code        heater as     operating     400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
§ 24-149.3(a)     primary       heater -
                   source of     forthwith
                   heat
                   Operating     Stop
                   wood burning  operating
Admin. Code        heater with   heater with   400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
§ 24-149.3(b)     non-          improper fuel
                   renewable     - forthwith
                   fuel
                   Operating
                   commercial
                   char broiler  Install
Admin. Code        to cook 875+  emissions     800              800     3,200     1,600   1,600 2,400   2,400
§ 24-149.4(b)     lbs of meat   control -
                   without       forthwith
                   emissions
                   control
                   Failure to
                   keep          Maintain
Admin. Code        maintenance   records -     800              800     3,200     1,600   1,600 2,400   2,400
§ 24-149.4(e)     records for   forthwith
                   commercial
                   char broiler
                   Failure to
                   maintain
                   records
Admin. Code        showing       Maintain
§ 24-149.4(f)     amount of     records -     800              800     3,200     1,600   1,600 2,400   2,400
                   meat cooked / forthwith
                   purchased for
                   commercial
                   char broiler
                   Operating
                   cookstove     Install
Admin. Code        without       required      400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
§ 24-149.5        emission      device -
                   control       forthwith
                   device
                   Operating     Stop
Admin. Code        stationary    operating
§ 24-149.6(a)     generator not generator -   400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
                   equipped with forthwith
                   Tier 4 engine
                   Concealing or Undo
                   masking of    concealment
Admin. Code        air           or masking of 800              800     3,200     1,600   1,600 2,400   2,400
§ 24-151          contaminant   air
                   emission      contaminant -
                                 30 days
                   Air           Reduce air
                   contaminant   contaminant
Admin. Code        emission      level as per  800              800     3,200     1,600   1,600 2,400   2,400
§ 24-153          exceeding     environment
                   environment   al rating -
                   al rating     forthwith
                   Mold                                                 1,000
                   assessment,                                          (1st
                   abatement or  Cause such                             offense)/
                   remediation   work to be                             5,000
Admin. Code        for a project performed by  800              800     (2nd      1,600   1,600 2,400   2,400
§ 24-154(b)       performed by  an authorized                          offense)/
                   a covered     person                                 10,000
                   person or an                                         (3rd
                   unlicensed                                           offense)
                   person
                                                                        1,000
                                                                        (1st
                   Failure to                                           offense)/
Admin. Code        file notice   File notice                            5,000
§ 24-154(c)       of mold       forthwith     800              800     (2nd      1,600   1,600 2,400   2,400
                   project as                                           offense)/
                   required                                             10,000
                                                                        (3rd
                                                                        offense)
                   Improper      Maintain
Admin. Code        maintenance   equipment     400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
§ 24-155          of equipment  properly -
                                 forthwith
                   Use of fuel   Use required
                   burning       apparatus
Admin. Code        equipment     while         400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
§ 24-156          without       operating
                   required      equipment -
                   apparatus     forthwith
                   Use of fuel   Operate
                   burning       equipment
Admin. Code        equipment by  with
§ 24-159          person        qualified     200              200     800       400     400   600     600
                   without       personnel -
                   certificate   forthwith
                   of fitness
                   No air        Install and
Admin. Code        contaminant   use air
§ 24-160          recorder for  contaminant   400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
                   boiler        recorder -
                                 forthwith
                   Operating
                   fuel burning  Obtain
Admin. Code        equipment     certificate
§ 24-161          without       of            200              200     800       400     400   600     600
                   certificate   instruction -
                   of            180 days
                   instruction
                                                                        1st:
                   Idling of                                            1,000;
Admin. Code        motor vehicle                                        2nd:
§ 24-163          engine more   N/A           N/A              350     1,500;    440     N/A   600     N/A
                   than three                                           3rd and
                   minutes                                              subsq:
                                                                        2,000
                   Idling of                                            1st:
                   motor vehicle                                        1,000;
Admin. Code        engine more                                          2nd:
§ 24-163(f)       than one      N/A           N/A              350     1,500;    440     N/A   600     N/A
                   minute while                                         3rd and
                   adjacent to                                          subsq:
                   school                                               2,000
                   Failure to    Use low
Admin. Code        use ultra low sulfur fuel
§ 24-163.3(b)(1)* sulfur diesel in non-road   1,000            1,000   10,000    5,000   5,000 5,000   5,000
                   fuel in non-  vehicle -
                   road vehicle  forthwith
                   Failure to
                   use best
                   available     Use best
Admin. Code        technology    available     1,000            1,000   10,000    5,000   5,000 5,000   5,000
§ 24-163.3(b)(2)* for emission  technology -
                   reduction in  forthwith
                   non-road
                   vehicle
                   Failure to
                   comply with
                   solid waste /
Admin. Code        recyclable    Use ULSDF -
§ 24-163.5(b)(1)* contract spec forthwith     1,000            1,000   10,000    5,000   5,000 5,000   5,000
                   to use ultra
                   low sulfur
                   diesel fuel
                   (ULSDF)
                   Failure to
                   comply with
                   solid waste /
                   recyclable
Admin. Code        contract spec Use BART -    1,000            1,000   10,000    5,000   5,000 5,000   5,000
§ 24-163.5(b)(2)* to use best   forthwith
                   available
                   retrofit
                   technology
                   (BART)
                   Failure to
                   use best
                   available
Admin. Code        retrofit      Use BART -    1,000            1,000   10,000    5,000   5,000 5,000   5,000
§ 24-163.6(b)*    technology    forthwith
                   for
                   sightseeing
                   bus
                   Failure to
Admin. Code        use ultra low Use ULSDF -
§ 24-163.7(b)(2)* sulfur diesel forthwith     1,000            1,000   10,000    5,000   5,000 5,000   5,000
                   fuel in
                   school bus
                   Failure to
                   use best
Admin. Code        available     Use BART -
§ 24-163.7(c)*    retrofit      forthwith     1,000            1,000   10,000    5,000   5,000 5,000   5,000
                   technology in
                   school bus as
                   per schedule
                   Failure to
                   use ultra low
Admin. Code        sulfur diesel Use ULSDF -
§ 24-163.8(b)(1)  fuel in       forthwith     500              500     500       500     500   500     500
                   generator for
                   film/TV/Ad/
                   street fair
                   Failure to    Retrofit bus
                   retrofit      with
Admin. Code        diesel school crankcase
§ 24-163.9(b)*    bus with      ventilation   1,000            1,000   10,000    5,000   5,000 5,000   5,000
                   crankcase     system -
                   ventilation   forthwith
                   system
                   Using diesel
                   school bus    Stop use of
Admin. Code        older than16  buses older
§ 24-163.9(c)*    years to      than 16 years 1,000            1,000   10,000    5,000   5,000 5,000   5,000
                   fulfill       - forthwith
                   school bus
                   contract
                   Failure to    Replace
                   replace       retired
Admin. Code        retired       school bus
§ 24-163.9(d)*    school bus    with          1,000            1,000   10,000    5,000   5,000 5,000   5,000
                   with low-     compliant bus
                   emission      - forthwith
                   school bus
                   Failure to                  10,000/ vehicle
                   use best                    in violation
                   available                   (mitigation:0 1
                   retrofit                    if correction
Admin. Code        technology in Use BART -    certified within         10,000/
§ 24-163.11(b)    heavy duty    forthwith     60 days)         No      vehicle   N/A     N/A   N/A     N/A
                   trade waste                 (separate
                   hauling                     penalty of 500/
                   vehicle as of               day for each day
                   1/1/2020                    not corrected
                                               after 60 days)
                   Operating
Admin. Code        soot blower   Stop using
§ 24-164          on vessel     soot blower - 400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
                   within city   forthwith
                   waters
                   Failure to
                   use air       Use air
Admin. Code        contaminant   contaminant   400 (mitigation: 400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
§ 24-165          detector/     detector -    0¹)
                   recording as  forthwith
                   required
                   Use of        Use properly
Admin. Code        inadequate    functioning   200 (mitigation:
§ 24-166          combustion    shutoff       0¹)             200     800       400     400   600     600
                   shut-off      device -
                   device        forthwith
Admin. Code        Improper use  Use equipment
§ 24-167          of equipment  as per code - 200              200     800       400     400   600     600
                   or apparatus  forthwith
                   Use of        Use fuel
Admin. Code        improper fuel specified for
§ 24-168          in fuel       equipment -   800              800     3,200     1,600   1,600 2,400   2,400
                   burning       forthwith
                   equipment
                   Use or        Use or
                   delivery of   deliver
Admin. Code        heating oil   heating oil   800              800     3,200     1,600   1,600 2,400   2,400
§ 24-168.1        containing    with at least
                   less than 2%  2% biodiesel
                   biodiesel     - forthwith
                   Use/purchase/
                   sale/offer/   Purchase and
                   storage/      use fuel with
Admin. Code        transport of  proper sulfur 1,600            1,600   6,400     3,200   3,200 4,800   4,800
§ 24-169(a)       fuel with     content -
                   excess sulfur forthwith
                   content (#2
                   oil)
                   Use/purchase/
                   sale/offer/   Purchase and
                   storage/      use fuel with
Admin. Code        transport of  proper sulfur 1,600            1,600   6,400     3,200   3,200 4,800   4,800
§ 24-169(b)       fuel with     content -
                   excess sulfur forthwith
                   content (#4
                   oil)
                   Use of coal   Stop use of
Admin. Code        in fuel       coal -        1,600            1,600   6,400     3,200   3,200 4,800   4,800
§ 24-173          burning       forthwith
                   equipment
                   Failure to
Admin. Code        report        File fuel
§ 24-176          shipment of   trip tickets  200              200     800       400     400   600     600
                   fuel to NYC   - forthwith
                   as required
                   Failure to    Supply
                   have required required info
Admin. Code        statement on  on fuel       200              200     800       400     400   600     600
§ 24-177(a)       fuel          tickets -
                   information   forthwith
                   ticket
                   Failure to
Admin. Code        retain fuel   Retain fuel
§ 24-177(b)       information   info tickets  200              200     800       400     400   600     600
                   tickets by    - forthwith
                   shipper
                   Failure to    Retain fuel
Admin. Code        retain fuel   info tickets  200              200     800       400     400   600     600
§ 24-177(c)       records for   for one year
                   one year      - forthwith
                   Breaking a    Stop
Admin. Code        Board ordered tampering     1,600            1,600   4,000     2,480   No    2,480   No
§ 24-178(b)(8)    seal          with seal -
                                 forthwith
                   Miscellaneous
Admin. Code        violation of  N/A           400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
Title 24           Air Pollution
                   Control Code
                   Failure to
                   retain
15 RCNY            records
§                 related to                 400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
2-09               combustion
                   efficiency
                   testing
                   Failure to
                   maintain
15 RCNY            records of
§                 hours of                   400              400     1,600     800     800   1,200   1,200
40-02(b)           operation for
                   emergency
                   generator
VAPOR RECOVER Y REGULATIONS
                   No stage 1    Install stage
15 RCNY            vapor         1 vapor
§                 collection    collection    400              400     875       545     545   545     545
4-03(a)(1)         system at gas system -
                   dispensing    forthwith
                   site
                                 Properly
                   Failure to    maintain
15 RCNY            maintain      stage 1 vapor
§                 stage 1 vapor collection/   400              400     875       545     545   545     545
4-03(a)(2)(3)      collection    control
                   and control   system at
                   system        site -
                                 forthwith
                   Failure to    Connect and
                   connect and   operate vapor
15 RCNY            operate vapor collection
§                 collection    system while  400              400     875       545     545   545     545
4-03(a)(2) (iv)    system        loading /
                   loading and   unloading at
                   unloading at  site -
                   site          forthwith
                   No stage 1    Install stage
                   vapor         1 vapor
15 RCNY            recovery      recovery
§                 system        system at gas 400              400     875       545     545   545     545
4-03(a)(3)         capacity at   dispensing
                   least 250     site -
                   gallons       forthwith
                   No            Obtain
                   certificate   certificate
15 RCNY            of            of
§                 registration  registration  400              400     875       545     545   545     545
4-03(b)            for gasoline  for gas
                   dispensing    dispensing
                   site          site -
                                 forthwith
                   No NYS DEC    Post NYS DEC
                   date for      marking
15 RCNY            pressure test indicating
§                 on gasoline   last date     400              400     875       545     545   545     545
4-04(a)(3)         transporting  pressure /
                   vehicle       vacuum test -
                                 forthwith
                                 Keep dome
                   Failure to    cover closed
                   keep dome     while
15 RCNY            covers closed transport
§                 on gas        vehicle       400              400     875       545     545   545     545
4-04c)             transport     loading /
                   vehicle       unloading
                                 motion -
                                 forthwith
                   No stage 1    Install stage
                   vapor         1 vapor
15 RCNY            collection /  collection
§                 control       and control   400              400     875       545     545   545     545
4-04(d)(1)         system on     system on gas
                   gasoline      transport -
                   transport     forthwith
                   vehicle
                   Failure to
                   provide       Provide
15 RCNY            adequate      training for
§                 training for  operator of   400              400     875       545     545   545     545
4-04(d)(2)         operator of   gas transport
                   gasoline      vehicle -
                   transport     forthwith
                   vehicle
                   Failure to    Properly
                   maintain      maintain
                   stage 1 vapor stage 1 vapor
15 RCNY            collection/   collection
§                 control       and control   400              400     875       545     545   545     545
4-04(d)(3)         system on gas system on gas
                   transport     transport
                   vehicle       vehicle -
                                 forthwith
                   Failure to    Connect and
                   connect/      operate vapor
15 RCNY            operate vapor collection /
§                 collection /  control       400              400     875       545     545   545     545
4-04(d)(4)         control       system on gas
                   system on gas transport
                   transport     vehicle -
                   vehicle       forthwith
                                 Control
                   Failure to    visible leaks
                   control       from vapor
15 RCNY            visible leaks collection
§                 from vehicle  and control   400              400     875       545     545   545     545
4-05               vapor         system
                   collection/   loading /
                   control       unloading
                   system        vehicle -
                                 forthwith
PERCHLORETHYLENE ("PERC") DRY CLEANING FACILITIES
                   Installation
                   of perc dry
15 RCNY            cleaning
§                 machine in                 No               750     875       875     No    875     No
12-04(a)           residential
                   building
                   after 7/13/06
                   Failure to    Install vapor
                   install vapor barrier or
15 RCNY            barrier or    room
§                 room          enclosure and No               750     875       No      875   No      875
12-05(a)           enclosure and general
                   general       exhaust
                   exhaust       ventilation -
                   ventilation   30 days
                   Improperly    Install
                   installed     proper vapor
                   vapor barrier barrier or
15 RCNY            or room       room
§                 enclosure and enclosure and 750              750     875       875     No    875     No
12-06(a)           general       general
                   exhaust       exhaust
                   ventilation   ventilation -
                                 30 days
                   Improper      Relocate
15 RCNY            process       process
§                 emission      ventilation   No               750     875       875     No    875     No
12-06(a)(4)(i)     point         point - 30
                   location      days
15 RCNY            Process       Retrofit to
§                 emissions     meet 20ppm    750              750     875       875     No    875     No
12-06(a)(4)(iii)   greater than  standard - 30
                   20 ppm        days
                   Failure to    Close or
15 RCNY            properly      repair
§                 operate       exhaust       750              750     875       875     No    875     No
12-06(a)(4)(iv)    exhaust       damper -
                   damper        forthwith
15 RCNY            Failure to    Install
§                 have proper   proper
12-06(a)(5), (a)   emission      emission      No               750     875       875     No    875     No
(6)                control       controls - 30
                   systems       days
15 RCNY            Failure to    Remove
§                 remove        equipment -   No               750     875       875     No    875     No
12-06(b)           equipment     forthwith
                   from service
                   Failure to    Replace,
15 RCNY            properly      retrofit, or
§                 replace,      convert       No               750     875       875     No    875     No
12-06(b)           retrofit, or  equipment -
                   convert       30 days
                   equipment
15 RCNY            Fugitive      Control
§                 emission      fugitive      No               750     875       875     No    875     No
12-06(b)           greater than  emissions -
                   50 ppm        30 days
                                 Conduct
15 RCNY            Failure to    inspection or
§                 inspect or    self-         750              750     875       875     No    875     No
12-07(a), (b)      self-monitor  monitoring -
                                 forthwith
15 RCNY            Failure to
§                 repair leak   Repair leak - 750              750     875       875     No    875     No
12-07(g)           within 24     forthwith
                   hours
                   Failure to
                   comply with   Comply with
15 RCNY            Operations    O&M
§                 and           requirements  750              750     875       875     No    875     No
12-08              Maintenance   - forthwith
                   (O&M)
                   requirements
15 RCNY            Failure to    Install spill
§                 have proper   control       750              750     875       875     No    875     No
12-08(d)(7)        spill control equipment -
                   equipment     30 days
15 RCNY            Failure to    Close solvent
§                 keep solvent  containers -  750              750     875       875     No    875     No
12-08(d)(8)        containers    forthwith
                   closed
                   Failure to    Manage
15 RCNY            properly      hazardous
§                 manage        waste -       750              750     875       875     No    875     No
12-10              hazardous     forthwith
                   waste
15 RCNY            Failure to    Seal floor
§                 seal floor    drains - 30   750              750     875       875     No    875     No
12-11(a)           drains        days
                   Failure to    Install
15 RCNY            install       proper spill
§                 proper spill  containment   750              750     875       875     No    875     No
12-11(b)           containment   system - 30
                   system        days
15 RCNY            Failure to
§                 report        N/A           750              750     875       875     No    875     No
12-11(c)           release, fire
                   or explosion
                   Failure to
15 RCNY            record
§                 emergency     N/A           400              400     875       500     No    500     No
12-11(d)           response
                   actions
15 RCNY            Failure to    Maintain
§                 maintain      proper        400              400     875       500     No    500     No
12-12              proper        records -
                   records       forthwith
15 RCNY            Installation  Remove
§                 of            uncertified   750              750     875       875     No    875     No
12-13              uncertified   equipment -
                   equipment     forthwith
15 RCNY            Failure to    Register for
§                 have owner or certification 750              750     875       875     No    875     No
12-14(a)(1)        manager       course - 60
                   certification days
15 RCNY            Failure to    Register for
§                 have operator certification 750              750     875       875     No    875     No
12-14(a)(2)        certification course - 60
                                 days
                   Failure to
                   attend
15 RCNY            required NYS
§                 DEC training               750              750     875       875     No    875     No
12-14(e)           and hold
                   valid NYS DEC
                   certificate
                   Failure to
15 RCNY            submit notice Submit
§                 of alteration notices - 14  400              400     875       500     No    500     No
12-15(a)           or            days
                   modification
                   s
                   Failure to    File for work
15 RCNY            have work     permit or
§                 permit or     operating     750              750     875       875     No    875     No
12-15(b)           operating     certificate -
                   certificate   14 days
15 RCNY            Failure to    Obtain
§                 have third    inspection -  750              750     875       875     No    875     No
12-16              party         14 days
                   inspection
                   Failure to
                   post New York Post notice
15 RCNY            State perc    in a
§                 notice in     conspicuous   400              400     875       500     No    500     No
12-18(a)           easily        location -
                   visible       forthwith
                   location
                   Failure to
15 RCNY            post perc
§                 notice in                  220              220     875       440     No    440     No
12-18(b)           easily
                   visible
                   location
                   Failure to
                   post notice
15 RCNY            regarding
§                 non-perc                   220              220     875       440     No    440     No
12-18(c)           chemical in
                   easily
                   visible
                   location
15 RCNY            Failure to
§                 post perc and              220              220     875       440     No    440     No
12-18(d)           non-perc
                   notices
                   Violation of  Comply with
15 RCNY            perc dry      perc dry      No               750     875       875     No    875     No
Ch. 12             cleaner rules cleaner rule
                                 - forthwith
CONSTRUCTION DUST RULES
15 RCNY            No access to
§                 inspect site               700              700     1,600     1,085   1,085 1,085   1,085
13-01(d)
15 RCNY            Interference
§                 with DEP                   700              700     1,600     1,085   1,085 1,085   1,085
13-01(e)           employee
                   Failure to
                   control
                   release of
15 RCNY            dust from
§                 construction               1,000            1,000   1,600     1,500   1,500 1,500   1,500
13-04(a)           by wetting or
                   other
                   acceptable
                   means
                   Failure to
15 RCNY            cover trucks
§                 used to                    1,000            1,000   1,600     1,500   1,500 1,500   1,500
13-04(b)           transport
                   particulate
                   matter
                   Failure to
                   provide
15 RCNY            adequate
§                 water to                   1,000            1,000   1,600     1,500   1,500 1,500   1,500
13-04(c)           perform wet
                   method of
                   dust control
                   Failure to
15 RCNY            provide
§                 suitable                   800              800     1,600     1,200   1,200 1,200   1,200
13-04(e)           drainage for
                   water and
                   sludge
                   Failure to
                   wet (and
                   maintain wet)
15 RCNY            all exterior
§                 building                   1,000            1,000   1,600     1,500   1,500 1,500   1,500
13-05(a)           surfaces
                   prior to and
                   during
                   demolition
                   Failure to
                   wet and/or
                   cover
15 RCNY            construction
§                 materials                  1,000            1,000   1,600     1,500   1,500 1,500   1,500
13-05(b)           before and
                   during
                   loading and
                   transport
                   Failure to
                   use wetting
                   to control
15 RCNY            dust during
§                 drilling,                  1,000            1,000   1,600     1,500   1,500 1,500   1,500
13-05(c)           grinding or
                   other similar
                   construction
                   activities
                   Failure to
15 RCNY            control dust
§                 produced at                800              800     1,600     1,200   1,200 1,200   1,200
13-05(d)           transfer
                   points
                   Failure to
                   have
                   sprinklers at
                   transfer
15 RCNY            points
§                 capable of                 800              800     1,600     1,200   1,200 1,200   1,200
13-05(e)           being
                   operated by
                   person
                   responsible
                   for loading
                   Failure to
                   moisten soil
15 RCNY            or debris
§                 piles to                   1,000            1,000   1,600     1,500   1,500 1,500   1,500
13-05(f)           prevent
                   windblown
                   dust
                   Failure to
15 RCNY            properly
§                 remove debris              1,000            1,000   1,600     1,500   1,500 1,500   1,500
13-06(a)           during hand
                   demolition
                   Failure to
                   board up
15 RCNY            windows to
§                 prevent dust               800              800     1,600     1,200   1,200 1,200   1,200
13-06(b)           emission
                   during
                   renovation
15 RCNY            Failure to
§                 suppress dust              800              800     1,600     1,200   1,200 1,200   1,200
13-06(c)           during
                   sandblasting
                   Failure to
                   cover trucks
15 RCNY            used to
§                 transport                  1,000            1,000   1,600     1,500   1,500 1,500   1,500
13-06(d)           dust-
                   producing
                   materials
                   Failure to
15 RCNY            remove earth
§                 or other                   800              800     1,600     1,200   1,200 1,200   1,200
13-06(e)           materials
                   daily
15 RCNY            Use of
§                 blowers for                800              800     1,600     1,200   1,200 1,200   1,200
13-06(g)           mud or dirt
                   removal
                   Failure to
                   operate
15 RCNY            construction
§                 vehicles                   800              800     1,600     1,200   1,200 1,200   1,200
13-06(h)           slowly to
                   minimize dust
                   emissions
                   Failure to
15 RCNY            properly
§                 stabilize                  800              800     1,600     1,200   1,200 1,200   1,200
13-06(i)           disturbed
                   areas
                   Failure to
15 RCNY            wet
§                 adequately                 1,000            1,000   1,600     1,500   1,500 1,500   1,500
13-07(b)           before and
                   during
                   demolition
                   Failure to
15 RCNY            use chutes /
§                 buckets to                 1,000            1,000   1,600     1,500   1,500 1,500   1,500
13-07(c)           transport
                   debris
                   Failure to
15 RCNY            remove dust /
§                 debris daily               800              800     1,600     1,200   1,200 1,200   1,200
13-07(d)           from adjacent
                   areas
15 RCNY            Performing
§                 dry                        800              800     1,600     1,200   1,200 1,200   1,200
13-08(a)           sandblasting
                   Failure to
15 RCNY            use
§                 containment                800              800     1,600     1,200   1,200 1,200   1,200
13-08(b)           during
                   sandblasting
15 RCNY            Failure to
§                 use curtains               800              800     1,600     1,200   1,200 1,200   1,200
13-08(c)           during
                   sandblasting
                   Failure to
15 RCNY            give required
§                 advance                    800              800     1,600     1,200   1,200 1,200   1,200
13-08(d)           notice of
                   sandblasting
                   Failure to
15 RCNY            register
§                 dust-emitting              800              800     1,600     1,200   1,200 1,200   1,200
13-09              construction
                   equipment
                   with DEP
                   Failure to
15 RCNY            prevent dust
§                 emission from              800              800     1,600     1,200   1,200 1,200   1,200
13-10              open areas
                   after
                   demolition
 
(Added City Record 4/11/2016, eff. 5/11/2016; amended City Record 8/17/2016,
eff. 9/16/2016; amended City Record 5/8/2017, eff. 6/7/2017; amended City
Record 11/25/2019, eff. 12/30/2019; amended City Record 11/18/2020, eff. 12/18/
2020; amended City Record 3/27/2023, eff. 4/26/2023; amended City Record 12/16/
2024, eff. 1/15/2025)
Chapter 44: Standard Test Procedures to Determine Smoke Emissions from
Generators with an Output of 40 kw or More
§ 44-01 Definitions.
"Generator" means any internal combustion engine that operates as a mechanical
or electrical power source.
"Kilowatt" means a unit of electrical power equal to one thousand watts.
(Added City Record 12/5/2016, eff. 1/4/2017)
§ 44-02 Test Procedures.
   (a)   Exemptions. The following generators are not subject to this rule's
testing requirements: Generators that are (1) certified Tier IV as set forth in
table one of 40 C.F.R. § 1039.101 or any subsequent United States environmental
protection agency, and (2) newly installed and being registered for the first
time.
   (b)   Test Procedures. All generators that are subject to the test
requirements of this rule must be tested in accordance with the procedures set
forth in paragraph (1) or (2) below.
      (1)   Stack Test Procedure. 
         (a)   Generators must meet equivalent Tier IV particulate matter (PM)
emissions standards established by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) as set forth in table one of 40 C.F.R. § 1039.101 or any
subsequent United States EPA emissions standard for such generator that is at
least as stringent.
         (b)   In order to demonstrate that the PM emissions from the stack of
a generator meet the Tier IV PM emissions standard, testing must be performed
by the equipment owner following EPA Method 5, titled "Determination of
particulate matter emissions from stationary sources" (Appendix A-3 to 40
C.F.R. Part 60). The P.E. or R.A, must certify the stack test results.
      (2)   Smoke Test Procedure. A smoke test on a generator shall be
performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in EPA Method 9, titled
"Visual determination of the opacity of emissions from stationary sources"
(Appendix A-4 to 40 C.F.R. Part 60). The test results shall indicate less than
20 percent opacity for any two consecutive minutes in any 60-minute period. The
smoke test must be performed and certified by a qualified visible emissions
evaluator.
   (c)   Recordkeeping. 
      (1)   For generators that require a registration under § 24-109 of the
Administrative Code (those stationary generators with an output from 40 kw to
less than 450 kw and all emergency and portable generators with an output of 40
kw or greater), proof that the generator passed either a stack test using EPA
Method 5 or a smoke test using EPA Method 9 must be submitted to the department
upon request.
      (2)   For generators that require a certificate of operation under § 24-
122 of the Administrative Code (those with an output of 450 kw or more), proof
that the generator passed either a stack test using EPA Method 5 or a smoke
test using EPA Method 9 must be submitted to the department with the
application for an original inspection request to obtain the Certificate of
Operation.
      (3)   Records of tests required by this rule shall be maintained by the
equipment owner for five years.
(Added City Record 12/5/2016, eff. 1/4/2017)
Chapter 45: Abatement Orders
§ 45-01 Abatement and Stop Work Orders Issued Pursuant to §§ 24-146 and 24-
223.1.
   (a)   The department may issue an abatement order whenever it is found that
work is being performed in violation of the provisions of subdivisions (a)
through (f) of § 24-146 of the Administrative Code, or 15 RCNY
Chapter 13, and that such work poses a threat to human health and safety. Such
circumstances may include, but are not limited to causing or permitting the
emission of dust as a result of the transportation or storage of any material
that may generate dust, the construction or alteration of a building or its
appurtenances or a road, the spraying of any insulating material in or upon any
building or other structure during its construction, alteration or repair, or
the causing or permitting a building or other structure to be demolished. Upon
issuance of an abatement order, the activity giving rise to the violation shall
immediately stop unless otherwise specified.
   (b)   The department may issue a stop work order if it finds that work is
being performed in violation of the provisions of § 24-223.1 of the
Administrative Code, or any rules promulgated thereunder. For the purposes of §
24-223.1, work that poses a threat to human health and safety may include, but
is not limited to, causing or permitting noise above the decibel levels set
forth in §§ 24-223 or 24-228, or prescribed decibel levels contained in an
approved alternative noise mitigation plan. Upon the issuance of a stop work
order, the activity giving rise to the violation must immediately stop unless
otherwise specified by the department.
   (c)   An abatement order may be given orally or in writing to the owner,
lessee or occupant of the property involved, or to the agent of any of them, or
to the person or persons performing the work. A stop work order may be given as
provided in subdivision (b) of § 24-223.1 of the Administrative Code. Except as
provided in subdivision (d), a verbal order must be followed promptly by a
written order and must include the reason for the issuance of the order. The
order may require all such work to be done as may be necessary, in the opinion
of the commissioner, to remove the danger therefrom.
   (d)   An abatement order issued pursuant to subdivision (a) of this section
or a stop work order issued pursuant to subdivision (b) of this section may be
appealed in accordance with 15 RCNY §
45-02. In the case of a verbal abatement or stop work order, if the
commissioner determines that the condition that gave rise to the order has been
immediately corrected, such order shall be lifted at once and shall not be
followed by a written order.
(Added City Record 2/2/2017, eff. 3/4/2017; amended City Record 9/10/2018, eff.
10/10/2018)
§ 45-02 Procedure to Appeal a Written Abatement Order Issued Pursuant to § 24-
146 or a Written Stop Work Order Issued Pursuant to § 24-223.1.
   (a)   Notice and opportunity to be heard. 
      (1)   The appeal shall be filed on a form to be prescribed by the
department.
      (2)   Upon filing of an appeal, a hearing will be scheduled in accordance
with the provisions of 15 RCNY
Chapter 32. The hearing will be held within 14 days of the filing of the
appeal.
      (3)   After the hearing, the department may lift the abatement or stop
work order if it is determined that the order was not properly issued, or upon
the submission of proof satisfactory to the commissioner that the requirements
of such order have been satisfied.
(Added City Record 2/2/2017, eff. 3/4/2017; amended City Record 9/10/2018, eff.
10/10/2018)
Chapter 46: Filming and Photography Authorized by the Department
§ 46-01 Scope.
These rules are applicable to all film and photography shoots and related
activities conducted on properties and within facilities under the jurisdiction
of, and with permission from, the Department of Environmental Protection that
shall be authorized by a permit issued by the Mayor's Office of Film, Theatre
and Broadcasting. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to relieve an
applicant from being required to comply with any other applicable law, rule or
case law governing such activities.
(Added City Record 1/6/2017, eff. 2/5/2017)
§ 46-02 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental
Protection or his or her designee.
   "Bureau of Public Affairs and Communications" or "BPAC" means the unit of
DEP that, among other things, oversees the filming, photography and related
activities that are conducted on properties and within facilities under the
jurisdiction of DEP.
   "Department" or "DEP" means the Department of Environmental Protection.
   "Equipment" includes, but is not limited to, television, photographic, film
or video cameras or transmitting television equipment, including radio remotes,
props, sets, lights, electric and grip equipment, dolly tracks, screens, or
microphone devices, and any and all production related materials. "Equipment"
does not include (1) "hand-held devices," as defined in 43 RCNY §
9-02 of the Mayor's Office of Film, Theatre and Broadcasting ("MOFTB") Film
Permit Rules, and (2) vehicles, as defined in section one hundred fifty-nine of
the New York Vehicle and Traffic Law, that are used solely to transport a
person or persons while engaged in the activity of filming or photography from
within such vehicle, operated in compliance with relevant traffic laws and
rules.
   "Filming" means the taking of motion pictures, the taking of still
photography or the use and operation of television cameras or transmitting
television equipment, including radio remotes and any preparatory activity
associated therewith, and includes events that include, but are not limited to,
the making of feature or documentary films, television serials, webcasts,
simulcasts or specials.
   "Holding" means the temporary accommodation of cast or crew members and
other individuals associated with a production in a space in which filming is
not taking place. "Holding" may include the space in which an independent
company provides meals or catering services to cast or crew members and other
individuals associated with a production.
   "MOFTB Film Permit Rules" means the rules promulgated by the Mayor's Office
of Film, Theatre and Broadcasting ("MOFTB"), codified as 43 RCNY
Chapter 9, as amended from time to time.
   "Permittee" means the holder of a Required Permit issued by the Mayor's
Office of Film, Theatre and Broadcasting in accordance with 43 RCNY §§
9-01 and
9-02.
   "Photography" means the taking of moving or still images.
   "Required Permit" means the permit for filming or photography issued by
MOFTB in accordance with 43 RCNY §§
9-01 and
9-02.
   "Rigging/de-rigging" means the loading in or loading out, loading or
unloading, of any shooting or production related equipment, including, but not
limited to, props, sets, electric and grip equipment, at any location, time and
date where film or production is not occurring. Such term has the same meaning
as the commonly used term "prepping/ wrapping."
   "Scouting" means the act of viewing, assessing and photographing locations
for filming or photography during pre-production or production for, including,
but not limited to, still photography, feature films, television series, mini-
series or specials.
   "Shooting" means filming on properties, in the interiors or on exteriors of
buildings or facilities under the jurisdiction of DEP.
(Added City Record 1/6/2017, eff. 2/5/2017)
§ 46-03 Pre-Production Scouting.
   (a)   Any person interested in conducting scouting-related activities on
properties or within facilities under the jurisdiction of DEP must first
contact BPAC for authorization and to make arrangements for such scouting.
   (b)   If after conducting scouting-related activities it is determined that
a filming or photography project or production will be pursued, the applicant
must submit the documentation and resolve production issues described in 15
RCNY §
46-04.
(Added City Record 1/6/2017, eff. 2/5/2017)
§ 46-04 Required Documentation and Approvals from DEP.
   (a)   The following forms and documents, which are required for DEP review
and approval prior to obtaining a Required Permit from MOFTB, must be submitted
to BPAC prior to the start date of prepping or rigging for any filming and/or
photography shoots:
      (1)   "Letter of Intent" in the form required by DEP, signed by the
applicant, submitted to BPAC at least ten (10) business days prior to the start
date of prepping or rigging for any filming of a motion picture, and five (5)
business days prior to the start date of prepping or rigging for any other
film; and
      (2)   A location agreement in the form required by DEP signed by the
applicant; and
      (3)   Proof of insurance, as provided in 15 RCNY §
46-06; and
      (4)   Any other documents, including, but not limited to, equipment
specifications and architectural renderings that may be required by BPAC.
   The Commissioner or his or her designee may approve an exception to the
minimum time frames referenced in subdivision (a)(1) of this section if the
nature and scope of the activity to be undertaken support a request that a
shorter time within which to submit requisite forms and documents be granted.
   (b)   In connection with submitting the Letter of Intent required by
subdivision (a)(1) of this section, the applicant must submit documentation and
DEP will review and issue determinations concerning the following types of
issues:
      (1)   Structural conditions, equipment specifics, weight, load and other
similar considerations.
      (2)   The use of smoke, pyrotechnics, firearms, weapons, animals and
other special effects or unusual scenes, which will also be subject to all
applicable laws, rules and other governmental policies regarding such
activities.
   (c)   Where appropriate, an applicant may be required to attend a security
meeting with DEP staff, depending on the nature and location of the activity to
be undertaken.
   (d)   Determinations about all DEP staffing matters, including decisions
regarding the scope, type, number or level of staff required, will be made by
DEP.
   (e)   BPAC will review the documentation provided in accordance with
subdivision (a) of this section, and will attempt to accommodate particular
technical needs and any other special circumstances, including approvals from
DEP engineers or other personnel, that may be presented by the applicant.
   (f)   Where BPAC has approved an applicant's documentation required pursuant
to subdivision (a) of this section, it will notify MOFTB about such approval.
(Added City Record 1/6/2017, eff. 2/5/2017)
§ 46-05 Application for Required Permit from MOFTB.
A Required Permit must be applied for and issued in accordance with the
provisions of 43 RCNY §
9-02 after the documentation required by 15 RCNY §
46-04 has been completed by the applicant and reviewed by DEP; production
issues have been resolved with DEP; and DEP approval has been received.
(Added City Record 1/6/2017, eff. 2/5/2017)
§ 46-06 Indemnification and Insurance Requirements.
   (a)   Prior to the commencement of prepping or rigging for film and/or
photography shoots on properties or within facilities under the jurisdiction of
DEP, a permittee must provide to BPAC a copy of insurance documentation and a
copy of the Required Permit in order to obtain final DEP authorization for such
production.
   (b)   By obtaining a Required Permit from MOFTB, a permittee who is
authorized to conduct film shoot and/or photography shoot activities on
properties or within facilities under the jurisdiction of DEP agrees to protect
all persons and property from damage, loss or injury arising from any of the
operations performed by or on behalf of such permittee, and to indemnify and
hold harmless the City of New York, to the fullest extent permitted by law,
from all claims, losses and expenses, including attorneys' fees, that may
result therefrom.
   (c)   A permittee who has been authorized by DEP to conduct film shoot and/
or photography shoot activities on properties or within facilities under the
jurisdiction of DEP must maintain, during the entire course of its operations,
a liability insurance policy with a limit of not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000) per occurrence. Such policy must name the City of New York as an
additional insured with coverage at least as broad as provided by Insurance
Services Office (ISO) form CG 20 12 (07/98 ed.). The permittee must provide to
DEP the original certificate of insurance signed in ink to which a copy of the
required endorsement is attached.
   (d)   If it is determined, in light of the activity for which a Required
Permit shall be sought, that such activity may increase the potential for
injury to individuals and/or damage to property, and that the minimum limit of
insurance should be higher than one million dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence
referenced in subdivision (c) of this section, it will be determined what
higher minimum limit is to be required and the permittee will be advised of
such higher limit. Factors to be considered will include, but not be limited
to, the number of people involved, the location of the activity and the nature
of the activity. The permittee must thereafter provide proof of such insurance
in accordance with this section.
(Added City Record 1/6/2017, eff. 2/5/2017)
§ 46-07 Production Requirements.
   (a)   Holding on properties and within facilities under the jurisdiction of
DEP is available only for those productions taking place on or within such
properties or facilities, upon the approval of the DEP official responsible for
operations at the facility or property in question or his or her designee.
   (b)   DEP will provide security personnel to protect City property under its
jurisdiction during production activities at DEP properties and facilities, the
cost of which must be reimbursed by the permittee.
   (c)   All individuals affiliated with the permittee and the production will
be required to present a valid, government-issued photo identification card to
receive security clearance to have access to properties and facilities under
the jurisdiction of DEP where the production and related activities are taking
place.
   (d)   All individuals affiliated with the permittee and the production must
wear an identification card on DEP properties and within DEP facilities under
the jurisdiction of DEP. The identification cards shall be similar in form and
include the name of the production. Failure to display such identification
cards at all times may lead to ejection from such properties and facilities.
   (e)   All production equipment and props brought to properties and
facilities under the jurisdiction of DEP shall be subject to inspection at any
time prior to or during the production.
   (f)   DEP will not be responsible for any injury to persons and/or damage or
loss to any property on properties and within facilities under the jurisdiction
of DEP arising from any of the operations performed by or on behalf of the
permittee.
(Added City Record 1/6/2017, eff. 2/5/2017)
§ 46-08 Post-Production Requirements.
   (a)   A permittee is responsible for cleaning and restoring the properties
and facilities under the jurisdiction of DEP after the rigging, shooting and/or
holding. The cost of any DEP employee time incurred due to a permittee failing
to clean and/ or restore such properties and facilities following the rigging,
shooting and/or holding will be borne by the permittee and reimbursed to DEP.
   (b)   Any fixtures, furniture, books, doors, windows, walls, and other
structures and/or objects must be returned to their original position and/or
restored to their original condition by the permittee during the de-rigging,
unless the permittee has obtained prior approval from the DEP official
responsible for operations at the facility or property in question or his or
her designee. The permittee must immediately remove any props used during the
production from properties and facilities under the jurisdiction of DEP. The
permittee must reimburse DEP for any property and facility damage arising from
such production activities.
   (c)   At the conclusion of all film and photography shoots, the permittee
must reimburse DEP for all production related costs including, but not limited
to, DEP personnel costs contemplated by 15 RCNY §§
46-04(d) and
46-07(b) and subdivision (a) of this section, including administrative overhead
costs, and reimbursement for any property or facility damage in accordance with
subdivision (b) of this section. If the permittee cancels any of its
production-related activities twenty-four (24) hours or less prior to the
scheduled commencement of such activities on properties or within facilities
under the jurisdiction of DEP, the permittee may be subject to the
reimbursement of costs for DEP personnel assigned to staff such production.
(Added City Record 1/6/2017, eff. 2/5/2017)
Chapter 47: Noise Code Penalty Schedule
§ 47-01 General.
Whenever a respondent is found in violation of any of the following provisions
of the New York City Administrative Code or Rules of the City of New York, any
civil penalties imposed by a Hearing Officer pursuant to 48 RCNY §
6-17(a) and/or any default penalties imposed pursuant to 48 RCNY §
6-20(b) in accordance with Section 1049-a(d)(1)(d) of the Charter and/or any
civil penalties imposed for admissions of violation(s) pursuant to 48 RCNY §
6-09(a) or late admissions pursuant to 48 RCNY §
3-17 will be imposed pursuant to the penalty schedules set forth below.
(Added City Record 2/22/2017, eff. 3/24/2017; amended City Record 5/8/2017,
eff. 6/7/2017)
§ 47-02 Noise Code Penalty Schedule.
All Citations are to the NYC Administrative Code unless otherwise indicated.
An admission or stipulation penalty is imposed if there is a "Y" (Yes) in the
Stipulation or Admission column in the Penalty Schedule rather than a "N" (No),
and if a stipulation is offered and accepted, or the violation is admitted, at
a hearing.
Definition of 2nd and/or 3rd and/or 4th offense: By the same respondent of the
same provision of law, order, rule or regulation as the previous violation and,
if the respondent is the owner, agent, lessee or other person in control of the
premises with respect to which the violation occurred, at the same premises as
the previous violation (all violations committed within two years).
Pursuant to 48 RCNY §
3-17, a late admit fee of $30.00 will be added to all the below listed
penalties for a failure to submit a payment by mail within 30 days of the
mailing date of the default order issued against respondent.
Asterisk (*): In connection with § 24-231(a), a zero penalty shall be imposed
for admission of a first offense upon submission to DEP (within 30 days of NOV
issuance unless extended by DEP) of acceptable certification of compliance as
set forth in § 24-231(b)(1).
(Mitigation: 0 1 ) A zero penalty shall be imposed for a first offense upon
submission to DEP (within 30 days of NOV issuance unless extended by DEP) of
acceptable certification of compliance and admission of liability by
respondent.
 
Section of Law Violation   Compliance Offense Penalty Default Stipulation or
               Description                             Penalty Admission
Section                                                                                                    Default Stipulation
of Law  Violation Description                                          Compliance    Offense Penalty      Penalty or
                                                                                                                   Admission
                                                                       Reduce noise
10-108  Noise from sound device exceeding permit levels                to conform to  1st     250          250     N
                                                                       permit
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     500          500     N
                                                                                      3rd     750          750     N
                                                                                      4th     1,000        1,000   N
24-206  Failed to Comply with Commissioner's Order to Provide Access   Allow access   1st     220          875     N
(c)     for Testing                                                    forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     440          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     660          2,625   N
24-207  Refused DEP entry into public area(s) of premises              Allow entry    1st     350          875     Y
(c)                                                                    forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     700          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,050        2,625   N
24-207                                                                 Allow sound
(d)     Refusal to allow authorized employee to perform sound testing  testing        1st     350          875     Y
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     700          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,050        2,625   N
                                                                       Obtain
24-208  Operating equipment without a valid registration               registration   1st     350          875     Y
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     700          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,050        2,625   N
                                                                       Cease
                                                                       interference
24-209  Interfering w/or obstructing DEP Personnel                     with adm.      1st     350          875     Y
                                                                       personnel -
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     700          1,750   Y
                                                                                      3rd     1,050        2,625   N
                                                                       Submit
24-210  False/misleading statements: unlawful repro/alteration of      documented     1st     350          875     N
        documents                                                      information -
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     700          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,050        2,625   N
                                                                       Post
24-211  Failure to post certificate or tunneling permit                certificate    1st     350          875     Y
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     700          1,750   Y
                                                                                      3rd     1,050        2,625   N
                                                                       Comply with
24-216  Failure to comply with noise abatement contract requirements   abatement      1st     650          2,625   Y
(d)                                                                    requirements
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     1,300        5,250   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,950        7,875   N
                                                                       Cease
24-218  Causing or permitting unreasonable noise (7 a.m. to 10 p.m.)   unreasonable   1st     75           100     Y
(a)                                                                    noise
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     150          225     Y
                                                                                      3rd     350          500     N
                                                                       Cease
24-218  Causing or permitting unreasonable noise (10 p.m. to 7 a.m.)   unreasonable   1st     75           150     Y
(a)                                                                    noise
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     150          250     Y
                                                                                      3rd     350          500     N
        Causing or permitting unreasonable noise for commercial        Cease
24-218  activities or purposes or through a device installed within or unreasonable   1st     350          1,000   Y
(a-1)   upon a building                                                noise
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     700          2,000   Y
                                                                                      3rd     1,050        3,000   N
24-218                                                                 Comply with            350
(e)     Failure to comply with Commissioner's Order or mitigation      Commissioner's 1st     (mitigation: 1,000   Y
       measures re noise from refuse collection facility              Order                  0 1 )
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     700          2,000   Y
                                                                                      3rd     1,050        3,000   N
24-
218.1   Use of mobile telephones in a place of public performance                     1st     0            0       Y
 
                                                                                      2nd     50           50      Y
                                                                                      3rd     50           50      Y
24-220  Failure to adopt/implement Noise Mitigation Plan for           Adopt
(a)     construction site                                              Mitigation     1st     875          1,400   Y
                                                                       Plan forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     1,750        2,800   N
                                                                                      3rd     2,625        4,200   N
                                                                       Provide
24-220                                                                 additional
(b)     Inadequate / insufficiently detailed noise mitigation plan     information to 1st     440          1,400   Y
                                                                       Noise Plan
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     880          2,800   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        4,200   N
                                                                       Inform workers
                                                                       about noise
24-220  Failure to ensure that all construction workers are familiar   mitigation     1st     440          1,400   Y
(b)     with noise mitigation plan                                     plan
                                                                       requirements
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     880          2,800   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        4,200   N
24-220  Failure to keep/have available for inspection copy of noise    Make plan
(c)     mitigation plan                                                available      1st     440          1,400   Y
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     880          2,800   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        4,200   N
24-220                                                                 Amend noise
(d)     Failure to amend noise mitigation plan                         mitigation     1st     440          1,400   Y
                                                                       plan forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     880          2,800   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        4,200   N
24-220                                                                 File noise
(e)     Failure to file noise mitigation plan when required            mitigation     1st     400          1,400   Y
                                                                       plan forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     880          2,800   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        4,200   N
                                                                       Cease
                                                                       construction
24-222  Construction activities at impermissible times/days            activities at  1st     1,400        3,500   Y
                                                                       impermissible
                                                                       times/days
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     2,800        7,000   N
                                                                                      3rd     4,200        10,500  N
24-223  Failure to submit certification for emergency work within 3    Submit
(b)     days of starting work                                          certification  1st     875          3,500   Y
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     1,750        7,000   N
                                                                                      3rd     2,625        10,500  N
24-223                                                                 Stop operation
(d)(1)  Excessive noise as measured from a residential receiving       of device      1st     560          875     Y
       property above 8dB(A).                                         causing
                                                                       exceedance.
                                                                                      2nd     1,120        1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,680        2,625   N
24-223                                                                 Stop operation
(d)(2)  Noise from a construction site in excess of 85 dB(A) that is   of device      1st     560          875     Y
       not within 200 feet of a residential receptor.                 causing
                                                                       exceedance.
                                                                                      2nd     1,120        1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,680        2,625   N
24-223                                                                 Stop operation
(d)(3)  Noise from a construction site in excess of 80 dB(A) within    of device      1st     560          875     Y
       200 feet of a residential receptor.                            causing
                                                                       exceedance.
                                                                                      2nd     1,120        1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,680        2,625   N
24-223                                                                 Stop operation
(d)(4)  Noise from street construction work in excess of 85 dB(A).     of device      1st     560          875     Y
                                                                      causing
                                                                       exceedance.
                                                                                      2nd     1,120        1750    N
                                                                                      3rd     1,680        2,625   N
                                                                       Stop work and/
24-                                                                    or operation
223.1   Violation of Stop Work Order.                                  of device that 1st     560          875     Y
(d)                                                                    is the cause
                                                                      of the stop
                                                                       work order.
                                                                                      2nd     1,120        1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,680        2,625   N
                                                                       Stop
24-224  Construction work not in compliance with noise mitigation plan construction   1st     1,400        3,500   Y
                                                                       work forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     2,800        7,000   N
                                                                                      3rd     4,200        10,500  N
                                                                       Stop operation
24-225  Sell / offer / operate / permit operation of refuse compacting of compacting  1st     560          1,400   Y
(a)     vehicle producing excessive noise                              vehicle
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     1,120        2,800   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,680        4,200   N
                                                                       Stop operation
24-225  Operate / cause operation of refuse compacting vehicle         of compacting  1st     700          1,400   Y
(b)     producing excessive noise (11 p.m. to 7 a.m.)                  vehicle
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     1,400        2,800   N
                                                                                      3rd     2,100        4,200   N
                                                                       Stop operation
24-226  Operating air compressor without appropriate muffler w/no      of air         1st     560          1,400   Y
(a)     exhaust leaks                                                  compressor
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     1,120        2,800   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,680        4,200   N
                                                                       Stop operation
24-226  Excessive noise from air compressor (measured @ 1 meter)       of air         1st     560          1,400   Y
(b)                                                                    compressor
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     1,120        2,800   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,680        4,200   N
                                                                       Stop operation
24-226  Excessive noise from air compressor (measured @ receiving      of air         1st     560          1,400   Y
(c)     property)                                                      compressor
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     1,120        2,800   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,680        4,200   N
24-227                                                                 Stop operation         220
(a)     Noise from circulation device in excess of 42 dB(A)            of circulation 1st     (mitigation: 875     Y
                                                                      device                 0 1)
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     440          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     660          2,625   N
24-227                                                                 Stop operation         220
(b)     Cumulative impact from circulation device exceeded 45 dB(A)    of circulation 1st     (mitigation: 875     Y
                                                                      device                 01)
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     440          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     660          2,625   N
                                                                       Reduce
                                                                       cumulative
24-227  Failure to reduce cumulative impact from multiple circulation  impact noise           220
(c)     devices exceeding 50 dB(A)                                     from           1st     (mitigation: 875     Y
                                                                      circulation            01)
                                                                       device
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     440          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     660          2,625   N
                                                                       Stop operation
                                                                       of
24-228  Unreasonable noise from construction devices                   construction   1st     560          1,400   Y
                                                                       device
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     1,120        2,800   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,680        4,200   N
                                                                       Stop operation
24-     Unreasonable noise from engine exhaust                         of engine      1st     560          875     Y
228.1                                                                  exhaust
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     1,120        1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,680        2,625   N
                                                                       Stop handling
                                                                       and
        Unreasonable noise from handling/transporting of container or  transportation
24-229  construction material                                          of             1st     560          1,400   Y
                                                                       construction
                                                                       material
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     1,120        2,800   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,680        4,200   N
                                                                       Use paving
                                                                       breaker with
24-230  Operation/caused operation of paving breaker w/o pneumatic     pneumatic      1st     560          1,400   Y
(a)     discharge muffler                                              discharge
                                                                       muffler
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     1,120        2,800   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,680        4,200   N
                                                                       Stop operation
24-230  Sold/offer for sale/operate/permit operation of paving breaker of paving      1st     560          1,400   Y
(b)     producing over 95 dB(A)                                        breaker
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     1,120        2,800   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,680        4,200   N
                                                                       Cease
24-231  Made / caused / permitted music from commercial establishment  operation of
(a)*    in excess of permitted levels                                  commercial     1st     2,000        8,000   N
                                                                      music
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     4,000        16,000  N
                                                                                      3rd     6,000        24,000  N
                                                                       Cease
24-231                                                                 operation of
(d)     Violation of variance from limits set forth in 24-231(a)       commercial     1st     560          875     N
                                                                       music
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     1,120        1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,680        2,625   N
24-232                                                                 Stop operation         440
(a)     Excessive noise from sound source @ commercial or business     of sound       1st     (mitigation: 1,400   N
       establishment                                                  source                 0 1 )
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     880          2,800   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        4,200   N
                                                                       Stop operation
24-233  Unreasonable noise: personal audio device                      of personal    1st     70           175     Y
(a)                                                                    audio device
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     140          350     Y
                                                                                      3rd     210          525     N
                                                                       Stop operation
24-233  Unreasonable noise – personal audio device (public right-of- of personal    1st     140          175     Y
(b)(1)  way)                                                           audio device
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     280          350     Y
                                                                                      3rd     420          525     N
                                                                       Stop operation
24-233  Unreasonable noise – personal audio device (motor vehicle)   of personal    1st     140          350     Y
(b)(2)                                                                 audio device
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     280          700     N
                                                                                      3rd     420          1,050   N
                                                                       Stop operation
        Excess noise from sound reproduction device on rapid transit   of sound
24-234  (subway, bus, ferry)                                           reproduction   1st     70           175     Y
                                                                       device
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     140          350     Y
                                                                                      3rd     210          525     N
                                                                       Cease
                                                                       permitting
                                                                       animal to
24-235  Permitting animal to cause unreasonable noise                  cause          1st     70           175     Y
                                                                       unreasonable
                                                                       noise
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     140          350     Y
                                                                                      3rd     210          525     Y
                                                                       Stop operating
                                                                       vehicle that
24-236  Excess noise from motor vehicles (10,000 lbs. or less)         causes         1st     210          525     Y
(a)                                                                    excessive
                                                                       noise
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     420          1,050   N
                                                                                      3rd     840          1,575   N
                                                                       Stop operating
                                                                       motorcycle
24-236  Excess noise from motorcycles                                  that causes    1st     880          1,440   Y
(b)                                                                    excessive
                                                                       noise
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     1,720        2,800   N
                                                                                      3rd     2,600        4,200   N
                                                                       Stop operating
                                                                       vehicle that
24-236  Excess noise from motor vehicles (10,000 lbs. or greater)      causes         1st     880          1,440   Y
(c)                                                                    excessive
                                                                       noise
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     1,720        2,800   N
                                                                                      3rd     2,600        4,200   N
                                                                       Stop using
24-236                                                                 compression
(d)     Non-emergency use of compression brake system                  brake for non- 1st     880          1,440   Y
                                                                       emergencies
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     1,720        2,800   N
                                                                                      3rd     2,600        4,200   N
                                                                       Stop causing
                                                                       or permitting
                                                                       the total
                                                                       sound of such
                                                                       a motor
                                                                       vehicle to
        Causing or permitting the total sound from motor vehicle       exceed the
24-236  operating on a public right-of-way to exceed the sound level   sound level
(e)     set forth in section 386 of the New York State Vehicle and     set forth in   1st     800          875     Y
        Traffic Law and any applicable rules                           section 386 of
                                                                       the New York
                                                                       State Vehicle
                                                                       and Traffic
                                                                       Law and any
                                                                       applicable
                                                                       rules
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     1,700        1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     2,500        2,625   N
24-237                                                                 Cease use of
(a)     Unauthorized use of motor vehicle claxon                       claxon         1st     350          1,000   Y
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     700          2,000   Y
                                                                                      3rd     1,050        3,000   N
24-237                                                                 Cease use of
(b)     Unauthorized use of motor vehicle air horn/gong                air horn       1st     350          875     Y
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     700          1,750   Y
                                                                                      3rd     1,050        2,625   N
24-237                                                                 Cease use of
(c)     Improper use of sound signal device (food vendor)              sound signal   1st     350          1,000   Y
                                                                      device
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     700          2,000   Y
                                                                                      3rd     1,050        3,000   Y
24-238                                                                 Cease use of
(a)     Improper audible burglar alarm/no automatic termination        burglar alarm  1st     220          700     Y
                                                                      forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     440          1,400   Y
                                                                                      3rd     660          2,100   N
24-238                                                                 Cease use of
(b)     Audible status indicator on motor vehicle in operation         status         1st     220          700     Y
                                                                      indicator
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     440          1,400   Y
                                                                                      3rd     660          2,100   N
                                                                       Display local
24-239  Vehicle owner failure to display owner's local precinct number precinct       1st     100          350     Y
(b)                                                                    number
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     200          700     Y
                                                                                      3rd     300          1,050   N
24-241  Unauthorized use of emergency signal device                    Cease use of   1st     440          1,400   Y
(a)                                                                    signal device
                                                                                      2nd     880          2,800   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        4,200   N
24-241  Failed to file certification regarding test of emergency       File
(b)     signal device                                                  certification  1st     440          1,400   Y
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     880          2,800   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        4,200   N
                                                                       Stop operation
24-242  Operating lawn care devices at unauthorized times or so as to  of lawn care   1st     220          875     Y
(a)     create unreasonable noise                                      device
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     440          1,750   Y
                                                                                      3rd     660          2,625   Y
                                                                       Stop operation
24-242  Operation of leaf blower without muffler                       of lawn care   1st     220          875     Y
(b)                                                                    device
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     440          1,750   Y
                                                                                      3rd     660          2,625   Y
                                                                       Cease
                                                                       operation of
24-244  Unreasonable noise from sound reproduction device              sound          1st     440          1,750   Y
(a)                                                                    reproduction
                                                                       device
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     880          3,500   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        5,250   N
                                                                       Cease
24-244                                                                 operation of
(b)     Unreasonable noise from sound reproduction device for          sound          1st     440          1,750   N
       commercial/bus. advert. Purposes                               reproduction
                                                                       device
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     880          3,500   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        5,250   N
24-245  Failure to have operating certificate or tunneling permit      Obtain permit  1st     1,050        2,625   N
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     2,100        5,250   N
                                                                                      3rd     3,150        7,875   N
                                                                       Cease
24-257  Breaking of Board ordered seal                                 tampering with 1st     1,600        4,000   N
(b)(7)                                                                 seal -
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     1,600        4,000   N
                                                                                      3rd     2,480        4,000   N
Admin.
Code    Miscellaneous violation of Noise Control Code or
Title   Rules                                                          N/A            1st     220          875     Y
24
 
                                                                                      2nd     440          1,550   N
                                                                                      3rd     660          2,425   N
15 RCNY
        Failed To Conspicuously Post an Accurate and Complete          Post complete  1st     220          875     Y
§      Construction Noise Mitigation Plan (CNMP)                      Plan forthwith
28-100
                                                                                      2nd     440          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     660          2,625   N
15 RCNY
                                                                       Certify
§      Failed To Self-Certify Equipment Maintenance in CNMP           equipment      1st     220          875     Y
28-101                                                                 forthwith
(a)
                                                                                      2nd     440          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     660          2,625   N
15 RCNY                                                                Replace tool
                                                                       with equipment
§      Failed to Exercise Noise Mitigation Option Within 5 Business   that complies  1st     440          875     Y
28-101  Days of Construction Tool Exceeding Noise Standard             with noise
(a)                                                                    standard
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY                                                                Equip
                                                                       construction
§      Failed to Equip Construction Equipment with Noise Reduction    equipment with 1st     440          875     Y
28-101  Device                                                         noise
(b)                                                                    reduction
                                                                       device
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY                                                                Mitigate noise
                                                                       from internal
§      Failed to Mitigate Noise From Internal Combustion Engine       combustion     1st     440          875     Y
28-101                                                                 engine
(c)                                                                    forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY                                                                Cover
                                                                       compressor
§      Failed to Cover Compressors / Generators / Pumps with Noise-   with noise     1st     440          875     Y
28-101  Insulating Fabric                                              insulating
(d)                                                                    fabric
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY                                                                Use noise
                                                                       perimeter
§      Failed to Use Perimeter Noise Barriers                         barriers       1st     440          875     Y
28-101                                                                 forthwith
(g)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY                                                                Create and
                                                                       utilize
§      Failed to Create and Utilize Noise Mitigation Training Program training       1st     220          875     Y
28-101                                                                 program
(h)                                                                    forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     440          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     660          2,625   N
15 RCNY
        Failed to Coordinate Work Schedule with Sensitive Facility     Coordinate
§      Receptor                                                       work schedule  1st     220          875     Y
28-101                                                                 forthwith
(i)
                                                                                      2nd     440          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     660          2,625   N
15 RCNY                                                                Comply with
        Failure to Comply with CNMP or File Alternative Plan w/in 3    CNMP or file
§      Days of Inspection                                             Alternative    1st     440          875     Y
28-101                                                                 Plan forthwith
(j)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY
                                                                       Use temporary
§      Failed to Utilize Temporary Barrier                            barrier        1st     440          875     Y
28-101                                                                 forthwith
(l)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY
        Failed to Utilize Noise Barrier on Sandblasting Perimeter      Use noise
§      Barrier                                                        barrier        1st     440          875     Y
28-101                                                                 forthwith
(m)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY
                                                                       Use specified
§      Failed to Use Specified Pile Driver When Working w/in 100 ft.  pile driver    1st     440          875     Y
28-102  of Receptor                                                    forthwith
(a)(1)
(B)(ii)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY
                                                                       Equip pile
§                                                                     driver with
28-102  Failed to Equip Pile Driver w/Exhaust Muffler                  muffler        1st     440          875     Y
(a)(1)                                                                 forthwith
(B)
(iii)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY
                                                                       Pre-augur /
§      Failed to Pre-Augur / Pre-Trench Pile Holes                    pre-trench     1st     440          875     Y
28-102                                                                 holes
(a)(1)                                                                 forthwith
(B)(v)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY
                                                                       Secure
§      Failed to Properly Secure Impact Cushions to Piles             cushions to    1st     440          875     Y
28-102                                                                 piles
(a)(1)                                                                 forthwith
(B)(vi)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY
                                                                       Construct
§                                                                     portable noise
28-102  Failed to Properly Construct Portable Noise Barrier            barrier        1st     440          875     Y
(a)(1)                                                                 forthwith
(C)(i)-
(iv)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY
                                                                       Equip
§                                                                     jackhammer
28-102  Failed to Equip Jackhammer With Effective Muffler              with muffler   1st     440          875     Y
(a)(2)                                                                 forthwith
(B)
(iii)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY                                                                Properly
                                                                       construct
§      Failed to Properly Construct Portable Noise Barrier            portable       1st     440          875     Y
28-102                                                                 barrier
(a)(2)                                                                 forthwith
(C)(i)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY
                                                                       Reduce barrier
§      Exceeded Maximum Height of 15 Feet for Free-Standing Barrier   height to 15   1st     440          875     Y
28-102                                                                 Feet forthwith
(a)(2)
(C)(ii)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY

§                                                                     Use multiple
28-102  Failed to Use Multiple Tents for Multiple Jackhammers          tents          1st     440          875     Y
(a)(2)                                                                 forthwith
(C)
(iii)
(b)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY

§
28-102  Failed to Move Noise Tents as Jackhammer Work Progresses       Move tents     1st     440          875     Y
(a)(2)                                                                 forthwith
(C)
(iii)
(c)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY

§                                                                     Use double
28-102  Failed to Use Double Layer of Mitigation During Emergency      layer of       1st     440          875     Y
(a)(2)  Jackhammering w/in 500 ft. of Residential Receptor             mitigation
(C)                                                                    forthwith
(iii)
(d)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY

§
28-102  Failed to Use Tents on Either Side of Jackhammer Where         Use tents      1st     440          875     Y
(a)(2)  Surrounded by Receptors                                        forthwith
(C)
(iii)
(e)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY

§      Failed to Wrap Noise Shroud Around Head of Hoe Ram w/in 200    Use wrap
28-102  ft. of Receptor                                                shroud         1st     440          875     Y
(a)(3)                                                                 forthwith
(B)
(iii)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY
                                                                       Construct
§                                                                     proper noise
28-102  Failed to Properly Construct Portable Noise Barrier            barrier        1st     440          875     Y
(a)(3)                                                                 forthwith
(C)(i-
iv)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY

§      Failed to Lay Heavy Rubber Blast Mats Over Blast Site          Lay heavy mats 1st     440          875     Y
28-102                                                                 forthwith
(a)(4)
(C)(i)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY
                                                                       Construct
§                                                                     proper noise
28-102  Failed to Properly Construct Portable Noise Barrier            barrier        1st     440          875     Y
(a)(4)                                                                 forthwith
(C)(ii-
iii)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY                                                                Cover vac
                                                                       truck with
§      Failed to Cover Vac-Truck's Suction Component w/Noise-Reducing noise reducing 1st     440          875     Y
28-102  Enclosure                                                      enclosure
(b)(1)                                                                 forthwith
(B)(iv)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY
                                                                       Construct
§                                                                     proper noise
28-102  Failed to Properly Construct Portable Noise Barrier            barrier        1st     440          875     Y
(b)(1)                                                                 forthwith
(C)(i-
iv)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY
                                                                       Install bed
§      Failed to Install Bed Liner                                    liner          1st     440          875     Y
28-102                                                                 forthwith
(c)(1)
(B)(ii)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY
                                                                       Equip truck
§      Failed to Equip Truck with Effective Muffler                   with effective 1st     440          875     Y
28-102                                                                 muffler
(c)(1)                                                                 forthwith
(B)(v)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY
                                                                       Close housing
§                                                                     doors during
28-102  Failed to Keep Housing Doors Closed During Engine Operation    engine         1st     440          875     Y
(c)(1)                                                                 operation
(B)                                                                    forthwith
(vii)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY
                                                                       Construct
§                                                                     proper noise
28-102  Failed to Properly Construct Portable Noise Barrier            barrier        1st     440          875     Y
(c)(1)                                                                 forthwith
(C)(i)-
(iii)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY
                                                                       Equip crane
§      Failed to Equip Crane with Effective Muffler                   with effective 1st     440          875     Y
28-102                                                                 muffler
(d)(1)                                                                 forthwith
(B)(v)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY                                                                Equip auger
                                                                       drill with
§      Failed to Equip Auger Drill Rig with Effective Muffler         effective      1st     440          875     Y
28-102                                                                 muffler
(d)(2)                                                                 forthwith
(B)(i)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY
                                                                       Lubricate all
§      Failed to Lubricate All Moving Parts of Auger Drill Rig        moving parts   1st     440          875     Y
28-102                                                                 of auger drill
(d)(2)                                                                 forthwith
(B)(ii)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY
                                                                       Clean all
§                                                                     debris from
28-102  Failed to Properly Clear Debris From Drill Bits                drill bits     1st     440          875     Y
(d)(2)                                                                 forthwith
(B)
(iii)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY
                                                                       Construct
§                                                                     proper noise
28-102  Failed to Properly Construct Portable Noise Barriers           barrier        1st     440          875     Y
(d)(2)                                                                 forthwith
(C)(i)-
(iv)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY
                                                                       Properly
§      Failed to Properly Install Street Plates                       install street 1st     440          875     Y
28-102                                                                 plates
(d)(3)                                                                 forthwith
(A)(i)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY
                                                                       Equip work
§                                                                     vehicles with
28-102  Failed to Equip Work Vehicles with Proper Backup Alarms        proper backup  1st     440          875     Y
(d)(4)                                                                 alarm
(A)(i)                                                                 forthwith
(a)-(c)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY

§                                                                     Construct
28-102  Failed to Properly Construct Portable Noise Barriers           proper noise   1st     440          875     Y
(d)(4)                                                                 barrier
(B)                                                                    forthwith
(ii)-
(iv)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY
                                                                       Construct
§                                                                     proper noise
28-102  Failed to Properly Construct Portable Noise Barriers           barrier        1st     440          875     Y
(e)(1)                                                                 forthwith
(C)(i)-
(iii)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY
                                                                       Use multiple
§      Failed to Use Multiple Tents During Use of Multiple Concrete   tents          1st     440          875     Y
28-102  Saws                                                           forthwith
(e)(1)
(C)(iv)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY

§      Failed to Move Noise Tent As Concrete Saw Work Progressed      Move tents     1st     440          875     Y
28-102                                                                 forthwith
(e)(1)
(C)(v)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY
        Failed to Use Double Layer of Mitigation for Noise Barrier     Use double
§      During Emergency Concrete Sawing within 500 ft. of Residential layer of       1st     440          875     Y
28-102  Receptor                                                       mitigation
(e)(1)                                                                 forthwith
(C)(vi)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY
                                                                       Use two tents
§      Failed to Use Two Tents on Either Side of Saw When Surrounded  on either side
28-102  by Receptors                                                   of saw         1st     440          875     Y
(e)(1)                                                                 forthwith
(C)
(vii)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY
        Failed to File Alternative Noise Mitigation Plan (ANMP)        File ANMP      1st     220          875     Y
§                                                                     forthwith
28-104
                                                                                      2nd     440          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     660          2,625   N
15 RCNY                                                                Conspicuously
        Failed to Conspicuously Post Utility Noise Mitigation Plan     post UNMP      1st     220          875     Y
§      (UNMP)                                                         forthwith
28-105
                                                                                      2nd     440          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     660          2,625   N
15 RCNY
                                                                       Certify
§      Failed to Self-Certify Equipment Maintenance in UNMP           equipment      1st     220          875     Y
28-106                                                                 forthwith
(a)
                                                                                      2nd     440          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     660          2,625   N
15 RCNY                                                                Replace tool
                                                                       with equipment
§      Failed to Exercise Noise Mitigation Option within 5 Days of    that complies  1st     440          875     Y
28-106  Construction Tool Exceeding Noise Standard                     with noise
(a)                                                                    standard
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY                                                                Equip tool
                                                                       with noise
§      Failed to Equip Construction Tool with Noise Reduction Device  reduction      1st     440          875     Y
28-106                                                                 device
(b)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
                                                                       Use additional
15 RCNY                                                                noise
        Failed to Comply with Additional Noise Mitigation Measures for mitigation
§      Specialized Vehicles                                           measures for   1st     440          875     Y
28-106                                                                 specialized
(c)                                                                    trucks
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY                                                                Cover
                                                                       equipment with
§      Failed to Cover Equipment with Noise-Insulating Fabric         noise          1st     440          875     Y
28-106                                                                 insulating
(d)                                                                    fabric
                                                                       forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY                                                                Properly
                                                                       install street
§      Failed to Properly Install and Secure Street Plates            plates         1st     440          875     Y
28-106                                                                 forthwith
(h)
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
15 RCNY
        Failed to Notify Residents within 200 Feet of Construction     Notify
§      Activity                                                       residents      1st     220          875     Y
28-106                                                                 forthwith
(i)
                                                                                      2nd     440          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     660          2,625   N
15 RCNY
                                                                       Respond to
§      Failed to Respond to Noise Complaints/Notice from DEP          notice         1st     220          875     Y
28-106                                                                 forthwith
(j)
                                                                                      2nd     440          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     660          2,625   N
15 RCNY                                                                Create and
                                                                       utilize
§      Failed to Create and Utilize Noise Mitigation Training Program training       1st     220          875     Y
28-106                                                                 program
(l)                                                                    forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     440          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     660          2,625   N
15 RCNY
        Failed to Coordinate Work Schedule with Sensitive Receptor     Coordinate
§      Owner                                                          work schedule  1st     220          875     Y
28-106                                                                 forthwith
(m)
                                                                                      2nd     440          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     660          2,625   N
15 RCNY                                                                Correct
                                                                       excessive
§      Failed to Correct Excessive Noise Condition/File ANMP          noise and/or   1st     440          875     Y
28-106                                                                 file ANMP
(n)                                                                    forthwith
                                                                                      2nd     880          1,750   N
                                                                                      3rd     1,320        2,625   N
 
(Added City Record 2/22/2017, eff. 3/24/2017; amended City Record 5/8/2017,
eff. 6/7/2017; amended City Record 9/5/2018, eff. 10/5/2018; amended City
Record 10/20/2021, eff. 11/19/2021; amended City Record 2/17/2022, eff. 3/19/
2022; amended City Record 11/18/2022, eff. 11/18/2022; amended City Record 12/
16/2024, eff. 1/15/2025; amended City Record 2/28/2025, eff. 3/30/2025)
Chapter 48: Green Infrastructure Grant Program
§ 48-01 Purpose and Applicability.
   (a)   Purpose. The Green Infrastructure Grant Program ("Program") is
intended to provide funding for the design and construction of green roof
retrofits to manage stormwater runoff in New York City.
   (b)   Applicability. The Program provides funding for the design and
construction of green roof retrofits on real property located within the five
(5) boroughs of New York City and, except as set forth in 15 RCNY §
48-04(b), real property that is privately owned.
(Added City Record 5/11/2017, eff. 6/10/2017; amended City Record 12/9/2019,
eff. 1/8/2020)
§ 48-02 Definitions.
"Applicant" means the person or entity completing, preparing and/or submitting
the Program application, in some cases on behalf of the potential Grantee.
"City" means the City of New York.
"Conditional acceptance" or "conditionally accepted" refers to a Grant
application that has been reviewed by the Department and accepted subject to
satisfaction of additional specific requirements, and for which there has not
yet been a binding commitment to award a Grant because there remain pre-
conditions to be satisfied by the Applicant and/or the prospective Grantee.
"Department" means the Department of Environmental Protection, the City agency
responsible for administering the Green Infrastructure Grant Program.
"Funding Agreement" means the primary contract between the City and the Grantee
with respect to the Program funding.
"Grant" means a grant of funds awarded by the Department to a Grantee under the
Program, which becomes effective and binding when the Funding Agreement has
been fully executed and registered with the City Comptroller.
"Grantee" means the owner of the real property on which the Project will be
built, including all parties having an ownership interest in the property.
"Green Roof" means a vegetated system installed on an above grade roof which is
designed and constructed by the Grantee to manage stormwater runoff in
accordance with the Program Guide.
"Private property" means real property not owned by the City and located within
the limits of the five (5) boroughs of the City of New York.
"Program" means the Department's Green Infrastructure Grant Program that
facilitates the installation of green roof retrofits on private property.
"Program Guide" means the step-by-step instruction manual for prospective
Grantees that describes the Project development process to be followed from
conditional acceptance of the application until execution of the Funding
Agreement, and how the Department will provide the funding to the Grantee for
the construction of the Project. The Program Guide will be incorporated by
reference into the Funding Agreement.
"Project" means the Green Roof(s) to be installed on the Grantee's property
with funding provided by a Grant awarded by the Department.
"Retrofit" means the implementation of a Project by constructing a Green Roof
on an existing building.
(Added City Record 5/11/2017, eff. 6/10/2017; amended City Record 12/9/2019,
eff. 1/8/2020)
§ 48-03 Eligible Grantees.
To be eligible for a Grant, Applicants must be in compliance with the
following:
   (a)   They are not in default on any prior grant agreement or other City
contract;
   (b)   They do not owe any taxes; and
   (c)   There is no evidence of lack of business integrity, as determined by
the Department after a review of information maintained in PASSPort or other
public databases; provided that the Department will not conclude that there is
a lack of business integrity without first providing the Applicant with an
opportunity to update or correct the information drawn from such databases.
(Added City Record 5/11/2017, eff. 6/10/2017; amended City Record 12/9/2019,
eff. 1/8/2020)
§ 48-04 Eligible Property.
   (a)   Grants may be awarded for Projects that will be constructed on private
property, except as set forth in paragraph (b) of this section.
   (b)   Grant applications involving Projects on property that is either (i)
owned in whole or in part by the City and occupied by the potential Grantee on
a long-term basis (e.g., pursuant to a ground lease or other land use
agreement) or (ii) owned by another governmental entity or public authority,
will be considered by the Department on a case-by-case basis. In evaluating
applications involving property leased from the City, as described in (i), the
Department will consider such factors as the length of the occupancy agreement
and whether or not the lease or agreement is renewable.
(Added City Record 5/11/2017, eff. 6/10/2017; amended City Record 12/9/2019,
eff. 1/8/2020)
§ 48-05 Project Feasibility Requirements.
   (a)   The building for which the proposed Project will be implemented must
be fully constructed and in a condition to accept the Retrofit at the time of
application.
   (b)   The proposed Project must manage stormwater runoff from the
surrounding impervious tributary drainage area and be designed in accordance
with the Program Guide.
   (c)   Projects must be determined to be feasible by a structural analysis
that has been performed by a professional structural engineer licensed by the
State of New York and that concludes that the loading capacity of the roof is
sufficient to support the proposed Project.
(Added City Record 5/11/2017, eff. 6/10/2017; amended City Record 12/9/2019,
eff. 1/8/2020)
§ 48-06 Application Submission Requirements.
   (a)   The application can be submitted through the Department's online
application system, at http://www.nyc.gov/dep/grantprogram. To request a paper
copy of the application, one can mail a request to Green Infrastructure Grant
Program, Bureau of Environmental Planning & Analysis at 59-17 Junction
Boulevard, 11th Floor, Flushing, NY 11373, and completed paper applications may
be submitted to the same address.
   (b)   Only one (1) tax lot may be included in an application to fund a
proposed Project, unless the potential Grantee owns adjacent lots and the
proposed Project would manage stormwater runoff from all of the commonly owned
adjacent tax lots. In this case, one (1) application may be submitted for a
Project to be constructed on the adjacent lots in common ownership.
   (c)   The Applicant must provide all information requested on the
application form, including detailed information regarding Project scope,
drawings, schematics, maps and plans. Proof of property ownership must be
included.
   (d)   All applications must include, at a minimum:
      1.   The Applicant's name, address, telephone number and email address;
      2.   The identity of the Grantee including names address, phone number
and email address;
      3.   The address and location of the property, as well as borough, block
and lot information;
      4.   A description of how the proposed Project will function;
      5.   A structural analysis that has been performed by a professional
structural engineer licensed by the State of New York that concludes that the
loading capacity of the roof is sufficient to support the proposed Project;
      6.   The professional qualifications of those designing and implementing
the Project;
      7.   The proposed budget for the proposed Project;
      8.   Calculations of the stormwater projected to be managed by the
proposed Project, derived using the calculator provided by the Department with
the application;
      9.   The construction timeline for the proposed Project;
      10.   Information including the Project's location within the property,
footprint dimensions, stormwater flow directions, and proposed materials;
      11.   A record of the connection of the building or site to the sewer, if
available; and
      12.   A proposed maintenance plan that details maintenance tasks and
activities for the useful life of the Project, and a statement of how the
Grantee would pay for these activities (note that maintenance costs are not
eligible for Grant funding).
   (e)   Relevant additional information should be included if applicable, such
as:
      1.   At least two photos showing the existing conditions of the proposed
Project area within the property as of the date of the application submission;
      2.   Identification of any "co-benefits" in addition to reduced
stormwater runoff;
      3.   Identification of any local institutions or community groups that
will be involved in the design, construction or stewardship of the proposed
Project; and
      4.   The proposed monitoring plan, if any.
(Added City Record 5/11/2017, eff. 6/10/2017; amended City Record 12/9/2019,
eff. 1/8/2020)
§ 48-07 Selection of Projects and Appeals.
   (a)   The Department will conditionally accept applications, in its
discretion, based upon the criteria set forth in this section, after a complete
application has been submitted, reviewed, and determined to meet the
eligibility requirements as set forth in these Rules.
   (b)   Applications will be evaluated based upon the following criteria:
      1.   Cost/benefit ratio. The stormwater management benefits of the
Project should be cost effective in comparison to the Project costs.
      2.   Constructability. An evaluation of the constructability of the
proposed Project will be based on information submitted.
      3.   Other factors. Such other factors as the quality of the application
materials, a short construction timeline, the availability of matching funds or
in-kind contributions, the involvement of community partners or organizations,
public visibility or accessibility, the inclusion of a robust scientific
monitoring plan, the ability of the proposed Project to be replicable on a wide
scale, and/or the inclusion of any training or workforce development
opportunities as part of a proposed Project may be considered by the Department
when evaluating the Project proposal.
   (c)   Prospective Grantees will be required to submit a Doing Business Data
Form to the Department.
   (d)   If an application is conditionally accepted, the Applicant will be
notified by letter, with a copy of the Program Guide. Such Guide will also be
available on the Department's website, at http://www.nyc.gov/dep/grantprogram.
The prospective Grantee must complete an Acceptance Form and return it to the
Department within two (2) weeks after receipt of the acceptance letter,
confirming that the prospective Grantee is prepared to execute the Funding
Agreement and, if appropriate, a restrictive covenant or security agreement
upon final acceptance of the Project design and is able to design and construct
the Project within one (1) year of conditional acceptance. Unsuccessful
Applicants will be sent a letter advising what needs to be done for a
resubmitted application to be conditionally accepted, or, if it does not appear
that the application will be accepted, advising of the reasons for denial.
   (e)   If an application is denied in whole or on part, an appeal may be
submitted as set forth in this paragraph. Such appeal may be made by the
property owner sending a letter to the New York City Department of
Environmental Protection, Attn: Commissioner, 59-17 Junction Boulevard,
Flushing, NY 11373, c/o Bureau of Legal Affairs, within thirty (30) days after
the date of the denial letter issued by the Department. Failure to submit an
appeal within thirty (30) days will be deemed to be an acceptance of the
Department's denial. Upon receipt of a timely letter of appeal, the
Commissioner will appoint an appeal officer within the Department to review.
Such appeal officer will make a report on the appeal to the Commissioner. The
Commissioner or his or her designee must issue a final order within sixty (60)
days after receiving the report. A copy of the final order will be sent to the
appellant within ten (10) days after the date the Commissioner or his or her
designee issues it.
(Added City Record 5/11/2017, eff. 6/10/2017; amended City Record 12/9/2019,
eff. 1/8/2020)
§ 48-08 Funding.
   (a)   Funding is provided to Grantees, or an approved assignee, on a
reimbursement basis upon receipt of invoices for eligible costs previously
paid. Monthly invoices may be submitted to the Department after:
      1.   Final designs have been accepted by the Department;
      2.   The Funding Agreement has been registered pursuant to Section 328 of
the Charter; and
      3.   A notice to proceed with the Project has been issued to the Grantee
by the Department.
   (b)   The following items are not eligible expenses and cannot be covered by
the Grant:
      1.   Non-third party personnel costs or salaries of Grantee employees
      2.   Operating costs
      3.   Maintenance activities
      4.   Legal expenses
   (c)   The Department will disburse Grant funding in accordance with the
instructions and requirements of the Department's Agency Chief Contracting
Officer and the City's Office of Management and Budget.
(Added City Record 5/11/2017, eff. 6/10/2017)
§ 48-09 Grant Administration and Compliance.
   (a)   Prospective Grantees will be required to execute a Funding Agreement
in the form provided in the on-line application available at www.nyc.gov/dep/
grantprogram after Project design is complete and has been accepted by the
Department.
   (b)   Grantees may be required to execute a security agreement, generally in
the form of a restrictive covenant, to ensure the preservation of the Project
for its useful life, which may be up to twenty (20) years.
   (c)   Grantees must provide proof of the required insurance as set forth in
the Funding Agreement.
   (d)   After a final design has been accepted by the Department, a notice to
proceed will be issued to the Grantee.
   (e)   Failure to render satisfactory progress or to complete the Project to
the satisfaction of the Department may be deemed an abandonment of the Project
and, under the terms of the Funding Agreement, may result in the termination of
further Grant funding and recoupment of funds already disbursed. Satisfactory
progress includes, without limitation, executing the required Funding Agreement
completing design milestones, or submitting required paperwork in accordance
with the deadlines set forth in the Program Guide.
   (f)   Projects must comply with all Local, State and Federal laws and
regulations.
   (g)   Grant funds must not be used for political advocacy, boycotts,
advertising, or litigation expenses. In addition, funds must not be used for
legally mandated actions under Local, State or Federal law and/or associated
with administrative permit conditions or terms of settlement agreements.
   (h)   Grantees must submit regular construction status reports once
construction commences, until final acceptance by the Department. Once
construction of the Project is completed, Grantees are required to submit
regular maintenance summaries for three (3) years.
   (i)   The City has the unrestricted right to use the designs for any
Projects for which Grants are awarded for any future Projects or purposes at no
additional cost to the City.
   (j)   The City has the right to publish photographs of completed Projects.
The Grantee must indicate in any statements to the press or in any materials
for publication in any media of communication (print, news, television, radio,
internet, etc.) that the Project was funded wholly or in part by the
Department.
(Added City Record 5/11/2017, eff. 6/10/2017; amended City Record 12/9/2019,
eff. 1/8/2020)
Chapter 49: Spraying Insulating Material
§ 49-01 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following term has the following meaning:
   Insulating Material. "Insulating Material" means any material or combination
of materials, except spray on foam, that restricts the flow of heat energy.
(Added City Record 3/23/2018, eff. 4/22/2018)
§ 49-02 Applicability.
This chapter is not applicable to new construction.
(Added City Record 3/23/2018, eff. 4/22/2018)
§ 49-03 Precautions to be Taken During Spraying of Insulating Material.
No person may cause or permit the spraying of any insulating material in or
upon any building or other structure during its construction, alteration or
repair, unless he or she complies with the following precautions.
   (1)   Before the start of spraying operations all floor areas must be
shoveled clean. Before the application of insulating material commences, the
floor of the areas must be cleared of all objects, material and equipment other
than that employed in the application of the insulating material, or all
objects, material, and equipment must be covered with plastic or other approved
tarpaulins in a manner that prevents the subsequent dispersal of dust.
   (2)   The entire floor, or the part of the floor to be insulated, must be
enclosed with plastic or other approved tarpaulins in a manner that prevents
the escape of dust from the enclosure. All interior open areas, such as
elevator shafts and stairwells must be enclosed in a manner that prevents the
escape of dust from the working area. Stack effect of the shafts and stairwells
must be considered in providing proper enclosures. An enclosure will be
considered satisfactory only if visible insulating material cannot escape from
the enclosure.
   (3)   Wet insulating material that has fallen to the floor must be shoveled
and scraped to prevent dispersal of dried material. This material must be
removed no later than the end of the working day. Shoveled and scraped material
must be placed in a heavy plastic bag strong enough to resist tearing or
breaking under normal handling conditions and clearly marked as containing
insulating material waste. The bags must then be placed into containers,
pursuant to Section BC 3303.4.2 of the New York City Building Code. The
contents of the aforementioned plastic bags must not be transferred to another
container and must not be combined with any designated recyclable materials,
pursuant to §§ 16-305, 16-306, 16-306.1, 16-307, 16-308 and 16-314 of the
Administrative Code of the City of New York. The plastic bags must be placed
upon a vehicle for either transfer to a solid waste transfer station, pursuant
to 16 RCNY
Ch. 4 or disposal at a site approved by the commissioner and regulated under 6
NYCRR Part 360 if located in New York State or that is consistent with the
regulations adopted by any locality where such disposal site is located if
outside New York State.
   (4)   All areas used for opening bags containing insulating material and/or
changing of containers must be vacuumed with a HEPA air filtration vacuum or a
dust collection system.
   (5)   Signs must be posted outside enclosures warning persons that entering
the enclosure without appropriate apparel may be a hazard.
   (6)   Facilities must be provided and procedures instituted and supervised
that prevent the removal and dispersal of insulating material from the
construction site on the clothing or other accessories of persons leaving the
area. All persons involved in the spraying of insulating material at the site
must be furnished with personal protective equipment specified in the
applicable Safety Data Sheet, including suitable coveralls which must be left
at the site until properly disposed of in plastic garbage bags. No person will
be permitted in an area in which spraying or handling of insulating material is
underway or has taken place until the final vacuuming referred to in paragraph
four of this subdivision has been accomplished, unless such person is furnished
with or wears personal protective equipment in accordance with this paragraph.
   (7)   Any plenum or structures coated with insulating material which are
intended for use in circulation of air in the building must be thoroughly
cleaned of all debris, dust and waste insulation. All applied insulation
material within a plenum or duct must comply with Section MC 602.2.1 of the New
York City Mechanical Code.
   (8)   A person who is fully trained in accordance with current standard
industry practice must be assigned the full-time responsibility of supervising
the spraying, preparation and clean-up operations to ensure that no insulating
material is released from the construction site.
   (9)   In case of emission of insulation material from the construction site,
immediate steps must be taken to cease such emissions which may include work
stoppage at the source of the emissions. There must then be immediate and
complete clean-up of all material that has escaped the construction site using
control measures including but not limited to the use of a water hose and HEPA
vacuum that prevent further dispersal of any insulating material into the
atmosphere.
(Added City Record 3/23/2018, eff. 4/22/2018)
Chapter 50: Registration of Other Emission Sources or Activities
§ 50-01 Engines in Mobile Food Vending Units.
No person shall cause or permit the installation, use, or operation of any
engine in a mobile food vending unit with an input of less than 50 horsepower
unless he or she has first registered the engine with the Department in
accordance with the requirements of § 24-109 of the Administrative Code.
(Added City Record 1/16/2018, eff. 2/15/2018)
§ 50-02 Cook Stoves and Charcoal Burning Appliances.
   (a)   Definition. 
      "Cook stove" shall have the same meaning as set forth in § 24-104(28) of
the Administrative Code.
   (b)   No person shall cause or permit the installation, use, or operation of
any cook stove unless he or she has first registered the cook stove or
appliance with the Department in accordance with the requirements of § 24-109
of the Administrative Code.
(Added City Record 7/2/2018, eff. 8/1/2018)
Chapter 51: [Retrofit Technology in Heavy Duty Trade Waste Hauling Vehicles]
§ 51-01 Definitions.
"Best Available Retrofit Technology" or "BART" means technology verified by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA") or the California Air
Resources Board ("CARB") for reducing the emission of pollutants that achieves
reductions in particulate matter emissions at the highest classification level
for diesel emission control strategies that is applicable to a particular
engine and application that has been approved for use by the commissioner or is
installed with an EPA certified engine year 2007 or later.
"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of the New York City Department of
Environmental Protection or his or her designee.
"Heavy duty trade waste hauling vehicle" means any diesel-fuel powered vehicle
with a gross weight of over sixteen thousand pounds that is owned or operated
by an entity that is required to be licensed or registered by the New York City
Business Integrity Commission pursuant to § 16-505 of the Administrative Code
and that is operated in New York City for collection and/or removal of trade
waste.
"Trade Waste" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Subdivision f of §
16-501 of the Administrative Code.
(Added City Record 7/10/2018, eff. 8/9/2018)
§ 51-02 Best Available Retrofit Technology in Heavy Duty Trade Waste Hauling
Vehicles.
Pursuant to § 24-163.11 of the Administrative Code, any heavy duty trade waste
hauling vehicle shall use the BART as defined in 15 RCNY §
51-01. Owners and operators of these vehicles shall consult the EPA and CARB
verified lists at https://www.epa.gov/verified-diesel-tech/verified-
technologies-list-clean-diesel and https://www.arb.ca.gov/diesel/verdev/vt/
cvt.htm.
(Added City Record 7/10/2018, eff. 8/9/2018)
§ 51-03 Classification Level to Select Best Available Retrofit Technology.
Level I
The BART selected to comply with 15 RCNY §
51-02 must meet the classification level specified in this section.
Any Diesel Particulate Filter (DPF) or other technology verified for a specific
engine type from either EPA or CARB verified lists that reduces particulate
matter emissions by 85 percent or more, or reduces engine emissions to less
than or equal to 0.01 grams diesel particulate matter per brake horsepower-hour
or applicable 2007 EPA standard for particulate matter as set forth in Section
86.007-11 of Title 40 of the United States Code of Federal Regulations or to
any subsequent EPA standard for such pollutant that is at least as stringent
shall be deemed to be in compliance with this regulation.
(Added City Record 7/10/2018, eff. 8/9/2018)
§ 51-04 Record Submittal Documentation.
Any heavy duty trade waste hauling vehicle that meets the definition set forth
in 15 RCNY §
51-01 shall utilize BART and the vehicle owner or operator must identify in
list form and submit to the department all types of pollution control
technology devices utilized for such vehicle as set forth in 15 RCNY §
51-03. In order to meet this certification requirement, evaluation documents
from the vendor/installer including a data logging record must be submitted to
the department by the owner and operator of these vehicles.
(Added City Record 7/10/2018, eff. 8/9/2018)
§ 51-05 Variance Procedure.
   (a)   An owner or operator of a heavy duty trade waste hauling vehicle that
meets the definition set forth in 15 RCNY §
51-01 may apply to the Commissioner no later than June 1, 2019 for a variance
pursuant to § 24-110 of the Administrative Code if upon evaluation by the
Department, there is a lack of feasibility or unavailability finding for either
spatial constraints or safety concerns. Nothing in this section shall preclude
the Business Integrity Commission from issuing a financial hardship waiver,
pursuant to § 24-163.11(c) of the Administrative Code.
(Added City Record 7/10/2018, eff. 8/9/2018)
Chapter 52: After Hours Noise Complaints
§ 52-01 After Hours Response Time at Construction Sites.
   (a)   (1)   When a complaint is made to the Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) concerning after hours noise at a construction site, DEP staff
will determine whether an after hours variance has been issued pursuant to §
24-223(a) of the New York City Noise Control Code by the Department of
Buildings (DOB). If there is no variance, an inspection will be conducted the
same day if the complaint is received during likely working hours. If the
complaint is not received during likely working hours, the inspection will be
conducted the following weekend or during the same after hours period, as
applicable.
      (2)   For locations with a DOB variance, an inspection will be conducted
during the next time period during which the after hours variance is in effect.
   (b)   For locations with a DOB variance, DEP will prioritize inspections
based upon the number of complaints received per location on a given day.
   (c)   DEP staff should also monitor after hour complaints to identify
situations where complaints have been received about three of more construction
sites within a one mile radius of each other and were received within four
hours of each other. Where feasible and when such complaints were received
during likely working hours, the inspections will be conducted at such
locations whether or not there is a variance.
   (d)   (1)   If an after hours complaint is received regarding noise
occurring on a weekday, DEP staff shall inspect the location the following
weekday.
      (2)   If an after hours complaint is received regarding noise occurring
on a weekend, DEP staff shall inspect at least 95% of such complaints the
following weekend, and the remaining percentage of such complaints, if any,
shall be inspected the weekend thereafter.
(Added City Record 9/14/2018, eff. 10/14/2018)
§ 52-02 After Hours Response Time for Street Work.
   (a)   When a complaint is reported to DEP concerning after hours noise from
street construction, which would require an after hours variance from the
Department of Transportation (DOT), DEP staff will check the DOT website. If
there is no variance, or a variance only for that one day, an inspection will
be conducted that day or night. If it is unclear from the website if there is a
variance, or if there is a variance within the first three days of receiving
such complaint, DEP will conduct an inspection to ascertain if there is a DOT
permit and to monitor for noise. DEP staff should inspect 75% of all street
construction complaints within three days or less. The remainder of the 25% of
complaints should be inspected by the fourth day.
   (b)   DEP staff should also monitor after-hour complaints to identify
situations where three or more complaints relate to the same work location and
are received within four hours of each other. Where feasible and the three or
more complaints are received within working hours, the inspection will be
conducted for those locations whether or not there is an after hours variance.
(Added City Record 9/14/2018, eff. 10/14/2018)
Chapter 53: Air Asbestos Penalty Schedule
§ 53-01 General.
   (a)   Whenever a respondent is found in violation of any of the following
provisions of the New York City Administrative Code or the Rules of the City of
New York or the New York Code of Rules and Regulations, any civil penalties
recommended by a hearing officer, pursuant to 48 RCNY §
6-17(a) in accordance with Section 1049-a(d)(1)(d) of the Charter and/or any
civil penalties imposed for admissions of violations, pursuant to 48 RCNY §
6-09(a) or late admissions, pursuant to 48 RCNY §
3-17 will be imposed, pursuant to the penalty schedule set forth below.
   (b)   If a stipulation is offered and accepted at or before a hearing, the
stipulation penalty will be imposed.
   (c)   Unless otherwise indicated, all citations are to 15 RCNY
Chapter 1.
   (d)   A second offense is a violation by the same respondent within two
years, for an infraction of the same section of the rules.
   (e)   The default penalty for all charges in this Penalty Schedule shall be
twice the penalty set forth in subsection (a) of 15 RCNY §
53-02.
(Added City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019)
§ 53-02 Air Asbestos Penalty Schedule.
   (a)   Penalty Table for Violations of
Title 15 of the Rules of the City of New York. 
Section Violation   1st Offense 1st Offense 2nd Offense Penalty 2nd Offense
        Description Penalty     Stipulation                     Stipulation
                                                                           1st     1st Offense 2nd     2nd Offense
Section     Violation Description                                          Offense Stipulation Offense Stipulation
                                                                           Penalty             Penalty
15 RCNY §  Failure of asbestos handler supervisor to comply with all      $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-01(c)     provisions of Asbestos Rules
15 RCNY §  Knowingly made a false statement or submitted a false document $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-01(e)     to DEP or any individual or city agency
15 RCNY §  Did not permit DEP inspection of asbestos project/abatement    $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-01(f)     activities
15 RCNY §  Interfered with or obstructed DEP personnel                    $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-01(g)
15 RCNY §  Engaged in unprofessional conduct                              $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-01(h)
15 RCNY §  Failed to generate an approved variance (v2 Form) by entering  $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-03(a)     start date in ARTS
15 RCNY §  Failed to place ACP-7 in postponed status in ARTS until        $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-03(j)     variance application approved
15 RCNY §  Conducted building survey and hazard assessment without DEP    $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-16(a)(1)  certification
15 RCNY §  Failed to sign/affix valid investigators seal to plan or       $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-16(h)     report as required
15 RCNY §  Failed to comply with reporting and filing requirements        $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-21(a)
15 RCNY §  Failed to calculate project size and scope as required         $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-21(b)
15 RCNY §  Failed to submit required certification to Buildings Dept      $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-22(b)
15 RCNY §  Failed to file required Asbestos Assessment Report (ACP-5)     $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-23(c)     with Buildings Dept
15 RCNY §  Failed to file required Asbestos Assessment Report (ACP-5)     $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-25(c)     with Buildings Dept
15 RCNY §  Failed to notify DEP in writing of any change on project       $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-25(d)     notification
15 RCNY §  Failed to obtain asbestos abatement permit when required       $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-26(a)
15 RCNY §  Failed to comply with work place safety plan                   $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-26(b)(4)
15 RCNY §  Failed to maintain/provide record of final inspection          $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-26(c)(3)
15 RCNY §  Failed to terminate asbestos abatement permit w/in 1 yr. of    $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-26(e)     issuance
15 RCNY §  Failed to maintain required insurance during work permitted    $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-26(f)     work
15 RCNY §  Commenced permitted work prior to permit issuance              $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-26(h)
15 RCNY §  Failed to submit letter to ATRU regarding additional asbestos  $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-26(i)     on projects with WPSP
15 RCNY §  Failed to immediately notify DEP of emergency project as       $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-27(b)     required
15 RCNY §  Failed to notify DEP by ARTS E-File of emergency project       $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-27(c)     within 48 hours
15 RCNY §  Failed to maintain permanent records of asbestos surveys as    $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-28(a)     required
15 RCNY §  Failed to compile complete records of asbestos survey as       $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-28(b)     required
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly record work by non-certified individual as  $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-28(c)     required
15 RCNY §  Failed to maintain records of asbestos surveys for 30 years    $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-28(d)
15 RCNY §  Failed to make asbestos survey records available for           $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-28(e)     inspection by DEP
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly store records or report damage/loss/        $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-28(f)     destruction of records
15 RCNY §  Failed to respond to DEP request for production of records     $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-28(g)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly maintain project record                     $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-29(a)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly maintain project summary                    $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-29(b)
15 RCNY §  Failed to make project record or project summary available for $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-29(c)     inspection in a timely manner
15 RCNY §  Failed to maintain air monitor project summary                 $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-29(d)
15 RCNY §  Failed to store records to minimize possibility of water       $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-29(e)     damage
15 RCNY §  Performed abatement activities without air monitoring          $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-32
15 RCNY §  Failed to retain independent third party air monitor           $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-36(a)
15 RCNY §  Failed to have technician present during air sample collection $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-36(b)
15 RCNY §  Use lab without required qualifications to perform bulk sample $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-36(c)     analysis
15 RCNY §  Used lab without required qualifications to perform air sample $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-36(d)     analysis
15 RCNY §  Employed unqualified analyst to perform air sample analysis    $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-36(e)     (TEM)
15 RCNY §  Failed to perform bulk sampling as required                    $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-37(a)
15 RCNY §  Failed to utilize area air sampling equipment for PCM per 60   $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-37(b)     NIOSH 7400
15 RCNY §  Failed to utilize area air sampling equipment for TEM as       $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-37(c)     required
15 RCNY §  Failed to use appropriate air sampling pump calibrated by      $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-37(d)     rotometer
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly inspect and label air sampling equipment    $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-37(e)
15 RCNY §  Failed to create/maintain air sampling log                     $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-37(f)
15 RCNY §  Failed to assess/identify exact locations and quantities of    $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $9,600
1-38(a)     ACM / PACM / misc. ACM
15 RCNY §  Failed to collect bulk samples and submit for analysis         $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-38(b)
15 RCNY §  Failed to comply with sampling requirements                    $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-38(c)
15 RCNY §  Sample collected by unauthorized person or outside physical    $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-38(d)     presence of certified asbestos inspector
15 RCNY §  Failed to conduct air sampling in accordance with required     $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-41(a)     schedule
15 RCNY §  Failed to conduct pre-abatement air sampling as required       $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-41(b)
15 RCNY §  Failed to conduct air sampling during abatement as required    $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-41(c)
15 RCNY §  Failed to conduct post-abatement air sampling as required      $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-41(d)
15 RCNY §  Utilized improperly located air samplers                       $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-42(a)
15 RCNY §  Failed to locate ambient samplers properly                     $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-42(b)
15 RCNY §  Failed to have a chain of custody record for air samples       $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-42(c)
15 RCNY §  Failed to follow specified area sampling schedule for air      $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-42(d)     monitoring
15 RCNY §  Failed to conduct air sampling for small projects as required  $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-42(e)
15 RCNY §  Failed to confirm absence of visible ACM before final air      $2,400  $1,200      $4,800  $3,000
1-43(a)     monitoring
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly place required number of samplers in work   $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-43(b)     area
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly place samplers outside work area            $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-43(c)
15 RCNY §  Failed to conduct aggressive sampling according to required    $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-43(d)     procedures
15 RCNY §  Area air samples did not meet schedule for post-abatement      $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-43(e)     monitoring
15 RCNY §  Failed to reclean and re-sample in areas that failed clearance $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-43(f)     as required
15 RCNY §  Failed to meet release criteria for any independent work area  $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-43(g)
15 RCNY §  Failed to analyze and report PCM area air samples as required  $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-44(a)
15 RCNY §  Failed to analyze and report TEM area air samples as required  $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-44(b)
15 RCNY §  Failed to analyze and report bulk sample as required           $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-44(c)
15 RCNY §  Failed to submit bulk/air sampling results w/in 5 days of DEP  $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-44(d)     request
15 RCNY §  Failed to follow proper procedures when action criteria        $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-45(a)     exceeded
15 RCNY §  Failed to meet clearance and/or reoccupancy criteria           $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-45(b)
15 RCNY §  Employed uncertified workers on an asbestos project            $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-51(a)
15 RCNY §  Failed to have supervisor present during abatement activities  $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-51(b)
15 RCNY §  Allowed persons inside work place w/out proper protective      $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-51(c)     clothing
15 RCNY §  Failed to perform person air monitoring as per OSHA standards  $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-51(d)
15 RCNY §  Failed to meet personal hygiene requirements at work site      $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-51(e)
15 RCNY §  Failed to have required info at work place                     $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-51(f)
15 RCNY §  Failed to post asbestos warning signs at all approaches to     $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-51(g)     work place
15 RCNY §  Failed to affix required warning labels to all ACM waste       $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-51(h)     containers
15 RCNY §  Did not store replacement materials outside work area as       $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-61(a)     required
15 RCNY §  Used replacement materials which did not comply with NYC Code  $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-61(b)     and regulations
15 RCNY §  Failed to use plastic of 6-mil thickness or greater for        $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-61(c)     plasticizing
15 RCNY §  Used duct tape and/or adhesive incapable of properly sealing   $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-61(d)     plastic
15 RCNY §  Failed to use and/or label 6-mil bags or containers for ACM as $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-61(e)     required
15 RCNY §  Failed to enclose ACM in airtight manner with impact resistant $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-61(f)     material
15 RCNY §  Failed to use HEPA filtration as required on power tools       $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-61(g)
15 RCNY §  Failed to provide ladders/scaffolds and/or seal joints/ends of $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-61(h)     same
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly use ladders in the conduct of abatement     $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-61(h)(1)  activities
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly seal scaffold joints / ends or failed to    $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-61(h)(2)  properly use scaffolds in the conduct of abatement activities
15 RCNY §  Failed to protect walking / working surfaces from danger of    $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-61(h)(3)  tripping or stepping into holes / openings
15 RCNY §  Failed to use UL listed and approved electrical equipment      $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-61(i)
15 RCNY §  Failed to use non-carcinogenic / non-toxic chemicals           $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-61(j)
15 RCNY §  Failed to use non-combustible / fire-retardant materials       $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-61(k)
15 RCNY §  Failed to obtain DEP approval for substitute equipment/        $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-61(l)     material
15 RCNY §  Failed to post notice of asbestos project as specified         $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-81(a)
15 RCNY §  Failed to post floor plan as specified                         $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-81(b)
15 RCNY §  Failed to vacate work place prior to and during abatement      $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-81(c)     activities
15 RCNY §  Failed to provide power from outside the work area thru GFI at $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-81(d)     source
15 RCNY §  Failed to install worker decon in required sequence            $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-81(e)
15 RCNY §  Did not limit disturbance of ACM before erecting partition as  $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-81(f)     required
15 RCNY §  Failed to lockout/isolate heating/ventilation/air conditioning $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-81(g)     system
15 RCNY §  Commenced abatement prior to completion of work place          $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-81(h)     preparation
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly pre-clean and remove movables and/or cover  $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-81(i)     carpet
15 RCNY §  Failed to remove flammables/extinguish ignition sources        $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-81(j)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly pre-clean and plasticize fixed objects in   $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-81(k)     work area
15 RCNY §  Failed to use temporary emergency lighting when required       $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-81(l)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly pre-clean the work area prior to            $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-81(m)     plasticizing
15 RCNY §  Failed to install isolation barriers over all openings to work $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-81(n)     place
15 RCNY §  Did not segregate work area from work site with partitions as
1-81(o)(1)- required                                                       $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
(3)
15 RCNY §  Failed to construct partitions to ensure unobstructed means of
1-81(o)(4)- egress                                                         $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
(5)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly seal floors and walls with 2 layers of 6-   $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-81(p)     mil plastic
15 RCNY §  Failed to remove/clean ceiling-mounted objects not previously  $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-81(q)     sealed
15 RCNY §  Removed contaminated ceiling tiles prior to full work area     $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-81(r)     preparation
15 RCNY §  Failed to lock entrances not used for workers or as emergency  $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-81(s)     exits
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly maintain/check exits                        $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-81(t)
15 RCNY §  Failed to post/maintain exit signs in work area                $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-81(u)
15 RCNY §  Failed to post/maintain no smoking signs in work place         $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-81(v)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly seal and/or cover floor drains, pits,       $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-81(w)     sumps, etc.
15 RCNY §  Did not maintain, secure, lockout elevators running thru work  $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-81(x)     area
15 RCNY §  Failed to provide adequate toilet facilities in vicinity of    $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-81(y)     clean room
15 RCNY §  Failed to have fire extinguisher(s) in work place              $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-81(z)
15 RCNY §  Failed to provide or locate worker decon outside work area as  $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-82(a)     required
15 RCNY §  Failed to construct worker decon as specified                  $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-82(b)
15 RCNY §  Failed to fully line worker decon with 2 layers of opaque 6-   $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-82(c)     mil plastic
15 RCNY §  Failed to secure/weatherproof outside or publicly accessible   $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-82(d)     decon
15 RCNY §  Failed to provide proper prefabricated or trailer worker decon $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-82(e)
15 RCNY §  Failed to construct and/or maintain clean room as required     $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-82(f)
15 RCNY §  Failed to install and/or maintain shower room as required      $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-82(g)
15 RCNY §  Failed to provide shower filtration system as specified        $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-82(h)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly use or maintain equipment room              $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-82(i)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly construct waste decon as specified          $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-83(a)
15 RCNY §  Failed to locate/install waste/worker decon where 1 exit       $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-83(b)     exists
15 RCNY §  Failed to construct waste decon in accordance with 15 RCNY §  $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-83(c)     1-82(a),(c),(d),(e),(f),(g),(h)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly construct alternative worker/waste decon    $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-84(a)     for small project
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly utilize alternative worker/waste decon for  $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-84(b)     small project
15 RCNY §  Failed to utilize negative pressure ventilation equipment      $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-91(a)
15 RCNY §  Failed to use manometer to document pressure differential      $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-91(a)(1)
15 RCNY §  Failed to use negative pressure ventilation equipment 24 hrs/  $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-91(b)     day
15 RCNY §  Did not maintain static negative air pressure of 0.02 in.      $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-91(c)     water column
15 RCNY §  Failed to turn on negative air units 1 by 1 to check barrier   $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-91(d)     integrity
15 RCNY §  Failed to use dedicated power supply for negative air units    $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-91(e)
15 RCNY §  Failed to utilize/properly locate negative air cutoff switch   $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-91(f)
15 RCNY §  Failed to follow procedures for loss of power to negative Air  $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-91(g)     units
15 RCNY §  Failed to provide required air changes in work area            $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-91(h)
15 RCNY §  Failed to make openings for negative air units airtight        $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-91(i)
15 RCNY §  Used negative air units not in compliance w/ANSI 9.2 standards $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-91(j)
15 RCNY §  Operated negative air system contrary to EPA report 560/5-85   $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-91(k)     (1985)
15 RCNY §  Failed to exhaust negative air units to outside as required    $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-91(l)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly use second negative air unit in series as   $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-91(m)     required
15 RCNY §  Failed to install ducting to prevent fiber release             $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-91(n)
15 RCNY §  Failed to smoke test/inspect/monitor ducts to ensure no fiber  $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-91(o)     release
15 RCNY §  Workers / visitors failed to enter work area through worker    $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-92(a)(1)  decontamination system
15 RCNY §  Failed to submit / maintain log                                $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-92(a)(2)
15 RCNY §  Failed to ensure all individuals are familiar with workplace   $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-92(a)(3)  entry requirements prior to entry
15 RCNY §  Failed to follow workplace entry requirements                  $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-92(a)(4)
15 RCNY §  Failed to ensure that proper work area exit procedures are     $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-92(b)     followed
15 RCNY §  Failed to follow procedures for entry into confined space      $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-92(c)
15 RCNY §  Permitted storage of ACM/carts in clean room when used as      $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-93(a)     holding area
15 RCNY §  Improperly removed waste while workers used combined decon     $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-93(b)     system
15 RCNY §  Improperly worker transit during waste transfer in combined    $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-93(c)     decon
15 RCNY §  Did not clean ACM container/equipment properly before transfer $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-93(d)     into decon
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly bag/package containerized ACM waste and     $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-93(e)     equipment
15 RCNY §  Improper washroom transit of workers prior to end of waste     $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-93(f)     removal
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly remove waste and equipment from airlock to  $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-93(g)     holding area
15 RCNY §  Failed to use/clean waste storage carts as required            $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-93(h)
15 RCNY §  Failed to secure exit from waste decontamination system        $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-93(i)
15 RCNY §  Failed to store waste storage carts in worksite holding area   $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-93(j)
15 RCNY §  Failed to inspect plastic barriers and partitions twice per    $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-94(a)     shift
15 RCNY §  Failed to smoke test plastic barriers and decon twice daily    $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-94(b)
15 RCNY §  Failed to immediately repair damage or defects in decon        $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-94(c)
15 RCNY §  Failed to follow proper procedure upon fiber release or        $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-94(d)     barrier damage
15 RCNY §  Failed to document specified events in daily projects log      $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-94(e)
15 RCNY §  Failed to document daily inspection to ensure exits have been  $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-94(f)     checked against blockage
15 RCNY §  Failed to stop abatement activities if exits are found blocked $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-94(g)
15 RCNY §  Performed dry removal of ACM without EPA and/or DEP approval   $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-102(a)
15 RCNY §  Failed to sufficiently wet down ACM for enhanced penetration   $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-102(b)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly apply removal encapsulant as per federal    $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-102(c)    guidelines
15 RCNY §  Failed to bag ACM directly upon detachment from substrate as   $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-102(d)    specified
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly wet, wrap and secure large components of    $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-102(e)    ACM
15 RCNY §  Failed to remove all visible ACM residue from abated surfaces  $2,400  $1,200      $4,800  $2,400
1-102(f)
15 RCNY §  Failed to utilize proper material for encapsulation/repair of  $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-103(a)    ACM
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly remove loose or hanging ACM before          $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-103(b)    encapsulation
15 RCNY §  Failed to use acceptable pigmented encapsulant                 $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-103(c)
15 RCNY §  Used encapsulant solvent or vehicle containing volatile        $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-103(d)    hydrocarbon
15 RCNY §  Improperly used latex paint as encapsulant                     $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-103(e)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly field test encapsulant prior to use         $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-103(f)
15 RCNY §  Failed to apply required thickness of bridging encapsulant     $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-103(g)    over ACM
15 RCNY §  Failed to use a different color for each coat of encapsulant   $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-103(h)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly apply penetrating encapsulant to ACM        $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-103(i)
15 RCNY §  Failed to apply encapsulant with airless spray equipment as    $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-103(j)    specified
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly identify encapsulated ACM                   $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-103(k)
15 RCNY §  Did not properly remove loose/hanging ACM before installing    $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-104(a)    enclosure
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly repair areas damaged during enclosure       $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-104(b)    procedure
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly lower/remove/replace utilities service      $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-104(c)    components
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly identify enclosed ACM                       $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-104(d)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly conduct glovebag procedures                 $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-105(a)
15 RCNY §  Failed to bring tools/materials into work area before glovebag $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-105(b)(1) begins
15 RCNY §  Failed to conduct air monitoring during glovebag procedure as  $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-105(b)(2) required
15 RCNY §  Failed to have trained/equipped workers to conduct glovebag    $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-105(b)(3) procedures
15 RCNY §  Failed to use properly sized glovebag for diameter of          $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-105(b)(4) insulation
15 RCNY §  Failed to wet ACM prior to stripping during glovebag procedure $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-105(b)(5)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly attach glovebag to insulation               $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-105(b)(6)
15 RCNY §  Failed to smoke test glovebag as required                      $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-105(b)(7)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly seal adjacent insulation during glovebag    $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-105(b)(8) procedure
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly clean/wet surface, tools, etc. before       $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-105(b)(9) glovebag is moved
15 RCNY §
1-105(b)    Failed to properly seal insulation ends                        $2,400  $1,200      $4,800  $3,000
(10)
15 RCNY §
1-105(b)    Failed to properly remove tools/tool pouch from glovebag       $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
(11)
15 RCNY §
1-105(b)    Failed to use HEPA vacuum to evacuate glovebag or for clean up $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
(12)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly collapse or seal glovebag prior to bag
1-105(b)    removal                                                        $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
(13)
15 RCNY §
1-105(b)    Failed to properly double-bag and detach glovebag              $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
(14)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly wet/bag, dispose of waste from glovebag
1-105(b)    procedure                                                      $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
(15)
15 RCNY §
1-105(b)    Failed to conduct / document visual clearance inspection       $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
(16)
15 RCNY §  Failed to utilize glovebag within containment as specified     $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-105(d)
15 RCNY §  Conducted tent procedures on 260 linear ft/160 sq. or more of  $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-106(a)    ACM
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly install and/or construct tent               $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-106(b)
15 RCNY §  Failed to install airlock at tent entrance when required       $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-106(c)
15 RCNY §  Failed to wear appropriate personal protective equipment       $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-106(d)    during tent procedure
15 RCNY §  Failed to attach tent to surface to produce an airtight seal   $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-106(e)
15 RCNY §  Failed to provide/maintain proper negative air in tent         $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-106(f)
15 RCNY §  Failed to use required wet removal methods during tent         $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-106(g)    procedures
15 RCNY §  Failed to place ACM removed in tent procedures in leaktight    $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-106(h)    container
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly clean/encapsulate enclosed surfaces in tent $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-106(i)
15 RCNY §  Failed to clean/encapsulate surfaces after tent failure/       $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-106(j)    termination
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly clean/double bag ACM for disposal as        $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-106(k)    specified
15 RCNY §  Failed to follow specified procedures for worker exit from     $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-106(l)    tent
15 RCNY §  Failed to have 4 Air changes after abatement but before tent   $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-106(m)    collapse
15 RCNY §  Did not collapse tent or dispose of contaminated material as   $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-106(n)    specified
15 RCNY §  Failed to follow proper glovebag procedure during removal in   $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-106(o)    tent
15 RCNY §  Failed to conduct / document visual clearance inspection       $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-106(p)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly cordon off and restrict access to work area $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-107(a)
15 RCNY §  Failed to use proper foam or liquid during removal             $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-107(b)
15 RCNY §  Failed to maintain blanket of foam or liquid during removal    $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-107(c)
15 RCNY §  Failed to keep ACRM wet during bagging process                 $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-107(d)
15 RCNY §  Failed to ensure that all persons in work area wear proper     $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-107(e)    boots / PPE
15 RCNY §  Carried out abatement during adverse weather conditions        $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-107(f)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly locate worker/waste decons                  $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-107(g)
15 RCNY §  Failed to remove or plasticize movable objects                 $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-107(h)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly seal openings/ensure adequate air supply    $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-107(i)
15 RCNY §  Failed to plasticize fixed objects as specified                $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-107(j)
15 RCNY §  Failed to blanket roofing material w/foam before removal       $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-107(k)
15 RCNY §  Failed to use HEPA filters on power tools used in removal      $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-107(l)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly conduct cleanup procedures                  $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-107(m)
15 RCNY §  Failed to conduct / document proper visual inspection          $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-107(n)
15 RCNY §  Failed to remove all plastic sheeting after visual inspection  $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-107(o)
15 RCNY §  Failed to conduct required air monitoring                      $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-107(p)
15 RCNY §  Failed to use proper foam or liquid during removal             $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-108(b)
15 RCNY §  Failed to maintain blanket of foam or liquid during removal    $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-108(c)
15 RCNY §  Failed to keep ACM wet during bagging process                  $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-108(d)
15 RCNY §  Failed to ensure that all persons in work area wear proper     $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-108(e)    boots / PPE
15 RCNY §  Failed to plasticize baseboards and walls as specified         $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-108(f)
15 RCNY §  Failed to provide negative pressure ventilation                $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-108(g)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly conduct cleanup procedures                  $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-108(h)
15 RCNY §  Failed to conduct or document proper visual inspection         $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-108(i)
15 RCNY §  Failed to remove all plastic sheeting after visual inspection  $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-108(j)
15 RCNY §  Failed to conduct required air monitoring                      $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-108(k)
15 RCNY §  Failed to establish restricted area                            $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-109(a)(2)
15 RCNY §  Allowed unauthorized persons to enter restricted area          $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-109(a)(3)
15 RCNY §  Failed to inspect and pre-clean restricted area before         $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-109(a)(4) plasticizing
15 RCNY §  Failed to make all openings within 25 feet of affected ACM     $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-109(a)(5) airtight
15 RCNY §  Failed to construct/maintain/use scaffolding in accordance     $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-109(a)(6) with federal/state/city laws
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly construct/plasticize elevated platforms     $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-109(a)(7)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly plasticize ground-level restricted area     $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-109(a)(8)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly plasticize sidewalk bridges in restricted   $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-109(a)(9) area
15 RCNY §  Failed to construct decon within restricted area               $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-109(b)
15 RCNY §  Failed to ensure that all persons in work area wear proper PPE $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-109(c)
15 RCNY §  Performed dry removal of ACM/failed to place ACM in leak tight $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-109(d)    containers
15 RCNY §  Failed to follow proper cleanup procedure                      $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-109(e)
15 RCNY §  Failed to conduct required air monitoring                      $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-109(f)
15 RCNY §  Carried out abatement under adverse weather conditions         $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-109(g)
15 RCNY §  Failed to use HEPA filters on power tools used in removal      $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-109(h)
15 RCNY §  Demolished building w/ACM in place w/no danger of collapse     $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-110(a)
15 RCNY §  Failed to submit copy of condemnation letter, declaration,     $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-110(b)    order, or scope of work to DEP
15 RCNY §  Failed to perform demolition as per Administrative Code § 28- $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-110(c)    215 / 56 NYCRR § 11.5
15 RCNY §  Failed to bag/wrap/containerize waste immediately upon removal $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-111(a)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly clean waste decon on completion of waste    $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-111(b)    removal
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly clean worker decon when required            $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-111(c)
15 RCNY §  Failed to stop work and dispose of excess water in work area   $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-111(d)
15 RCNY §  Failed to HEPA vacuum all surfaces after removal of all        $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-112(a)    visible ACM
15 RCNY §  Failed to wet clean all surfaces in work area (first cleaning) $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-112(b)
15 RCNY §  Failed to apply lockdown encapsulant as specified              $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-112(c)
15 RCNY §  Failed to vacate area for 12 hrs after 1st cleaning            $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-112(d)
15 RCNY §  Failed to remove 1st layer of surface barriers                 $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-112(e)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly perform 2nd cleaning                        $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $2,400
1-112(f)
15 RCNY §  Failed to follow required procedures for third cleaning        $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-112(g)
15 RCNY §  Failed to remove 2nd layer of surface barriers                 $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-112(h)
15 RCNY §  Failed to verify absence of ACM prior to clearance air         $2,400  $1,200      $4,800  $2,400
1-112(i)    monitoring
15 RCNY §  Failed to remove containerized waste from work areas as        $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-112(j)    required
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly decontaminate or dispose of tools,          $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-112(k)    equipment, etc.
15 RCNY §  Removed isolation barriers before successful clearance air     $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-112(l)    monitoring
15 RCNY §  Failed to submit project monitor's report within 21 days of    $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-112(m)    project completion
15 RCNY §  Failed to post notice of asbestos project as required before   $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-125(a)    abatement
15 RCNY §  Failed to evacuate all occupants prior to abatement activities $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-125(b)
15 RCNY §  Failed to lock out electrical power and/or provide outside     $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-125(c)    power as required
15 RCNY §  Failed to install worker waste decon in required sequence      $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-125(d)
15 RCNY §  Failed to lock out HVAC and/or install isolation barriers at   $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-125(e)    ducts
15 RCNY §  Commenced abatement prior to completion of work place          $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-125(f)    preparation
15 RCNY §  Used methods that raise dust during work area preparation      $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-125(g)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly preclean and/or remove movable objects from $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-125(h)    work area
15 RCNY §  Failed to install required isolation barriers as specified     $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-125(i)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly cover / seal cinderblock / porous           $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-125(j)    construction material
15 RCNY §  Failed to make flooring in work area watertight                $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-125(k)
15 RCNY §  Disturbed contaminated ceiling tiles prior to full work area   $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-125(l)    prep
15 RCNY §  Failed to establish and maintain required means of egress      $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-125(m)
15 RCNY §  Failed to lock entrances to work area against unauthorized     $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-125(n)    entry
15 RCNY §  Failed to maintain/secure/lock-out elevators running thru work $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-125(o)    area
15 RCNY §  Failed to provide adequate external toilet facilities near     $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-125(p)    clean room
15 RCNY §  Performed concurrent abatement & demolition or story removal   $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-126
15 RCNY §  Failed to bag/wrap/containerize waste immediately upon removal $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-127(a)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly clean waste decon on completion of waste    $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-127(b)    removal
15 RCNY §  Failed to clean worker decon after shift/meal break as         $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-127(c)    specified
15 RCNY §  Failed to stop work and dispose of excess water in work area   $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-127(d)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly remove/containerize visible accumulations   $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-128(a)    of ACM
15 RCNY §  Failed to remove containerized waste from work area as         $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-128(b)    required
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly wet-clean / HEPA vac surfaces in work area  $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-128(c)
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly clean and/or encapsulate plastic on porous  $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-128(d)    material
15 RCNY §  Failed to properly encapsulate surfaces in work area           $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-128(e)
15 RCNY §  Failed to remove and decontaminate all tools and equipment as  $1,200  $1,000      $2,400  $1,500
1-128(f)    required
15 RCNY §  Remove isolation barriers before final air clearance           $4,800  $3,000      $9,600  $6,000
1-128(g)
15 RCNY §  Failed to submit project monitor's report within 21 days of    $2,400  $1,500      $4,800  $3,000
1-128(h)    project completion
 
   (b)   Penalty Table for Violations of New York State Industrial Code. 
 
Section       Violation        1st Offense 1st Offense 2nd Offense 2nd Offense
              Description      Penalty     Stipulation Penalty     Stipulation
              Violation of New
12 NYCRR Part York State
56            Industrial Code  $4,800      $3,000      $9,600      $6,000
              Rule 56 - level
              1
              Violation of New
12 NYCRR Part York State
56            Industrial Code  $2,400      $1,500      $4,800      $3,000
              Rule 56 - level
              2
              Violation of New
12 NYCRR Part York State
56            Industrial Code  $1,200      $1,000      $2,400      $1,500
              Rule 56 - level
              3
 
   (c)   Penalty Table for Violations of New York City Administrative Code. 
 
Section          Violation      1st Offense 1st Offense 2nd Offense 2nd Offense
                 Description    Penalty     Stipulation Penalty     Stipulation
                 Resumed work
Admin. § 24-136 in violation   $4,400      $2,750      $8,800      $5,500
(h)              of stop-work
                 order
                 Violated
                 Master
Admin. § 24-1002Environmental  $1,000      $1,000      $1,000      $1,000
                 Remediation
                 Technician Law
 
(Added City Record 12/7/2018, eff. 1/6/2019; amended City Record 8/21/2019,
eff. 9/20/2019; amended City Record 11/25/2022, eff. 12/25/2022; amended City
Record 7/2/2025, eff. 8/1/2025)
Chapter 54: Community Right-To-Know Law Penalty Schedule
§ 54-01 General.
   (a)   For the purposes of this chapter, the term Extremely Hazardous
Substance (EHS) has the same meaning as provided by § 24-702(h) of the
Administrative Code.
   (b)   Whenever a respondent is found in violation of any of the following
provisions of the Administrative Code or the rules of the City of New York, any
civil penalties recommended by a hearing officer, pursuant to 48 RCNY §
6-17(a) in accordance with Section 1049-a(d)(1)(d) of the Charter and/or any
civil penalties imposed for admissions of violations pursuant to 48 RCNY §
6-09(a) or late admissions pursuant to 48 RCNY §
3-17 will be imposed pursuant to the penalty schedule set forth below.
   (c)   A second or subsequent offense is a violation by the same respondent
of the same section within five years of the prior violation.
   (d)   Mitigating and Aggravating Factors:
      (1)   All additions and subtractions are cumulative, except that factors
J and K cannot be applied together, and factors A, B, and L may only be applied
when at least one aggravating factor is also present (i.e., they cannot be used
to reduce the penalty to less than the legal minimum).
      (2)   Where the application of multiple aggravating factors would cause
the legal maximum penalty to be exceeded, the legal maximum penalty (same as
the default penalty) shall be imposed.
         A.   Subtract $1,750 for compliance by first hearing date.
         B.   Subtract $3,750 for compliance by first hearing date.
         C.   Add $250 if there are any EHS stored at the facility.
         D.   Add $1,750 if there are any EHS stored at the facility.
         E.   Add $3,750 if there are any EHS stored at the facility.
         F.   Add $100 for each unlabeled non-EHS hazardous substance more than
one; add $2,000 for each unlabeled EHS.
         G.   Add $1,000 if there are 25 or more hazardous substances stored at
the facility; add $5,000 if there are more than 50 hazardous substances stored
at the facility or if any EHS are stored at the facility. NOTE: This factor may
only be applied until the legal maximum penalty has been reached.
         H.   Add $5,000 for willful refusal to allow access to the facility,
or physical interference with or obstruction of the inspection.
         I.   Add $1,000 if there was an emergency response to the facility.
         J.   Add $2,500 if there was a release of a hazardous substance at the
facility.
         K.   Add $4,500 if release of a hazardous substance at the facility
resulted in injury to any person, or injury to plant or animal life, or damage
to property or business.
         L.   Subtract $250 where the existence of the violation was
voluntarily disclosed to DEP by respondent.
         M.   Mitigate to zero where correction certified within 30 days of
summons issuance.
(Added City Record 3/6/2019, eff. 4/5/2019)
§ 54-02 Community Right-to-Know Law Penalty Schedule.
Section          Description   Offense Penalty Default Stipulation Mit/Agg
                 Failed to file 1st     $100    $5,000  Yes         C I J K L
Admin. § 24-706 a completed    2nd     $3,500  $10,000 No          A D I J K L
(a)              Facility       3rd     $7,500  $20,000 No          B E I J K L
                 Inventory Form
                 Failed to file 1st     $100    $5,000  Yes         C I J K L
                a facility     2nd     $3,500  $10,000 No          A D I J K L
                 inventory      3rd     $7,500  $20,000 No          B E I J K L
                 update
                 Failed to
Admin. § 24-706 submit a       1st     $100    $5,000  Yes         I J K L
(b)              Material       2nd     $3,500  $10,000 No          A I J K L
                 Safety Data    3rd     $7,500  $20,000 No          B I J K L
                 Sheet
                 Failed to make 1st     $100    $5,000  No          I J K L
Admin. § 24-706 copy of FIF or 2nd     $3,500  $10,000 No          I J K L
(c)              MSDS available 3rd     $7,500  $20,000 No          I J K L
                 at facility
                 Failed to      1st     $100    $5,000  No          F I J K L
Admin. § 24-711 properly label 2nd     $3,500  $10,000 No          F I J K L
                 hazardous      3rd     $7,500  $20,000 No          F I J K L
                 substance
                 Failed to give
Admin. § 24-712 access to      1st     $2,500  $20,000 No          G H
                 inspect        2nd     $5,000  $20,000 No          G H
                 facility
                 Failed to
                 properly file  1st     $100    $5,000  No          I J K L
Admin. § 24-718 risk           2nd     $3,500  $10,000 No          A I J K L
                 management     3rd     $7,500  $20,000 No          B I J K L
                 plan
                 Failed to
                 properly site/
                 store          1st     $500    $5,000  Yes         M
15 RCNY §       hazardous      2nd     $3,500  $10,000 No          M
41-14            substances     3rd     $7,500  $10,000 No          M
                 stored in
                 portable
                 containers
(Added City Record 3/6/2019, eff. 4/5/2019; amended City Record 2/28/2025, eff.
3/30/2025)
Chapter 55: Stormwater Penalty Schedule
§ 55-01 General.
   (a)   Whenever a respondent is found in violation of any of the following
provisions of the Rules of the City of New York, any civil penalties imposed by
a hearing officer pursuant to 48 RCNY §
6-17(a) in accordance with Section 1049-a(d)(1)(d) of the Charter or any civil
penalties imposed for admissions of violations pursuant to 48 RCNY §
6-09(a) or late admissions pursuant to 48 RCNY §
3-17 will be imposed pursuant to the penalty schedule set forth below.
   (b)   A second offense occurs when a respondent is found to be in violation
of the same section of the rules twice within two years. A third offense occurs
when a respondent is found to be in violation of the same section of the rules
for the third time within two years.
   (c)   Mitigation is available for first offenses where respondent has
satisfied the conditions set forth in the "Mitigation" column of the penalty
schedule set forth below.
   (d)   "Default" refers to a failure by respondent to appear or to make a
request to reschedule.
   (e)   "Stipulation" means an admission of the violation and agreement to pay
the specified penalty.
(Added City Record 4/1/2019, eff. 6/1/2019; amended City Record 12/9/2019, eff.
1/8/2020)
§ 55-02 Stormwater Penalty Schedule.
   (a)   Penalty Table. 
Rule Description Violation
                 Penalty Mitigation Default Stipulation
Rule                       Description   Violation
                                         Penalty Mitigation    Default Stipulation
                                                 Fine may be
                                                 reduced if a
                           Performing            DEP inspector
                           development           has inspected
                           activity in           the site and
                           connection            confirmed
                           with a                that
                           covered               construction
15 RCNY §                 development           has been
19.1-03.3(b)(1)            project               stopped prior         Yes
                           without a             to the first
                           Stormwater            hearing date,
                           Construction          and the
                           Permit from           permit
                           the                   application
                           department.           is received
                                                 on or before
                                                 the first
                                                 hearing date.
1st offense                              $3,000  $1,000        $6,000  $3,000
2nd offense                              $6,000                $8,000  $6,000
3rd offense                              $8,000                $10,000 $8,000
                           Failure to
                           have a
                           written
15 RCNY §                 authorization                               Yes
19.1-03.3(b)(6)            to disturb
                           greater than
                           five (5)
                           acres of soi.
1st offense                              $2,500                $5,000  $2,500
2nd offense                              $5,000                $10,000 $5,000
3rd offense                              $7,500                $10,000 $7,500
                           Failure to
                           have a
                           qualified
                           inspector
                           conduct at
                           least two
                           site
                           inspections
                           (in
                           accordance
15 RCNY §                 with the                                    Yes
19.1-03.3(b)(6)(i)         NYSDEC
                           Construction
                           General
                           permit) every
                           seven
                           calendar days
                           as long as
                           greater than
                           five acres of
                           soil are
                           disturbed.
1st offense                              $2,000                $3,000  $2,000
2nd offense                              $3,000                $6,000  $3,000
3rd offense                              $4,000                $9,000  $4,000
                           Failure to
                           comply with
                           the approved
                           SWPPP or the
15 RCNY §                 terms and                                   Yes
19.1-03.3(b)(9)(i)         conditions of
                           the
                           stormwater
                           construction
                           permit.
1st offense                              $1,500                $3,000  $1,500
2nd offense                              $2,000                $6,000  $2,000
3rd offense                              $3,000                $9,000  $3,000
                                                 Fine may be
                                                 reduced if
                                                 DEP receives,
                                                 at least one
                                                 week prior to
                           Failure to            the first
                           comply with           hearing date,
                           the approved          photos that
                           SWPPP or the          show the
                           terms and             appropriate
                           conditions of         erosion and
                           the                   sediment
                           stormwater            control
                           construction          practice
                           permit                implemented,
15 RCNY §                 resulting or          and a signed
19.1-03.3(b)(9)(i)         likely to             statement             Yes
                           result in a           from a
                           discharge             Qualified
                           that causes a         Inspector
                           substantial           that contains
                           visible               a stamp or a
                           contrast to           seal
                           natural               confirming
                           conditions of         that the
                           the waters of         approved
                           the state.            SWPPP is in
                                                 place and
                                                 terms and
                                                 conditions of
                                                 the permit
                                                 have been
                                                 met.
1st offense                              $2,500  $1,500        $5,000  $2,500
2nd offense                              $5,000                $10,000 $5,000
3rd offense                              $7,500                $10,000 $7,500
                                                 Fine may be
                                                 reduced if
                                                 DEP receives,
                                                 at least one
                                                 week prior to
                                                 the first
                                                 hearing date,
                                                 photos that
                                                 show the
                                                 appropriate
                                                 erosion and
                                                 sediment
                                                 control/
                                                 pollution
                           Failure to            prevention
                           implement             practice
                           pollution             implemented,
15 RCNY §                 prevention            and a signed          Yes
19.1-03.3(b)(9)(i)         measures              statement
                           included in           from a
                           the approved          Qualified
                           SWPPP.                Inspector
                                                 that contains
                                                 a stamp or a
                                                 seal
                                                 confirming
                                                 that the
                                                 approved
                                                 SWPPP is in
                                                 place and the
                                                 applicable
                                                 terms and
                                                 conditions of
                                                 the permit
                                                 have been
                                                 met.
1st offense                              $2,500  $1,500        $5,000  $2,500
2nd offense                              $5,000                $10,000 $5,000
3rd offense                              $7,500                $10,000 $7,500
                                                 Fine may be
                                                 reduced if
                                                 DEP receives,
                                                 at least one
                                                 week prior to
                                                 the first
                                                 hearing date,
                                                 photos that
                                                 show the
                                                 appropriate
                                                 erosion and
                           Failure to            sediment
                           install and           control
                           maintain              practice
                           erosion and           implemented,
15 RCNY §                 sediment              and a signed
19.1-03.3(b)(9)(i)         control               statement             Yes
                           practices in          from a
                           compliance            Qualified
                           with approved         Inspector
                           SWPPP.                that contains
                                                 a stamp or a
                                                 seal
                                                 confirming
                                                 that the
                                                 approved
                                                 SWPPP is in
                                                 place and
                                                 terms and
                                                 conditions of
                                                 the permit
                                                 have been
                                                 met.
1st offense                              $3,000  $1,500        $6,000  $3,000
2nd offense                              $5,000                $10,000 $5,000
3rd offense                              $7,500                $10,000 $7,500
                                                 Fine may be
                                                 reduced if
                                                 DEP receives,
                           Failure to            at least one
                           follow the            week prior to
15 RCNY §                 construction          the first
19.1-03.3(b)(9)(i)         phasing plan          hearing date,         Yes
                           included in           an amended
                           the approved          phasing plan
                           SWPPP.                that has been
                                                 approved by
                                                 the
                                                 department.
1st offense                              $2,500  $1,500        $5,000  $2,500
2nd offense                              $5,000                $10,000 $5,000
3rd offense                              $7,500                $10,000 $7,500
                                                 Fine may be
                                                 reduced if
                                                 DEP receives,
                                                 at least one
                                                 week prior to
                                                 the first
                                                 hearing date,
                                                 photos that
                                                 show the
                                                 appropriate
                           Failure to            stabilization
                           implement the         measures are
                           temporary and         in place, and
                           permanent             a signed
15 RCNY §                 stabilization         statement
19.1-03.3(b)(9)(i)         plans in              from a                Yes
                           accordance            Qualified
                           with the              Inspector
                           approved              that contains
                           SWPPP.                a stamp or a
                                                 seal
                                                 confirming
                                                 that the
                                                 approved
                                                 SWPPP is in
                                                 place and
                                                 terms and
                                                 conditions of
                                                 the permit
                                                 have been
                                                 met.
1st offense                              $2,500  $1,500        $5,000  $2,500
2nd offense                              $5,000                $10,000 $5,000
3rd offense                              $7,500                $10,000 $7,500
                                                 Fine may be
                           Failure to            reduced if
                           renew or              the applicant
15 RCNY §                 extend a              renews the
19.1-03.3(b)(9)(ii) or     stormwater            permit at             Yes
(iii)                      construction          least one
                           permit.               week prior to
                                                 the first
                                                 hearing date.
1st offense                              $3,000  $1,000        $6,000  $3,000
2nd offense                              $6,000                $8,000  $6,000
3rd offense                              $8,000                $10,000 $8,000
                           Failure to
                           notify the
15 RCNY §                 department                                  Yes
19.1-03.3(b)(9)(iv)        prior to
                           starting
                           construction.
1st offense                              $1,000                $3,000  $1,000
2nd offense                              $2,000                $6,000  $2,000
3rd offense                              $3,000                $9,000  $3,000
                                                 Fine may be
                                                 reduced if
                                                 DEP receives,
                           Failure to            at least one
                           post the              week prior to
15 RCNY §                 stormwater            the first
19.1-03.3(b)(9)(v)         construction          hearing date,         Yes
                           permit at the         photos that
                           site.                 show the
                                                 permit has
                                                 been posted
                                                 at the work
                                                 site.
1st offense                              $1,000  $1,500        $3,000  $1,000
2nd offense                              $2,000                $6,000  $2,000
3rd offense                              $3,000                $9,000  $3,000
                           Failure to
                           retain a copy
15 RCNY §                 of the SWPPP                                Yes
19.1-03.3(b)(9)(vi)        at the
                           development
                           site.
1st offense                              $1,000                $3,000  $1,000
2nd offense                              $2,000                $6,000  $2,000
3rd offense                              $3,000                $9,000  $3,000
                           Failure of
                           the trained
                           contractor to
15 RCNY §                 document
19.1-03.3(b)(9)(vii)       daily                                       Yes
                           inspections
                           and/or
                           corrective
                           actions.
1st offense                              $1,000                $3,000  $1,000
2nd offense                              $2,000                $6,000  $2,000
3rd offense                              $3,000                $9,000  $3,000
                                                 Fine may be
                                                 reduced if
                                                 the
                           Failure to            inspection
                           have a                reports for
                           qualified             the required
15 RCNY §                 inspector             days, dated
19.1-03.3(b)(9)(viii)      inspect at an         and signed by         Yes
                           appropriate           a Qualified
                           interval and          Inspector,
                           document              are submitted
                           inspections.          to DEP on or
                                                 before the
                                                 first hearing
                                                 date.
1st offense                              $1,000  $500          $3,000  $1,000
2nd offense                              $2,000                $6,000  $2,000
3rd offense                              $3,000                $9,000  $3,000
                           Failure to
                           begin to
                           implement
                           corrective
15 RCNY §                 actions                                     Yes
19.1-03.3(b)(9)(viii)      within one
                           business day
                           of Qualified
                           Inspector
                           report.
1st offense                              $2,000                $4,000  $2,000
2nd offense                              $3,000                $6,000  $3,000
3rd offense                              $4,000                $8,000  $4,000
                                                 Fine may be
                                                 reduced if
                                                 DEP receives,
                                                 at least one
                                                 week prior to
                                                 the first
                                                 hearing date,
                                                 photos that
                                                 show the site
                                                 is
                                                 stabilized,
                           Failure to            and a signed
                           notify the            statement
                           department of         from a
15 RCNY §                 a temporary           Qualified
19.1-03.3(b)(9)(ix)        shutdown or           Inspector             Yes
                           inspect the           that contains
                           site during a         a stamp or a
                           temporary             seal
                           shutdown.             confirming
                                                 that the site
                                                 will be
                                                 inspected
                                                 every 30 days
                                                 and
                                                 immediately
                                                 after
                                                 rainfall
                                                 events of
                                                 more than
                                                 1.5".
1st offense                              $2,500  $1,500        $5,000  $2,500
2nd offense                              $5,000                $10,000 $5,000
3rd offense                              $7,500                $10,000 $7,500
                                                 Fine may be
                                                 reduced if
                                                 DEP receives,
                                                 at least one
                                                 week prior to
                           Failure to            the first
                           submit a              hearing date,
15 RCNY §                 closure plan          photos that           Yes
19.1-03.3(b)(9)(x)         prior to              show the site
                           terminating           is stabilized
                           construction.         and a closure
                                                 plan is
                                                 submitted to
                                                 the
                                                 Department
                                                 for review
1st offense                              $3,000  $1,000        $6,000  $3,000
2nd offense                              $6,000                $8,000  $6,000
3rd offense                              $8,000                $10,000 $8,000
                                                 Fine may be
                                                 reduced if a
                                                 minor
                                                 amendment(s)
15 RCNY §                 Failure to            submission is
19.1-03.3(b)(9)(xi)        submit                received by           Yes
                           amendments.           DEP at least
                                                 one week
                                                 prior to the
                                                 first hearing
                                                 date.
1st offense                              $1,000  $500          $3,000  $1,000
2nd offense                              $2,000                $6,000  $2,000
3rd offense                              $3,000                $9,000  $3,000
                           Failure to
                           submit major
15 RCNY §                 amendments to                               Yes
19.1-03.3(b)(9)(xii)       the SWPP for
                           review and
                           approval.
1st offense                              $1,500                $3,000  $1,500
2nd offense                              $3,000                $6,000  $3,000
3rd offense                              $4,000                $8,000  $4,000
                                                 Fine may be
                                                 reduced if
                                                 records of
                           Failure to            all
                           maintain              inspections
                           records of            and tests
                           all                   required
                           inspections           through the
                           and tests             period of
15 RCNY §                 required              construction
19.1-03.3(b)(12)           throughout            and for 5-            Yes
                           the period of         years after
                           construction          the
                           and for 5-            completion of
                           years after           construction
                           the                   are submitted
                           completion of         to DEP at
                           construction.         least one
                                                 week prior to
                                                 the first
                                                 hearing date.
1st offense                              $1,000                $3,000  $1,000
2nd offense                              $2,000                $6,000  $2,000
3rd offense                              $3,000                $9,000  $3,000
                           Failure to
15 RCNY §                 obtain a
19.1-03.3(c)(1)(i)         stormwater                                  Yes
                           maintenance
                           permit.
1st offense                              $3,000                $6,000  $3,000
2nd offense                              $4,000                $8,000  $4,000
3rd offense                              $5,000                $10,000 $5,000
                           Failure to
                           document
                           activities in
15 RCNY §                 compliance                                  Yes
19.1-03.3(c)(3)(i)         with
                           operation and
                           maintenance
                           plan.
1st offense                              $2,000                $5,000  $2,000
2nd offense                              $3,000                $7,500  $3,000
3rd offense                              $4,000                $10,000 $4,000
                           Failure to
15 RCNY §                 submit annual
19.1-03.3(c)(3)(ii)        certification                               Yes
                           to the
                           department.
1st offense                              $1,500                $3,000  $1,500
2nd offense                              $3,000                $6,000  $3,000
3rd offense                              $4,500                $9,000  $4,500
                           Failure to
15 RCNY §                 renew a
19.1-03.3(c)(3)(iii)       stormwater                                  Yes
                           maintenance
                           permit.
1st offense                              $3,000                $6,000  $3,000
2nd offense                              $4,000                $8,000  $4,000
3rd offense                              $5,000                $10,000 $5,000
                           Failure to
15 RCNY §                 notify the
19.1-03.3(c)(3)(iv)        department of                               Yes
                           a change of
                           ownership.
1st offense                              $3,000                $6,000  $3,000
2nd offense                              $4,000                $8,000  $4,000
3rd offense                              $5,000                $10,000 $5,000
                                                 Fine may be
                                                 reduced if a
                                                 DEP inspector
                                                 has inspected
                                                 and confirmed
                                                 that
                           Failure to            construction
                           get approval          is suspended
                           to modify a           before the
15 RCNY §                 practice              first hearing         Yes
19.1-03.3(c)(4)(i)         covered by a          date, and an
                           stormwater            application
                           maintenance           for
                           permit.               modification
                                                 is received
                                                 by DEP at
                                                 least one
                                                 week before
                                                 the first
                                                 hearing date
1st offense                              $3,000  $1,500        $6,000  $3,000
2nd offense                              $4,000                $8,000  $4,000
3rd offense                              $8,000                $10,000 $8,000
                                                 Fine may be
                                                 reduced if,
                                                 at least one
                                                 week prior to
                                                 the first
                                                 hearing date
                                                 DEP receives
                                                 photos of the
                           Failure to            repaired or
                           maintain a            replaced
                           stormwater            stormwater
                           management            management
15 RCNY §                 practice in           practice, and
19.1-03.3(c)(5)            good working          a signed              Yes
                           condition to          written
                           meet the              certification
                           applicable            by a
                           design                qualified
                           standards.            professional
                                                 that the
                                                 stormwater
                                                 management
                                                 practice is
                                                 repaired and
                                                 in good
                                                 working
                                                 condition.
1st offense                              $3,000  $1,500        $6,000  $3,000
2nd offense                              $4,000                $8,000  $4,000
3rd offense                              $8,000                $10,000 $8,000
                           Failure to
15 RCNY §                 keep and                                    Yes
19.1-03.3(c)(6)            maintain
                           records.
1st offense                              $3,000                $6,000  $3,000
2nd offense                              $6,000                $9,000  $6,000
3rd offense                              $8,000                $10,000 $8,000
                           Failed to
Administrative Code § 24- comply with a                               Yes
558                        stop work
                           order.
1st offense                              $3,000                $6,000  $3,000
2nd offense                              $6,000                $9,000  $6,000
3rd offense                              $8,000                $10,000 $8,000
                           Failure to
                           keep a stop
Administrative Code § 24- work order
558                        posted until                                Yes
                           rescinded by
                           the
                           commissioner.
1st offense                              $3,000                $6,000  $3,000
2nd offense                              $6,000                $9,000  $6,000
3rd offense                              $8,000                $10,000 $8,000
 
(Added City Record 4/1/2019, eff. 6/1/2019; amended City Record 12/9/2019, eff.
1/8/2020; amended City Record 9/20/2022, eff. 10/20/2022)
Chapter 56: Sewer Control Rules Penalty Schedule
§ 56-01 General.
   (a)   The name "Division of Pollution Prevention and Monitoring" is
abbreviated as "DPPM." The name "Bureau of Environmental Planning and Analysis"
is abbreviated as "BEPA". The term "Not Applicable" is abbreviated as "N/A."
The term "Notice of Violation" is abbreviated as "NOV."
   (b)   Citations preceded by "A.C." are to the NYC Administrative Code.
   (c)   For purposes of this Penalty Schedule, the term "serious" in the
charge for A.C. Title 24, Ch. 5 / 15 RCNY
Ch. 19, for "any serious Admin. Code Rule violation" means "any violation
resulting in injury to human, animal, or aquatic life, harm to public health or
the environment, or damage to the publicly owned treatment works or its
collection system."
   (d)   A second, third and/or subsequent violation shall be based on the
following criteria: (1) an offense by the same respondent; (2) the prior NOV(s)
is for the same subsection and paragraph of the same regulation as the current
NOV; (3) the offense does not have to involve the same premises, equipment and/
or vehicle; (4) the prior NOV(s) was concluded by a finding of violation or an
admission or a default and has a date of offense within 1 year of the date of
offense of the current NOV; and (5) if NOV(s) with different dates of offense
are adjudicated at the same hearing, each NOV shall serve as a prior violation
for all subsequently issued NOV's.
   (e)   The default penalty for all charges in this Penalty Schedule is
$10,000.
   (f)   Mitigation, if applicable, shall be determined as per notes 1 through
9 below, and as indicated in the mitigation penalty column ("MIT. PENALTY") of
this Penalty Schedule, and also as per "Compliance Incentives Policy
Mitigation" set out below.
 
                                                  DPPM has received the
                                                  results of sampling
                                                  conducted by the respondent
  15 RCNY §                                      subsequent to the date of
  19-03(a)(6)                                     offense which are in
  15 RCNY §                                      compliance with applicable
  19-03(a)(9)                                     limits and deemed
1 15 RCNY §              Mitigation              acceptable by DPPM. Such
  19-04(a)-(c)                                    results must be received by
  15 RCNY §                                      DPPM within 30 calendar
  19.1-02.1                                       days from the date of
                                                  service of the NOV. The
                                                  burden of proving
                                                  compliance shall be upon
                                                  the respondent.
                                                  DPPM has received proof
                                                  deemed acceptable by DPPM
                                                  that the Commissioner of
  A.C. § 24-524(f)                               Environmental Protection's
2 A.C. § 24-585          Mitigation              order or permit has been
  15 RCNY §              failure to comply       fully complied with, within
  19.1-02.1                                       30 calendar days from the
                                                  due date for compliance
                                                  with said order, or report
                                                  due date.
                                                  DPPM (or BEPA if the spill/
                                                  discharge was to green
                                                  infrastructure) has
  15 RCNY §                                      received proof deemed
  19-03(a)(1), (4), (5),                          acceptable by DPPM or BEPA
  (7), (8)                                        that the spill/discharge
  15 RCNY §                                      was accidental, that the
3 19-03(a)(10)-(11)       Mitigation              respondent has properly
  15 RCNY §                                      reported the spill/
  19-03(a)(15)                                    discharge to DPPM or BEPA,
  15 RCNY §                                      has taken adequate measures
  19.1-02.1                                       to minimize the extent of
                                                  the spill/discharge, and
                                                  has properly cleaned the
                                                  spill/discharge.
                                                  DPPM has received proof
                                                  deemed acceptable by DPPM
                                                  that the Commissioner of
                                                  Environmental Protection's
                                                  order or permit has been
                                                  fully complied with, within
                                                  30 calendar days from the
                                                  due date for compliance
                                                  with said order, or report
                                                  due date. Alternatively, a
                                                  prior NOV exists for the
                                                  same commissioner of
  A.C. § 24-524(f)                               environmental protection's
4 A.C. § 24-585          Mitigation              order or permit reporting
  15 RCNY §              failure to comply       requirement (i.e. same
  19.1-02.1                                       report was due) and has a
                                                  date of offense within 1
                                                  year of the date of offense
                                                  of the current NOV and DPPM
                                                  has received proof deemed
                                                  acceptable by DPPM that the
                                                  commissioner of
                                                  environmental protection's
                                                  order or permit has been
                                                  fully complied with within
                                                  30 calendar days from the
                                                  date of service of the
                                                  current NOV.
  15 RCNY §                                      DPPM has received proof
  19-02(a), (d)                                   deemed acceptable by DPPM
5 15 RCNY §              Mitigation              that the violation has been
  19-05(e)                                        corrected within 30
  15 RCNY §                                      calendar days from the date
  19-06(b)                                        of service of the NOV.
                                                  DPPM has received proof
                                                  deemed acceptable by DPPM
                                                  that the respondent has
                          Mitigation              immediately ceased the
6 15 RCNY §              discharge burdensome to unauthorized discharge,
  19-03(a)(12)            plant                   performed a proper cleanup,
                                                  if applicable, and taken
                                                  adequate measures to
                                                  prevent future unauthorized
                                                  discharges.
                                                  Respondent has DEP house
                          Mitigation              connection permit by first
7 A.C. § 24-509(c)       failure to connect to   scheduled hearing date and
                          public sewer            connects within three weeks
                                                  of the first scheduled
                                                  hearing date.
                                                  Respondent files plumbing
                                                  repair application with
                          Mitigation              department of buildings by
8 A.C. § 24-509(c)       failure to connect to   first scheduled hearing
                          public sewer            date and completes
                                                  connection within five
                                                  weeks of the first
                                                  scheduled hearing date.
                                                  Respondent fails to
                                                  initiate the connection
                          Mitigation              process by first scheduled
9 A.C. § 24-509(c)       failure to connect to   hearing date but completes
                          public sewer            connection within seven
                                                  weeks of the first
                                                  scheduled hearing date.
 
Compliance Incentives Policy Mitigation 
If recommended by DPPM, penalties may be assessed under the terms of the New
York City Department of Environmental Protection's Policy on Incentives for
Businesses to Comply with Regulations Governing Discharges to Public Sewers,
also known as the Compliance Incentives Policy (CIP). A copy of the CIP can be
obtained from the New York City Department of Environmental Protection Bureau
of Wastewater Treatment, Division of Pollution Prevention and Monitoring. The
actual text of the CIP shall be determinative of the requirements for
mitigation under the CIP. See below for a brief summary of the CIP. See also
the CIP penalty reduction table, below.
Summary of CIP
(See actual CIP for further details)
Qualifying violations will be:
   1)   violations discovered through a voluntary on-site compliance assistance
program, as per the terms of the CIP;
   2)   violations discovered through an environmental self-audit, as per the
terms of the CIP;
   3)   violations discovered through special testing, sampling, or monitoring
performed by a business for the purpose of evaluating or upgrading its
equipment or processes, as per the terms of the CIP. The disclosure of the
violation must occur within the time frames required by the CIP, and before the
violation was otherwise discovered by, or reported to DPPM, and cannot be a
result of legally mandated monitoring or sampling requirement prescribed by
statute, regulation, permit, judicial or administrative order, or consent
agreement. As described in the CIP, businesses must correct the violations
within the shortest practicable period of time, not to exceed 90 days following
detection of the violation, unless an additional 90 day period is approved by
DPPM, only if necessary to allow the business to correct the violation by
implementing pollution prevention measures. See actual CIP for all
requirements, and for further details. Additional requirements include, but are
not limited to:
      a)   the business immediately corrects threats to the public's health,
safety or the environment; and
      b)   the business has not intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with
criminal or gross negligence caused harm to public health, safety or the
environment; and
      c)   the violation does not involve criminal conduct; and
      d)   the violation does not cause the publicly-owned treatment works
facility, which treats the related NYC sewer discharge where the violation
occurred, to exceed its effluent limitations; and
      e)   the business has not received any NOVs, for the same subsection and
paragraph of the same regulation as the current NOV, with a date of offense
within two years prior to the date of offense of the current NOV, or
alternatively, at DPPM's discretion, the business either funds an
environmentally beneficial project that contributes to the betterment of the
NYC wastewater collection and treatment system (or other related or non-related
Department of Environmental Protection concerns), or attends a mandatory user-
paid environmental education program.
CIP Penalty Reduction Table 
If Respondent also qualifies for a non-CIP mitigated penalty, the CIP
percentage penalty reduction shall be applied to the mitigated penalty amount.
Determining Factors For Reduction in Penalty Percent Reduction In Penalty
Determining Factors For Reduction in Penalty         Percent Reduction In
                                                     Penalty
All CIP requirements satisfied, and violation
corrected within 90 days following detection of the
violation, and no prior NOV for the same subsection  100%
and paragraph as current NOV within 2 years, and
violation caused no harm to public health, safety or
the environment.
All CIP requirements satisfied, and violation
corrected within 180 days (with  DPPM  approval)
instead of 90 days following detection of the
violation, and no prior NOV for the same subsection  90%
and paragraph as current NOV within 2 years, and
violation caused no harm to public health, safety or
the environment.  
All CIP requirements satisfied, and violation
corrected within 90 days following detection of the
violation, and NOV exists for same subsection and
paragraph within 2 years, but environmentally        80%
beneficial project funded or environmental education
program attended, and violation caused no harm to
public health, safety or the environment.
All CIP requirements satisfied, and violation
corrected within 180 days (with  DPPM  approval),
instead of 90 days following detection of the
violation, and NOV for the same subsection and       70%
paragraph within 2 years but environmentally
beneficial project funded or environmental education
program attended, and violation caused no harm to
public health, safety or the environment.  
All CIP requirements satisfied, and violation
corrected within 90 days following detection of the
violation, and no prior NOV for the same subsection
and paragraph as current NOV within 2 years, and     60%
violation caused harm to public health, safety or
the environment, but not intentionally, knowingly,
recklessly, or with criminal or gross negligence.
All CIP requirements satisfied, and violation
corrected within 180 days (with  DPPM  approval)
instead of 90 days following detection of the
violation, and no prior NOV for the same subsection  50%
and paragraph as current NOV within 2 years, and
violation caused harm to public health, safety or
the environment, but not intentionally, knowingly,
recklessly, or with criminal or gross negligence.  
All CIP requirements satisfied, and violation
corrected within 90 days following detection of the
violation, and NOV exists for same subsection and
paragraph within 2 years, but environmentally
beneficial project funded or environmental education 40%
program attended, and violation caused harm to
public health, safety, or the environment, but not
intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with
criminal or gross negligence.
All CIP requirements satisfied, and violation
corrected within 180 days (with DPPM approval)
instead of 90 days following detection of the
violation, and NOV exists for same subsection and
paragraph within 2 years, but environmentally        30%
beneficial project funded or environmental education
program attended, and violation caused harm to
public health, safety or the environment, but not
intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with
criminal or gross negligence.  
 
(Added City Record 4/1/2019, eff. 6/1/2019; amended City Record 12/10/2020,
eff. 1/9/2021)
§ 56-02 Sewer Control Rules Penalty Schedule.
 
                       First Violation Second          Third Violation
Regulation Description                 Violation                       Subs  Default
                       Penalty MIT.    Penalty MIT.    Penalty MIT.    Viol. Penalty
                               Penalty         Penalty         Penalty
                                                                      First Violation Second          Third Violation
Regulation                        Description                                         Violation                       Subs    Default
                                                                      Penalty MIT.    Penalty MIT.    Penalty MIT.    Viol.   Penalty
                                                                              Penalty         Penalty         Penalty
15 RCNY §                        Unauthorized connection to public                                              
19-02 (a), (d)                    sewer/interceptor
1st offense                                                          $300    $200 5                                     $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $500    NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $1,000  NO             $3,000
Subs. offense                                                                                                  $2,500  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Unauthorized discharge to catch                                                
19-02 (b), (c),(e)                basin/storm/sanitary sewer
1st offense                                                          $250    NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $500    NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $1,000  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $2,500  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Discharge of groundwater without                                               
19-02 (f)                         permit
1st offense                                                          $250    NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $500    NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $1,000  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $2,500  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Discharge of obstructive substance
19-03 (a)(1)                      or other interference (non-green                                               
                                  infrastructure)
1st offense                                                          $350    NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $500    NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $1,000  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $2,500  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Discharge of snow and ice at                                                   
19-03 (a)(2)                      unauthorized location
1st offense                                                          $100    NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $200    NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $500    NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $1,000  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Discharge of steam/waste water over                                            
19-03 (a)(3)                      150°f
1st offense                                                          $350    NO                                          $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $500    NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                       $1,000  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $2,000  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Discharge of flammable or explosive
19-03 (a)(4)                      substance

15 RCNY §                        Discharge of obstructive substance
19-03 (a)(1)                      or other interference to green                                                 
                                  infrastructure

15 RCNY §                        Discharge of oil to green
19-03 (a)(5)                      infrastructure
1st offense                                                          $1,000  $500 3                                     $2,000
2nd offense                                                                        $2,000  NO                           $4,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $4,000  NO             $8,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $10,000 $10,000
                                  Discharge of oil 0-5 qts from
15 RCNY §                        changing oil in privately owned                                                
19-03 (a)(5)                      automobile (non-green
                                  infrastructure)
1st offense                                                          $500    NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $800    NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $1,000  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $2,000  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Discharge of non-polar material                                                
19-03 (a)(6)
1st offense                                                          $1,000  $500 1                                     $2,000
2nd offense                                                                        $2,000  $800 1                       $4,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $4,000  $1,000         $8,000
                                                                                                              1
Subs offense                                                                                                   $7,500  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Discharge of oil sludge/coal tar/                                              
19-03 (a)(5), (7), (8)            paints (non-green infrastructure)
1st offense                                                          $1,000  $500 3                                     $2,000
2nd offense                                                                        $2,000  $800 3                       $4,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $4,000  $1,000         $8,000
                                                                                                              3
Subs offense                                                                                                   $7,500  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Discharge of wastewater outside of                                             
19-03 (a)(9)                      applicable ph limits
1st offense                                                          $400    $250 1                                     $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $800    $400 1                       $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $1,000  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $2,000  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Discharge of toxics
19-03 (a)(10)-(11)
                                  Discharge in excess of interim or                                              
15 RCNY §                        final limits for toxic parameter
19.1-02.1                         under SPDES Multi-Sector General
                                  Permit
1st offense                                                          $1,000  $500 3                                     $2,000
2nd offense                                                                        $2,000  NO                           $4,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $4,000  NO             $8,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $10,000 $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Discharge of pollutant burdensome                                              
19-03 (a)(12)                     to sewage treatment plant
1st offense                                                          $2,500  $1,500                                     $5,000
                                                                              6
2nd offense                                                                        $5,000  NO                           $10,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $7,500  NO             $10,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $10,000 $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Discharge of noxious malodorous or                                             
19-03 (a)(13)-(14)                discoloring substance
1st offense                                                          $350    NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $800    NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $1,000  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $2,000  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Discharge of dry cleaning wastes
19-03 (a)(15)
                                  Discharge of concrete/cement or                                                
15 RCNY §                        similarly obstructive material or
19-03 (a)(1)                      water contaminated therewith (non-
                                  green infrastructure)
1st offense                                                          $1,000  $350 3                                     $2,000
2nd offense                                                                        $2,000  NO                           $4,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $4,000  NO             $8,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $5,000  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Discharge of unshredded garbage                                                
19-03 (b)
1st offense                                                          $350    NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $1,000  NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $2,000  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $5,000  $10,000
15 RCNY § 
19-03(d)(1)                       Failure to protect against                                                     
15 RCNY §                       accidental discharge
19.1-01.4
1st offense                                                          $350    NO                                          $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $1,000  NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $2,500  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $5,000  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Failure to immediately notify DEP                                              
19-03 (d)(2)                      of accidental discharge
1st offense                                                          $500    NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $1,000  NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $2,500  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $5,000  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Failure to post accidental                                                     
19-03 (d)(3)                      discharge procedures
1st offense                                                          $250    NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $500    NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $1,000  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $2,500  $10,000
15 RCNY §                       Failure to mitigate discharge and
19-03(d)(4)                       commence clean-up
                                                                                                                 
15 RCNY §                       Failure to comply with Storm Water
19.1-01.4                         Pollution Prevention Plan
1st offense                                                          $500    NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $1,000  NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $2,500  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $5,000  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Failure to control sewer odor                                                  
19-03 (e)                         arising in premise
1st offense                                                          $350    NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $500    NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $1,000  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $2,500  $10,000
15 RCNY §
19-03 (f)                         Failure to install or maintain                                                 
15 RCNY §                        pretreatment equipment (grease)
19-11 (q)
1st offense                                                          $100    NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $400    NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $800    NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $1,500  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Unlawful discharge of radioactive                                              
19-03 (g)                         material
1st offense                                                          $2,500  NO                                         $5,000
2nd offense                                                                        $5,000  NO                           $10,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $7,500  NO             $10,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $10,000 $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Discharge of cyanide amenable in
19-04 (a)                         excess of local limit, but less                                                
                                  than 25x the limit
1st offense                                                          400     $250 1                                     $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $800    $400 1                       $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $1,000  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $2,000  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Discharge of cyanide amenable in
19-04 (a)                         excess of local limit, and equal to                                            
                                  25x the limit or greater
1st offense                                                          750     NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $1,000  NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $2,000  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $5,000  $10,000
                                  Discharge in excess of local/
                                  categorical limits/limits set by
15 RCNY §                       commissioner, but less than 10x the
19-04(a)-(c)                      limit (not applicable to cyanide
                                  amenable under 15 RCNY § 
                                  19-04(a))                                                                      
                                  Discharge in excess of interim or
15 RCNY §                       final effluent limits for non-toxic
19.1-02.1                         parameter under SPDES Multi-Sector
                                  General Permit but less than 10x
                                  the limit / unauthorized discharge
1st offense                                                          400     $250 1                                     $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $800    $400 1                       $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $1,000  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $2,000  $10,000
                                  Discharge in excess of local/
                                  categorical limits/limits set by
15 RCNY §                       commissioner, and equal to 10x the
19-04(a)-(c)                      limit or greater (not applicable to
                                  cyanide amenable under 15 RCNY § 
                                  19-04(a))                                                                      
                                  Discharge in excess of interim or
15 RCNY §                       final effluent limits for non-toxic
19.1-02.1                         parameter under SPDES Multi-Sector
                                  General Permit and equal to 10x the
                                  limit or greater / Significant
                                  unauthorized discharge
1st offense                                                          750     NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $1,000  NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $2,000  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $5,000  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Failure to maintain/properly
19-04 (d)                         operate pretreatment equipment                                                 
                                  (categorical)
1st offense                                                          350     NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $500    NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $1,000  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $2,500  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Unlawful dilution of wastewater                                                
19-04 (e)
1st offense                                                          500     NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $1,000  NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $2,500  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $5,000  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Discharge of wastewater w/o permit                                             
19-05 (a)(1)-(2)                  or equivalent control mechanism
1st offense                                                          300     NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $500    NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $1,000  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $2,500  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Refusal to provide information,
19-05 (c)                         permit inspection, or measure/                                                 
                                  sample
1st offense                                                          500     NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $1,000  NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $2,500  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $5,000  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Failure to install measurement/                                                
19-05 (d)                         sampling equipment, as required
1st offense                                                          350     NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $500    NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $1,000  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $2,500  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        New connection to public sewer,                                                
19-05 (e)                         without permit
1st offense                                                          500     $250 5                                     $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $1,000  NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $2,500  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $5,000  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Discharge of scavenger waste                                                   
19-06 (a)(1)                      without scavenger waste permit
1st offense                                                          $1,000  NO                                         $2,000
2nd offense                                                                        $2,500  NO                           $5,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $5,000  NO             $10,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $7,500  $10,000
                                  Discharge of scavenger waste in
15 RCNY §                        violation of terms of permit/                                                  
19-06 (a)(1)-(2)                  discharge of scavenger waste from
                                  outside NYC
1st offense                                                          $500    NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $1,000  NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $2,500  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $5,000  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Discharge of non-sanitary wastes                                               
19-06 (a)(3)
1st offense                                                          $1,000  NO                                         $2,000
2nd offense                                                                        $2,500  NO                           $5,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $5,000  NO             $10,000
Subs. offense                                                                                                  $7,500  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Discharge of scavenger wastes at                                               
19-06 (a)(4)                      non-designated manhole
1st offense                                                          $500    NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $1,000  NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $2,500  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $5,000  $10,000
                                  Discharge of scavenger wastes in
15 RCNY §                        unclean/unsafe manner/failure to                                               
19-06 (b)                         produce or carry permit/false or
                                  misleading statement in application
1st offense                                                          $400    $100 5                                     $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $1,000  $250 5                       $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $2,500  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $5,000  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Unlawful transport of other wastes                                             
19-06 (d)                         in scavenger vehicle
1st offense                                                          $1,000  NO                                         $2,000
2nd offense                                                                        $2,500  NO                           $5,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $5,000  NO             $10,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $7,500  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Impermissible discharge of waste
19-06 (e)                         from grease interceptor, separator,                                            
                                  or trap
1st offense                                                          $1,000  NO                                         $2,000
2nd offense                                                                        $2,500  NO                           $5,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $5,000  NO             $10,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $7,500  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Failure to prepare/Implement silver                                            
19-07 (a), (i)                    halide bmpp
1st offense                                                          $350    NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $500    NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $1,000  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $2,500  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Failure to install, operate, and
19-07 (b), (f)                    maintain proper pretreatment                                                   
                                  equipment
1st offense                                                          $350    NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $500    NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $1,000  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $2,500  $10,000
                                  Failure to follow off-site recovery
15 RCNY §                        req. for silver halide records and                                             
19-07 (c)                         measurements, or vendor
                                  certification
1st offense                                                          $350    NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $500    NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $1,000  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $2,500  $10,000
                                  Failure to maintain and make
15 RCNY §                        available all required records and                                             
19-07 (d), (h)                    measurements, or vendor
                                  certification
1st offense                                                          $350    NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $500    NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $1,000  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $2,500  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Unauthorized entry into or damage                                              
19-10 (b)(1)-(2)                  to sewer system
1st offense                                                          $2,500  NO                                         $5,000
2nd offense                                                                        $5,000  NO                           $10,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $7,500  NO             $10,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $10,000 $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Interference with DEP personnel/                                               
19-10 (c)                         equipment
1st offense                                                          $1,000  NO                                         $2,000
2nd offense                                                                        $2,500  NO                           $5,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $5,000  NO             $10,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $10,000 $10,000
15 RCNY §                       Refusal to allow entry/inspection/
19-10(d)                          tampering with sampling or testing                                             
15 RCNY §                        device
19.1-02.3
1st offense                                                          $1,000  NO                                         $2,000
2nd offense                                                                        $2,500  NO                           $5,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $5,000  NO             $10,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $10,000 $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Failure to provide required                                                    
19-10 (e)                         information/refusal to cooperate
1st offense                                                          $500    NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $1,500  NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $5,000  NO             $10,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $7,500  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Failure to install/maintain
19-12 (a), (c)                    pretreatment equipment (dry                                                    
                                  cleaners)
1st offense                                                          $350    NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $500    NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $1,000  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $2,500  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Discharge of dry cleaning waste                                                
19-12 (b)                         (perc)
1st offense                                                          $500    NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $1,000  NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $2,500  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $5,000  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Failure to protect against
19-12 (d)                         accidental spill (dry cleaner                                                  
                                  waste)
1st offense                                                          $350    NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $500    NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $1,000  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $2,500  $10,000
15 RCNY §                        Failure to maintain records (dry                                               
19-12 (e)                         cleaners)
1st offense                                                          $350    NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $500    NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $1,000  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $2,500  $10,000
A.C. § 24-509(c)                 Failure to connect to public sewer                                             
                                  w/i 6 months of notification
                                                                              $500 7
1st offense                                                          $3,000  $750 8                                     $5,000
                                                                              $1,000
                                                                              9
2nd offense                                                                        N/A     N/A                    
3rd offense                                                                                      N/A     N/A      
Subs offense                                                                                                   N/A
A.C. § 24-523 (c)(2)
A.C. § 24-573                   Failure to maintain/submit required                                            
15 RCNY §                       record/report
19.1-02.4
1st offense                                                          $350    NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $500    NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $1,000  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $2,500  $10,000
A.C. § 24-523(c)(2)              Failure to maintain monitoring                                                 
                                  equipment/methods
1st offense                                                          $350    NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $500    NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $1,000  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $2,500  $10,000
A.C. § 24-523(c)(2)              Failure to provide required                                                    
                                  information
1st offense                                                          $500    NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $1,500  NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $5,000  NO             $10,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $7,500  $10,000
                                  Refusal to allow inspection of
A.C. § 24-523(c)(3)              monitoring equipment/ method or                                                
                                  sampling
1st offense                                                          $1,000  NO                                         $2,000
2nd offense                                                                        $2,500  NO                           $5,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $5,000  NO             $10,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $10,000 $10,000
A.C. § 24-523 (c)(4)             Providing false or misleading
15 RCNY §                       information                                                                    
19.1-02.1
1st offense                                                          $1,000  NO                                         $2,000
2nd offense                                                                        $2,500  NO                           $5,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $5,000  NO             $10,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $10,000 $10,000
A.C. §§ 24-523 (f) / 24-524 (f) Failure to comply with Comm.
15 RCNY §                       request for information/terms of                                               
19.1-02.1                         permit other than reporting
                                  requirements
1st offense                                                          $500    NO                                         $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $1,000  NO                           $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $2,500  NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $5,000  $10,000
A.C. § 24-524 (f)                Failure to comply with Comm's Order                                            
A.C. § 24-585
1st offense                                                          $400    $125 2                                     $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $600    $250 4                       $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $800    $400 4         $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $1,000  $10,000
A.C. § 24-524 (f)                Failure to comply with terms of
15 RCNY §                       permit reporting requirements                                                  
19.1-02.1
1st offense                                                          $250    $125 2                                     $1,000
2nd offense                                                                        $500    $250 4                       $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                      $800    NO             $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                   $1,000  $10,000
A.C. Title 24, Ch.5
A.C. Title 24, Ch.5-A
15 RCNY                           Miscellaneous Administrative Code/
Ch.19                             Rule violation
15 RCNY
Ch.19.1
1st offense                                                           $500    NO                                              $1,000
2nd offense                                                                           $1,000  NO                              $2,000
3rd offense                                                                                           $2,500  NO              $3,000
Subs offense                                                                                                          $5,000  $10,000
A.C. Title 24, Ch.5
A.C. Title 24, Ch.5-A
15 RCNY                           Any serious Administrative Code/
Ch.19                             Rule violation
15 RCNY
Ch.19.1
1st offense                                                           $2,500  NO                                              $5,000
2nd offense                                                                           $5,000  NO                              $10,000
3rd offense                                                                                           $7,500  NO              $10,000
Subs offense                                                                                                          $10,000 $10,000
 
(Added City Record 4/1/2019, eff. 6/1/2019; amended City Record 12/10/2020,
eff. 1/9/2021)
Chapter 57: Rules Concerning Drilling and Excavation
§ 57-01 Purpose and Applicability.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of these rules is to protect Department and Water
Board water tunnels and shafts in the five boroughs of New York City from
potential damage due to drilling or excavation.
   (b)   Applicability. 
      (1)   These rules apply to any proposed drilling or excavation, for any
purpose, to a depth greater than fifty (50) feet below ground surface in the
borough of the Bronx or on or north of 135th Street in the borough of
Manhattan, or greater than 100 feet in the borough of Brooklyn, Queens or
Staten Island or south of 135th Street in the borough of Manhattan, in a
corridor within the City of New York or to any depth within 200 feet horizontal
distance of a water tunnel shaft.
      (2)   These rules do not apply to any drilling or excavation conducted
by, or on behalf of, the Department for water supply or wastewater projects.
      (3)   These rules do not apply to drilling and excavation projects
permitted by the New York City Department of Buildings prior to the effective
date of these rules.
(Added City Record 7/22/2019, eff. 8/21/2019)
§ 57-02 Definitions.
For the purposes of these rules, the following definitions apply:
   Application. "Application" means the Department Drilling and Excavation
Permit Application, including all information and documentation required by the
Commissioner and these rules.
   Azimuth. "Azimuth" means an angle used to define the apparent position of an
object, relative to a specific observation point.
   Blowout preventer. "Blowout preventer" means a safety device used to prevent
the uncontrolled flow of liquids and gases during well drilling operations.
   Borehole. "Borehole" means a narrow shaft bored in the ground as part of a
geotechnical investigation.
   Commissioner. "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Environmental
Protection or his or her designee.
   Corridor. "Corridor" means a block that has any part of its boundary falling
within five hundred (500) feet horizontal distance from the centerline of any
water tunnel or shaft as measured at or near the surface.
   Crown. "Crown" means the topmost point of a water tunnel.
   Datum Plane. "Datum Plane" means the horizontal plane from which heights and
depths are calculated.
   Department. "Department" means the New York City Department of Environmental
Protection and its authorized agents.
   Deviation. "Deviation" means a borehole's departure from a true vertical
line, measured in degrees.
   Deviation survey. "Deviation survey" means an investigative procedure
conducted using generally accepted engineering principles and practices to
establish the position of a tip of a borehole or well, with respect to a true
vertical line, and the orientation of such tip with respect to north direction.
   Directional drilling. "Directional drilling" means a method used to control
the location and the direction of the drill bit.
   Drill or Drilling. "Drill" or "Drilling" means using shaft-like equipment
with a drill bit to bore a hole to below ground surface.
   Elevation. "Elevation" means the height above or below a specific datum
plane.
   Excavate or Excavation. "Excavate" or "Excavation" means any man-made cut,
cavity, trench, or depression in an earth surface formed by earth removal.
   Geothermal well. "Geothermal well" means a well which taps into the natural
geothermal energy found beneath the Earth's crust in order to harness the heat
energy produced by the earth underground.
   Gyroscopic probe. "Gyroscopic probe" means a device used for measuring or
maintaining position or orientation.
   Invert. "Invert" means the lowest inside surface or floor of a water tunnel.
   No Drilling/Excavation Zone. "No Drilling/Excavation Zone" means a boundary
area defined as two hundred feet (200') on either side of the centerline of the
water tunnel and vertical distances of one hundred fifty feet (150') above the
crown of the water tunnel and one hundred fifty feet (150') below the invert of
the water tunnel; or, except as otherwise indicated, two hundred feet (200')
feet on either side of the centerline of the water tunnel shaft.
   Owner. "Owner" means any person who holds legal title to a property or any
person who holds a leasehold of at least twenty (20) years over a property,
where the property is a proposed drilling or excavation site.
   Permit. "Permit" means a written document issued by the Department granting
an owner approval, if owner meets required conditions, to drill and/or excavate
on a property in close proximity to a water tunnel or shaft.
   Permittee. "Permittee" means an owner to whom the Department has issued a
permit.
   Person. "Person" means an individual, firm, partnership, company,
corporation, association, society, institution, organization, governmental
agency, administration, department, or other group of individuals or legal
entity, or an officer or employee thereof.
   Site plan. "Site plan" means a plan of the area of a proposed drilling or
excavation operation.
   Stratigraphic well. "Stratigraphic well" means a well drilled for
stratigraphic information, i.e., information about rock strata, especially the
distribution, deposition, and age of sedimentary rocks.
   Verticality probe. "Verticality probe" means a device used to measure
inclination and to provide accurate information on the precise location of
underground features intersected by a borehole.
   Water Board. "Water Board" means the New York City Water Board.
   Water Tunnel. "Water Tunnel" means any tunnel or covered aqueduct, including
a water tunnel shaft, used to convey the supply of drinking water, that is
owned, leased or operated by the City of New York, the Water Board, or the
Department and located in the five boroughs of New York City.
   Water tunnel shaft or shaft. "Water tunnel shaft or shaft" means a shaft of
a water tunnel consisting of a vertical pathway that conveys water from an
underground tunnel to a chamber at the surface. A shaft is constructed with
pipes connected to a concrete lined circular opening in bedrock.
   Water tunnel shaft structure or shaft structure. "Water tunnel shaft
structure or shaft structure" means the shaft superstructure and substructure
including any building, building foundation, or below grade chamber associated
with a shaft facility.
(Added City Record 7/22/2019, eff. 8/21/2019)
§ 57-03 Standards for Drilling and Excavation.
No person may drill or excavate in a corridor within the City of New York, to a
depth greater than fifty (50) feet below ground surface in the borough of the
Bronx or on or north of 135th Street in the borough of Manhattan; or greater
than 100 feet in the borough of Brooklyn, Queens or Staten Island or south of
135th Street in the borough of Manhattan or to any depth within 200 feet
horizontal distance of a water tunnel shaft, without obtaining a permit from
the Department.
A person with a permit may drill or excavate in a corridor within the City of
New York only to the extent allowed under the permit. Any other drilling or
excavation will be a violation of these rules.
(Added City Record 7/22/2019, eff. 8/21/2019)
§ 57-04 Application for Drilling and Excavation Permit.
   (a)   Pre-Application Assessment Submittal. Every person drilling to a depth
greater than 50 feet (15 240 mm) in the borough of the Bronx or on or north of
135th Street in the borough of Manhattan, or greater than 100 feet (30 480mm)
in the borough of Brooklyn, Queens, or Staten Island or south of 135th Street
in the borough of Manhattan, must submit to the Department a pre-application
for proposed drilling and/or excavation. A Pre-Application Assessment Form is
available on the Department's website at www.nyc.gov/DEP, or by request in
person or by mail, from the DEP Bureau of Water and Sewer Operations Permitting
Office at the address on the Department's website.
      (1)   Pre-Application Requirements. The pre-application assessment
submission must include the following information:
         (i)   the name, address, and telephone number of the owner and project
engineer, architect or contractor;
         (ii)   the proposed location and depth of the drilling and/or
excavation, as applicable, by way of address, block and lot, and a survey of
the proposed location in reference to the applicable block and lot.
      (2)   Within ten (10) business days from receipt of a pre-application
assessment submission, the Department will notify the applicant that:
         (i)   proposed drilling and/or excavation is located in a corridor and
within a No Drilling/Excavation Zone, and that no drilling or excavation is
permitted; or
         (ii)   a permit is not required to drill and/or excavate because the
proposed drilling and/or excavation is not located in a corridor; or
         (iii)   a permit is not required to drill and/or excavate because the
drilling or excavation is more than fifteen feet (15') from the outer wall of a
shaft structure and less than fifteen feet (15') below ground surface; or
         (iv)   proposed drilling and/or excavation is located in a corridor,
and a permit application must be submitted to the Department with the required
documentation in accordance with 15 RCNY §§
57-04(b) et seq.
   (b)   Permit Application Form and Fee. To obtain a permit, an owner must
file an application with the Department. An application form is available on
the Department's website at www.nyc.gov/_DEP, or by request, in person or by
mail, from the DEP Bureau of Water and Sewer Operations Permitting Office at
the address on the Department's website. The application must be accompanied by
a filing fee, as established by the latest New York City Water Board Water and
Sewer Rate schedule, in the form of a bank check, certified check, or money
order made payable to the New York City Water Board.
      (1)   Application Requirements. The application must include the
following information:
         (i)   the name, address, and telephone number of the owner;
         (ii)   the name, address, and telephone number of the company
performing the drilling or excavation, and the name of a contact person;
         (iii)   the name, address, telephone number, and email address of the
project engineer; and
         (iv)   the proposed location of the drilling and/or excavation, as
applicable, by way of address, block and lot, and a survey of the proposed
location in reference to the applicable block and lot, prepared and sealed by a
land surveyor licensed to practice in the State of New York.
      (2)   Additional Information. The Department may at its discretion
require an owner to submit additional information to complete the application,
including but not limited to:
         (i)   the site plan of the borehole or well location, prepared and
sealed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of New
York. The site plan must indicate the ground surface elevation of the borehole
or well, the proposed depth and elevation of the bottom of the borehole or
well, and the diameter of the borehole or well;
         (ii)   the purpose of the drilling and/or excavation, as applicable,
which may include but is not limited to drilling a geothermal well or
stratigraphic well or excavating as part of an environmental investigation;
         (iii)   the proposed methods to measure deviation from the vertical
and azimuth of the borehole or well;
         (iv)   the anticipated start and end dates of drilling and/or
excavation, as applicable;
         (v)   the site plan of the drilling and/or excavation, as applicable.
The site plan must indicate the ground surface elevation of the drilling and/or
excavation, the proposed depth and elevation of the bottom of the drilling and/
or excavation, and the length and width of the excavation or diameter of the
drilling;
         (vi)   the proposed method of excavation and drilling stamped and
signed by a professional engineer; and
         (vii)   upon preliminary notification from the Department that
drilling and/or excavation at a proposed location requires insurance, proof of
insurance as further delineated in 15 RCNY §
57-06.
(Added City Record 7/22/2019, eff. 8/21/2019)
§ 57-05 Issuance of Drilling and Excavation Permit.
   (a)   Standards for Issuance. Within thirty (30) days from receipt of an
application and processing fee:
      (1)   If the proposed drilling and/or excavation is located in a corridor
and inside the No Drilling and/or Excavation zone, the Department will deny a
permit.
      (2)   If the proposed drilling and/or excavation is located in a corridor
but outside of the No Drilling and/or Excavation zone and the Department
believes that the drilling and/or excavation will not impair the stability of a
water tunnel or shaft, the Department will issue a permit upon its further
determination that the drilling and/or excavation complies with all standards
and requirements of these rules, including but not limited to, engineering,
legal, and insurance standards and requirements. The Department will not issue
a permit unless proof of insurance required by the Department under these rules
has been submitted to and accepted by the Department in accordance with the
requirements of 15 RCNY §
57-06(b).
   (b)   General Permit Conditions. 
      (1)   The permittee or the contractor must notify the Department 30 days
prior to commencing any drilling or excavation activity.
      (2)   Permittee is authorized to drill and/or excavate only to the depth
specified by the permit as shown on approved plan.
      (3)   The permittee must abandon any borehole or well within two hundred
feet (200') horizontal distance from the center line of a water tunnel, where
the tip of the borehole or well comes within one hundred fifty feet (150')
above the crown of a water tunnel or within one hundred fifty (150') below the
invert of a water tunnel.
         (i)   The permittee must seal any abandoned borehole or well through
the full drilling depth with Department-approved material, and
         (ii)   The permittee must bear all costs and expenses associated with
the sealing of such borehole or well.
      (4)   The permittee must abandon any excavation within two hundred feet
(200') horizontal distance from the centerline of a water tunnel, where the
elevation of the bottom of the excavation comes within one hundred fifty feet
(150') above the crown of a water tunnel.
         (i)   The permittee must fill any abandoned excavation throughout its
full depth with Department-approved material, and
         (ii)   The permittee must bear all costs and expenses associated with
the filling of such excavation.
      (5)   The permittee must abandon any borehole or well within two hundred
feet (200') horizontal distance from a shaft.
         (i)   The permittee must seal any abandoned borehole or well through
the full drilling depth with cement grout or other suitable material and
         (ii)   The permittee shall bear all costs and expenses associated with
the plugging of such borehole or well.
      (6)   The permittee must abandon any excavation within two hundred feet
(200') horizontal distance from a shaft.
         (i)   The permittee must fill any abandoned excavation throughout its
full depth with Department-approved material, and
         (ii)   The permittee must bear all costs and expenses associated with
the filling of such excavation.
      (7)   The permittee may be required to utilize a blowout preventer, when
the Department. determines that its use is necessary to prevent damage to the
water tunnel or shaft.
      (8)   The permittee must comply with all applicable laws and regulations.
      (9)   The permittee must not perform work in such a way that damages any
water tunnel or shaft.
      (10)   Within thirty (30) days after completing drilling and/or
excavation, the permittee must provide documentation to the Department
indicating the depth and azimuth of the finished borehole or well and/or the
depth of the excavation, as applicable. A professional engineer or licensed
land surveyor must stamp such certification.
      (11)   The permittee must conduct, at a frequency specified by the
Department, all deviation surveys deemed necessary by the Commissioner. The
frequency will vary depending on the type of drilling equipment utilized and
the location of the borehole or well. If the Department requires the applicant
to perform a deviation survey:
         (i)   The permittee must engage an experienced specialty surveyor
licensed as a land surveyor in the State of New York, who has experience
conducting deviation surveys;
         (ii)   The permittee must conduct a deviation survey that measures
borehole or well inclination and azimuth;
         (iii)   The permittee must conduct the deviation survey utilizing a
gyroscopic probe or another suitable verticality probe;
         (iv)   The drilling company or engineering firm must process the
deviation survey output to produce a log containing tabular and graphical
representations of the borehole or well inclination, azimuth, and depth; must
maintain the log on site; must update the log at least once per shift or every
8 hours, whichever is sooner; and must make the log readily available for a
Department inspector to review;
         (v)   If the Department determines that the deviation survey is
inadequate or the drilling is not proceeding as approved, the Department may
require the permittee to retain an independent deviation surveyor and bear all
costs and expenses associated with that surveyor; permittee must submit the
credentials of the independent surveyor to DEP for review and approval
      (12)   The permit shall be valid for a period not to exceed three (3)
years from the date of issuance.
   (c)   Stop Work Order or Independent Inspector. Whenever the department
finds that drilling and/or excavation is in violation of this section or
creates a danger to water tunnel or shaft the department may:
      (1)   Issue a stop work order, or
      (2)   Require the permittee to retain an inspector independent of the
contractor at the drilling and/or excavation site in order to observe the
drilling and/or excavation activities, verify the drilling results, or for any
other purpose the Commissioner deems necessary. Such inspector must be an
architect or professional engineer licensed in New York State with a minimum of
five (5) years of drilling/excavation experience; the permittee must submit the
inspector's credentials to DEP for review and approval. The permittee must bear
all costs and expenses associated with the inspection personnel.
   (d)   Revocation of permit. 
      (1)   The Department may revoke a permit on written notice to the
permittee, when the Department finds that permittee failed to comply with any
of the requirements of subdivision (b). Such notice shall inform the permittee
of the reasons for the proposed revocation and that the applicant has the right
to present to the commissioner or his or her representative, within 10 business
days of delivery of the notice by hand or 15 calendar days of mailing of the
notice, information as to why the Department should not revoke the permit. When
a permit is revoked, all activity at the drilling and/or excavation site shall
cease and not resume until the permittee corrects the non-compliance and
reapplies for the permit and the Department issues a new permit.
      (2)   Non-compliance that creates an immediate danger will result in the
automatic revocation of a permit. A permittee may correct the non-compliance
and reapply for the permit. Alternatively, a permittee may appeal the
revocation in writing to the Department's Commissioner. Within 30 days of
receiving such appeal, the Department must issue a written determination
upholding or reversing the revocation.
(Added City Record 7/22/2019, eff. 8/21/2019)
§ 57-06 Assumption of Risk, Indemnification, and Insurance.
   (a)   Assumption of Risk. The permittee and contractor assume the risk of,
and shall be responsible for any loss or damage to property of the City of New
York or the Water Board, arising out of or in any way related to operations for
which the Department has issued a permit.
   (b)   Indemnification. The permittee and the contractor shall defend,
indemnify, and hold harmless the City of New York and the Water Board,
including their respective officials and employees, against any and all claims,
liens, demands, judgments, penalties, fines, liabilities, settlements, damages,
costs and expenses of whatever kind or nature (including, without limitation,
attorneys' fees and disbursements), known or unknown, contingent or otherwise,
allegedly arising out of or in any way related to operations for which the
Department has issued a permit and/or the permittee's and/or contractor's
failure to comply with any of the requirements set forth herein or law. Insofar
as the facts and law would preclude the City of New York, Water Board, or their
respective officials and employees from being completely indemnified by the
permittee and contractor, the City of New York and the Water Board, including
their respective officials and employees, shall be partially indemnified by the
permittee and contractor to the fullest extent permitted by law.
   (c)   Insurance. 
      (1)   Workers' Compensation, Employers' Liability, Disability Benefits,
and Paid Family Leave Benefits Insurance. 
         (i)   The permittee must maintain workers' compensation insurance,
employers' liability insurance, disability benefits insurance, and paid family
leave benefits insurance in accordance with the laws of the State of New York
on behalf of, or in regard to, all employees engaged in operations under the
permit.
         (ii)   The permittee shall submit proof of its workers' compensation
insurance, disability benefits insurance, and paid family leave benefits
insurance or a Certificate of Attestation of Exemption to the Department in a
form approved by the New York State Workers' Compensation Board. ACORD forms
are not acceptable proof of such insurance. The following forms are acceptable:
            •   Form C-105.2, Certificate of Workers' Compensation Insurance;
            •   Form U-26.3, State Insurance Fund Certificate of Workers'
Compensation Insurance;
            •   Form SI-12, Certificate of Workers' Compensation Self-
Insurance;
            •   Form GSI-105.2, Certificate of Participation in Workers'
Compensation Group Self-Insurance;
            •   Form DB-120.1, Certificate of Disability and Paid Family Leave
Benefits Insurance;
            •   Form DB-120.2, Certificate of Participation in Disability or
Disability and Paid Family Leave Benefits Group Self- Insurance;
            •   Form DB-155, Certificate of Disability and Paid Family Leave
Benefits Self-Insurance;
            •   Form CE-200, Certificate of Attestation of Exemption from New
York State Workers' Compensation and/or Disability and Paid Family Leave
Benefits Insurance Coverage; • Other forms approved by the New York State
Workers' Compensation Board; or
            •   Other proof of insurance in a form acceptable to the
Department.
      (2)   Commercial General Liability Insurance. 
         (i)   The permittee must maintain commercial general liability
insurance ("CGL") for the operations under this permit. Such insurance must
meet the following requirements:
            a.   Unless otherwise approved by the Department, the CGL limits
must be at least twenty million dollars ($20,000,000) per occurrence, one
million dollars ($1,000,000) for personal and advertising injury, twenty
million dollars ($20,000,000) products/ completed operations coverage, and
twenty million dollars ($20,000,000) aggregate on a "per project basis."
               i.   Such limits may be satisfied by a primary policy or a
combination of a primary policy, an umbrella policy, and/or an excess policy,
so long as all policies provide the scope of coverage required herein.
               ii.   The products/completed operations coverage must be
maintained for at least three years after the completion of operations under
this permit.
            b.   The CGL policy must be at least as broad as that provided by
the most recently issued Insurance Services Office ("ISO") Form CG 00 01 and it
must not include any exclusions or limitations other than those incorporated in
the standard form. By way of example and not limitation, no CGL and excess/
umbrella policy maintained hereunder shall include the following exclusions:
               i.   XCU exclusion for property damage from explosion, collapse
or underground hazard, or construction defects;
               ii.   "Labor Law" or other gravity-related injuries exclusions;
               iii.   independent contractors exclusion;
               iv.   an insured contract exclusion broader than any contained
in the most recent edition of ISO Form CG 00 01;
               v.   exclusion for work performed in New York City;
               vi.   exclusion for any of the operations allowed under the
permit;
               vii.   exclusions with respect to the Additional Insureds for
claims arising from the permittee's employees or the permittee's contractor's
employees.
            c.   The CGL policy shall be "occurrence" based, not "claims-made."
            d.   The CGL policy must list the City of New York and the Water
Board, including their respective officials and employees ("the Additional
Insureds"), with coverage at least as broad as that provided by the most
recently issued ISO Form CG 20 26 and CG 20 37.
               i.   The coverage for the Additional Insureds under ISO Form CG
20 37 must be maintained for at least three years after the completion of
operations under this permit.
               ii.   The Additional Insureds' limits of CGL shall be the
greater of (i) the minimum limits set forth in these rules or (ii) the limits
provided to the permittee under all primary, excess, and umbrella policies
covering operations under a permit.
            e.   The CGL policy must be "occurrence" based (not "claims-made")
and primary and non-contributing to any insurance or self-insurance maintained
by the Additional Insureds.
            f.   The CGL coverage must be provided by a company or companies
that may lawfully issue such policy and have an A.M. Best rating of at least A-
/"VII," a Standard & Poor's rating of at least A, a Moody's Investors Service
rating of at least A3, a Fitch Ratings rating of at least A- or a similar
rating by any other nationally recognized statistical rating organization
acceptable to the Department unless prior written approval is obtained from the
Department.
         (ii)   If the permittee enters into a contract for any of the work
done under the permit, the permittee shall cause its contractor to maintain CGL
insurance compliant with this 15 RCNY §
57-06(c), including the requirement that such CGL insurance cover the
Additional Insureds.
         (iii)   Proof of Insurance. 
            a.   The permittee must submit the following proof of its and its
contractors' (if any) CGL insurance to the Department: (1) a certificate of
liability insurance; (2) a Certification of Insurance Broker or Agency; and (3)
the required additional insured endorsement(s) covering ongoing and products/
completed operations.
            b.   Prior to the expiration of the CGL insurance policy for which
proof has been provided, proof of a new or renewal CGL insurance policy in the
form required in (c)(2)(iii)a., above, must be provided.
            c.   Acceptance or approval by the Department of proof of insurance
or any other insurance-related document does not waive the permittee's
obligation to ensure that insurance fully consistent with the requirements of
these rules is maintained, nor does it relieve the permittee from liability for
its failure to do so.
            d.   Upon request of the Department, Water Board or the New York
City Law Department, the permittee must provide or shall cause its contractor
to provide to the City and the Water Board the CGL insurance policy required by
this rule.
            e.   If the permittee or its contractor receives notice, from an
insurance company or other person that the CGL policy will expire or be
cancelled or terminated (or has expired or has been cancelled or terminated)
for any reason, the permittee shall or shall cause its contractor to
immediately forward a copy of such notice to the Department. Notwithstanding
the abovementioned, the permittee must ensure that there is no interruption in
any of the insurance coverage required under these rules.
         (iv)   Miscellaneous. 
            a.   The Additional Insureds shall not be responsible for the
payment of any premiums, deductibles, self-insured retentions, or other costs
relating to the insurance required by this section.
            b.   There must be no self-insurance program.
            c.   Where a CGL policy, maintained in accordance with these rules,
requires a notice of a claim or of an occurrence or an offense that may result
in a claim, the permittee must provide and cause its contractors (if any) to
provide a written notice to the CGL insurance carriers within the time required
by the policy that expressly states that, "this notice is being given on behalf
of the City of New York and the New York City Water Board, including their
respective officials and employees as Additional Insureds as well as the Named
Insureds." Such notice must also contain the following information to the
extent known: the number of the insurance policy, the name of the named
insured, the date and location of the damage, occurrence, or accident, and the
identity of the persons or things injured, damaged, or lost. Simultaneously, a
copy of such notice must be sent to the City of New York c/o Insurance Claims
Specialist, Affirmative Litigation Division, New York City Law Department, 100
Church Street, New York, NY 10007.
            d.   The failure to secure and maintain insurance in complete
conformity with these rules, or to give the insurance carrier timely notice on
behalf of the Additional Insureds, or to do anything else required by these
rules will constitute violation of these rules. Such breach is not waived or
otherwise excused by any action or inaction by an Additional Insured at any
time.
            e.   Insurance coverage in the minimum amounts provided for in
these rules shall not relieve the permittee or contractors of any liability
under a permit, nor must it preclude the Additional Insureds from exercising
any rights or taking such other actions as are available to it under these
rules or the law.
            f.   In the event of any occurrence or offense that does or can
give rise to a claim under the CGL insurance policy required under these rules,
the permittee must at all times fully cooperate and must cause its contractors
to fully cooperate with the City and the Water Board with regard to such
potential or actual claim.
            g.   Where notice to the Department is required under this 15 RCNY
§
57-06, such notice must be in writing and must be sent by certified mail,
return receipt requested or by nationally recognized overnight mail courier to
the New York City Department of Environmental Protection, Attention:
Commissioner, 59-17 Junction Boulevard, Flushing, NY 11373.
(Added City Record 7/22/2019, eff. 8/21/2019)
§ 57-07 Variance Requests.
   (a)   Unless otherwise prohibited by Federal, State, or Local law or
regulation, the Department may, upon written request from any owner who is
subject to these rules, grant a variance from 15 RCNY §
57-05(a)(1). A Variance Request Form is available on the Department's website
at www.nyc.gov/DEP, and in person or by mail from the DEP Bureau of Water and
Sewer Operations Permitting Office at the address on the Department's website.
   (b)   An owner wishing to request a variance must submit the completed form
to the New York City Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Water
and Sewer Operations, Permitting Section, at the address on the Department's
website. The Variance Request Form must be accompanied by a filing fee in
accordance with 15 RCNY §
57-04(b), in the form of a bank check, certified check, or money order made
payable to the New York City Water Board.
   (c)   Every variance request must demonstrate that the proposed means and
methods of the drilling and/or excavation will not have any adverse impact on a
water tunnel or shaft and will be performed consistently with all of the
conditions set forth in these rules. The said demonstration must be signed and
stamped by a NYS professional engineer and accompanied by Proof of Insurance in
compliance with the conditions outlined in 15 RCNY §
57-06(b).
   (d)   The Department will issue or deny a variance within sixty (60) days
from receipt of a completed request, including receipt of any requested
additional information. In granting a variance under this subchapter, the
Department may impose additional conditions to ensure that the drilling and/or
excavation does not cause any significant adverse impact on the public health,
safety, or welfare, on the environment, or on natural resources.
(Added City Record 7/22/2019, eff. 8/21/2019)
§ 57-08 Penalties and Sanctions.
   (a)   Any person who fails to comply with any section of these rules or any
condition of a permit issued under these rules will be subject to issuance of a
Notice of Violation returnable to the Environmental Control Board, as provided
in § 24-346 of the Administrative Code of the City of New York.
   (b)   A person must bear all costs and expenses associated with any and all
damage resulting from unpermitted or non-compliant drilling and/or excavation.
(Added City Record 7/22/2019, eff. 8/21/2019)
Chapter 58: Notification of Mold Remediation
§ 58-01 Applicability
   (a)   This rule applies to mold remediation projects for which a
notification to the department of environmental protection is required pursuant
to § 24-154 of the Administrative Code.
(Added City Record 3/19/2019, eff. 4/18/2019)
§ 58-02 Conditions that Pose an Immediate Threat of Harm to Any Person or
Damage to Property.
   (a)   To determine if a notification of mold remediation must be filed,
pursuant to § 24-154 of the Administrative Code, an immediate risk of harm to
any person or damage to property is considered to exist when any of the
following are present in the dwelling to be remediated:
      (1)   At least 30 square feet or more of visible mold within one room.
      (2)   Excessive water accumulation or flooding.
   (b)   Before commencing work, the mold remediation contractor must determine
if any of the conditions listed in subdivision (a) exist, and must indicate in
the mold remediation notice which, if any of these conditions exist, and attach
appropriate documentation of said condition.
(Added City Record 3/19/2019, eff. 4/18/2019)
Chapter 59: Hazardous Substances Emergency Response Law Penalty Schedule
§ 59-01 General.
   (a)   Whenever a respondent is found in violation of any of the following
provisions of the NYC Administrative Code, any civil penalties imposed by a
hearing officer, pursuant to 48 RCNY §
6-17(a) in accordance with Section 1049-a(d)(1)(d) of the Charter or any civil
penalties imposed for admissions of violations, pursuant to 48 RCNY §
6-09(c) or late admissions, pursuant to 48 RCNY §
3-17 will be imposed, pursuant to the penalty schedule set forth below.
   (b)   All citations, unless otherwise indicated are to the NYC
Administrative Code.
   (c)   A second violation is a violation by the same respondent of the same
section of law with a date of occurrence within three (3) years of the date of
occurrence of the previous violation.
(Added City Record 10/30/2019, eff. 11/29/2019)
§ 59-02 Hazardous Substances Emergency Response Law Penalty Schedule.
* The following shall be considered environmentally sensitive areas: wetlands
and wetland buffer areas; National and State parks; critical habitats for
endangered and threatened plant and animal species; wilderness and natural
areas; marine sanctuaries; conservation areas; preserves; wildlife areas;
scenic, wild or recreational rivers; seashore and lakeshore recreational areas;
critical biological resource areas; National and State protected and critical
environmental areas (CEAS) as defined in 6 NYCRR Section 617.2(i).
 
                                                                                                 Aggravating
                                                                                                 Factor
Section/Offense/Penalty  Mitigating Factors                                                      (Cumulative, up Default
                         (Cumulative)                                                            to a Total
                                                                                                 Penalty of
                                                                                                 $10,000)
                                                                                                 1. Add $2,500,
                                                                                                 if release
                                                                                                 occurred within
                                                                                                 1,000 feet of
                                                                                                 any of the
                                                                                                 following:
                                                                                                 residence
                                                                                                 district as
                                                                                                 defined by the
                                                                                                 New York City
                                                                                                 Zoning
                                                                                                 Resolution;
                                                                                                 school,
                                                                                                 highway,
                                                                                                 parkway or any
                                                                                                 other three
                                                                                                 lane roadway;
                                                                                                 environmentally
                                                                                                 sensitive
                                                                                                 area*;
                                                                                                 hazardous/toxic
                                                                                                 substance(s)
                         1. Subtract $500, if telephone within 24 hours. Telephone notification  industry/
                         shall be found where respondent provided DEP with all of the telephone  facility
                         notification requirements as provided in 15 RCNY §                     required to
Admin. Code § 24-609(b) 11-03(b) within 24 hours of when respondent knows or has reason to know file under the
1st offense              of a release.                                                           New York City
Failed to comply with                                                                            Community
notification             2. Subtract $500, if respondent did provide written notification.       Right-to-know   $10,000
requirements upon        Written notification shall be found where respondent provided DEP with  Law, Title 24
release of hazardous     all of the written notification requirements as provided in 15 RCNY §  Chapter 7 of
substance                11-03(c).                                                               the New York
$4,000                                                                                           Administrative
                         3. Subtract $1,000, if began abating release within 3 hours of when     Code.
                         respondent knew or had reason to know of a release.
                                                                                                 2. Add $2,500,
                                                                                                 if amount of
                                                                                                 release was
                                                                                                 equal to or
                                                                                                 greater than
                                                                                                 twice the
                                                                                                 Reportable
                                                                                                 Quantity.

                                                                                                 3. Add $2,500,
                                                                                                 if release
                                                                                                 caused actual
                                                                                                 injury to
                                                                                                 wildlife and/or
                                                                                                 human health.

                                                                                                 4. Add $2,500
                                                                                                 if willful or
                                                                                                 intentional
                                                                                                 release of the
                                                                                                 listed
                                                                                                 hazardous
                                                                                                 substance.
Admin. Code § 24-609(b)
2nd Offense              SAME AS ABOVE                                                           SAME AS ABOVE   $10,000
$9,000
                                                                                                 1. Add $1,500,
                                                                                                 if failed to
                                                                                                 comply with
                                                                                                 that portion of
                                                                                                 Scope of Work
                                                                                                 Order relating
                                                                                                 to Bills of
                                                                                                 Lading and
Admin. Code § 24-610(c)                                                                         Hazardous Waste
1st Offense              1. Subtract $1,000, if complied with that portion of Scope of Work      Manifests.
Willfully violated or    Order relating to securing of premises/building.
failed or refused to                                                                             2. Add $1,500,  $10,000
comply with              2. Subtract $500, if complied with that portion of Scope of Work Order  if total non-
Commissioner's Order     relating to identification of all hazardous substances.                 compliance,
$3,000                                                                                           i.e. failed to
                                                                                                 comply with any
                                                                                                 part of
                                                                                                 Commissioner's
                                                                                                 Order. (In such
                                                                                                 cases, there
                                                                                                 could be no
                                                                                                 mitigating
                                                                                                 factors.)
Admin. Code § 24-610(c)
2nd Offense              SAME AS ABOVE                                                           SAME AS ABOVE   $10,000
$4,500
 
(Added City Record 10/30/2019, eff. 11/29/2019)
Chapter 60: Rulemaking Petitions
§ 60-01 Scope.
These Rules and Regulations govern the procedures by which the public may
submit to an Agency Petitions for Rulemaking pursuant to § 1043(g) of the New
York City Charter (City Administrative Procedures Act) and the procedures for
Agency consideration and disposition of such Petitions.
(Added City Record 2/9/2022, eff. 3/11/2022)
§ 60-02 Definitions.
City Administrative Procedures Act (CAPA). "City Administrative Procedures Act
(CAPA)" means the requirements for rulemaking by agencies of the City of New
York specified in Chapter 45 of the New York City Charter.
Department. "Department" means the Department of Environmental Protection.
Person. "Person" means an individual, partnership, corporation or other legal
entity, and any individual or entity acting in a fiduciary or representative
capacity.
Petition. Petition" means a request or application for the Department to adopt
a Rule.
Petitioner. "Petitioner" means the person who files a Petition.
Rule. Rule" has the same meaning as in § 1041(5) of the New York City Charter
(City Administrative Procedure Act) (CAPA).
(Added City Record 2/9/2022, eff. 3/11/2022)
§ 60-03 Procedures for Submitting Petitions.
   (a)   Any Person may petition the Department to consider the adoption of a
Rule. The Petition must include:
      (1)   The Rule to be considered, with proposed language for adoption;
      (2)   Petitioner's arguments in support of adoption of the Rule;
      (3)   The name, address, telephone number, and email address of the
Petitioner or his or her authorized representative;
      (4)   The signature of Petitioner or his or her representative.
   (b)   Any change in the name, address or telephone number of the Petitioner
or his or her authorized representative must be reported to the office to which
the Petition was submitted.
   (c)   All Petitions should be typewritten, if possible, but handwritten
Petitions will be accepted provided they are legible.
   (d)   Petitions must be submitted by email to nycrules@dep.nyc.gov or by
mailing or delivering the Petition to the DEP Bureau of Legal Affairs, 59-17
Junction Boulevard 19th Floor, Flushing NY 11373.
(Added City Record 2/9/2022, eff. 3/11/2022)
§ 60-04 Procedures for Consideration of and Responses to Petitions.
When a Petition submitted in proper form is received, within 60 days from the
date the Petition was received, the Department must either:
   (a)   Deny such Petition in a written statement containing the reasons for
denial; or
   (b)   Approve the Petition and state in writing the Department's intention
to grant the Petition and to initiate Rulemaking by a specified date. The
Department is not required to grant the entirety of a Petition and is not bound
by the language proposed by Petitioner but may amend or modify such proposed
language at the Department's discretion.
(Added City Record 2/9/2022, eff. 3/11/2022)
Chapter 61: Public Hearings Held Pursuant to Administrative Code § 24-110
§ 61-01 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the following
meanings:
   Commissioner. The term "commissioner" means the commissioner of the
department, or his or her designee.
   Department. The term "department" means the department of environmental
protection.
(Added City Record 6/1/2022, eff. 7/1/2022)
§ 61-02 Public Hearing Procedures.
   a.   If a person files a written objection to a variance petition within
twenty-one days from the department's publication of a notice pursuant to
subdivision (c) of § 24-110 of the Administrative Code or if the commissioner
determines that a public hearing regarding such variance petition would be
advisable, the department shall hold a public hearing regarding such variance
petition.
   b.   The department shall post a notice regarding each variance petition
public hearing on its website. The following information shall be included in
each notice:
      1.   The date and time of the hearing;
      2.   The subject matter of the hearing, including a brief summary of the
variance petition;
      3.   Information regarding how to appear at the hearing, either in person
or by remote means; and
      4.   Information regarding how written comments can be submitted.
   c.   For a variance petition for which such a public hearing is held, the
commissioner shall consider all comments received at such hearing and submitted
in writing prior to such hearing before making a decision regarding whether to
grant such variance.
(Added City Record 6/1/2022, eff. 7/1/2022)
Chapter 62: Emissions Reduction Technologies for Existing Cook Stoves
§ 62-01 Definitions.
Access Point means that which enables a device, appliance or equipment to be
reached by ready access or by a means that first requires the removal or
movement of a panel, door or similar obstruction.
Air Filtration Device means a device composed of fibrous materials which
removes solid particulates.
CFM means cubic feet per minute.
Cook Stove means any wood fired or anthracite coal fired appliance used for the
preparation of food intended for onsite consumption or retail purchase.
Discharge Point means the point at which particulate matter is released from a
stack into the open air.
Electrostatic Precipitator (ESP) means a filtration device that removes fine
particles, such as dust and smoke, from a flowing gas using the force of an
induced electrostatic charge minimally impeding the flow of gases through the
unit. An ESP is a type of emissions control device.
Emissions Control Device means any equipment used for collecting or confining
particulate matter for the purpose of preventing or reducing the emission of
such particulate matter into the open air.
Existing means installed before May 6, 2016.
New means installed on or after May 6, 2016.
NFPA means National Fire Prevention Association.
Optical Particle Counter (OPC) means an instrument based on the principle of
light scattering from particles. It is a real time instrument that is used to
measure particles above 0.05 µm in diameter.
Particulate Matter (PM) means a complex mixture of tiny particles that consists
of dry solid fragments, solid cores with liquid coatings, and small droplets of
liquid. These particles vary greatly in shape, size and chemical composition,
and can be made up of many different materials such as metals, soot, soil, and
dust. PM 10 describes inhalable particles, with diameters that are generally 10
micrometers and smaller.
Peak Load means twenty percent additional solid fuel is added to the amount of
fuel that is normally used for cooking in the cook stove.
RH Correction Function refers to relative humidity correction. When this
function is enabled, the particle growth effect due to high humidity is
corrected by computing the mass concentration based on the original dry
environment particle population.
Smoke means small gas-borne and airborne particulate matter arising from a
process of combustion in sufficient number to be visible.
Stack means any duct, control equipment exhaust or similar apparatus, which
vents gases and/or PM into the open air.
Test Port Plate (TPP) means a template cover that is designed to prevent any of
the air stream from escaping when the existing access plate is removed and
which has an opening for the test probe to fit securely through the material
(e.g. cardboard or plexi-glass).
Total Suspended Particulates (TSP) means small airborne particles such as dust,
fume and smoke with diameters less than 100 µm.
Treated firewood shall have the same meaning as set forth in paragraph 13 of
section 192.5 of title 6 of the New York Code Rules and Regulations.
Underwriters Laboratories (UL) means an American worldwide safety consulting
and certification company.
Wet Scrubber System means any emission control device that mixes an aqueous
stream or slurry with the exhaust gases from an indirect heat exchanger to
control emissions of particulate matter (PM).
(Added City Record 10/27/2023, eff. 4/27/2024)
§ 62-02 Assessment to Determine Control Technology for Existing Cook Stoves.
   (a)   No person shall operate an existing cook stove that was installed
prior to May 6, 2016, without hiring a professional engineer or registered
architect licensed under Sections 7202 or 7302 of the Education Law to conduct
and submit a feasibility analysis of installing an Emissions Control Device as
set forth in this section to reduce such cook stove’s total PM emissions by 75
percent or more. The feasibility analysis must detail the Emission Control
Devices, if any, that can be installed be submitted to the Department within
one year of the effective date of this rule. A feasibility analysis is not
required if an emission control device that is on the Fire Department’s and the
Department’s approved list of emission control devices found at: https://
www.nyc.gov/assets/fdny/downloads/pdf/business/coa-pcus-and-air-cleaners.pdf
and https://www.nyc.gov/assets/dep/downloads/pdf/air/approved-cook-stove-
technology.pdf is installed.
   (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, if the assessment
submitted pursuant to subdivision (a) of this section determines that one or
more Emission Control Devices can be installed to reduce an existing cook
stove’s total PM emissions by 75 percent or more, the Emission Control Device,
or Emission Control Devices if more than one is required, must be installed
within 180 days of the date on which such assessment is submitted to the
Department. Any Emission Control Device that is installed must be certified by
the Department in accordance with 15 RCNY §
62-07 and installed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (c)   If the assessment submitted pursuant to subdivision (a) of this
section concludes that one or more Emission Control Devices can be installed to
reduce an existing cook stove’s total PM emissions by at least 25 percent but
less than 75 percent, such assessment must describe the Emissions Control
Devices that can be installed to achieve such reduction, and such Emissions
Control Devices shall be installed prior to operation of the cook stove in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter. After installation of such
Emission Control Devices, the operator must conduct another assessment in
accordance with subdivision (a) of this section within two years of the date on
which the Emission Control Devices were installed to determine if additional
Emission Control Devices can be installed to reduce such existing cook stove’s
total PM emissions by at least 75 percent.
   (d)   If the assessment concludes that no Emission Control Device can be
installed on an existing cook stove or that any Emission Control Devices that
can be installed cannot achieve a reduction of the existing cook stove’s total
PM emissions by at least 25 percent, the assessment must include an explanation
for this conclusion, and the applicant must submit a variance petition in
accordance with the procedures set forth in § 24-110 of the Administrative Code
of the City of New York.
(Added City Record 10/27/2023, eff. 4/27/2024)
§ 62-03 Control Devices to Reduce Emissions from Existing Cook Stoves.
The following are the approved technologies that may be used to achieve a 75
percent reduction in PM 10:
   (a)   Wet Scrubbers Systems and Air Filtration Devices must comply with UL
1978 (2010) and be correctly sized for the cooking appliance as specified by
the manufacturer of the cook stove.
   (b)   Electrostatic Precipitators must comply with UL 867 (2011) or UL 710
(2012), must have a certificate of approval from the Fire Department, and must
be correctly sized for the cooking appliance as specified by the manufacturer.
(Added City Record 10/27/2023, eff. 4/27/2024)
§ 62-04 Compliance Requirements.
   (a)   Existing cook stoves that are solid fuel-fired ovens must be certified
in accordance with UL 2162 (2001), “Outline of Investigation for Commercial
Wood-Fired Baking Ovens-Refractory Type” and comply with the New York City
Construction Codes.
   (b)   Fans that are used in conjunction with an Emissions Control Device
must be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 762 (2010) and UL 705 (2004).
   (c)   Where a Type I hood, as defined in the New York City Construction
Code, or other approved type of exhaust system acceptable by the Department of
Buildings, is installed, the exhaust system must be designed and constructed so
that the CFM rate of exhaust is equal to or greater than:
      (1)   The manufacturer’s UL listed exhaust rate for the extra heavy duty
class of appliance; and
      (2)   The lowest acceptable ventilation rate for the UL listed appliance
exhaust requirement.
   (d)   A Type I hood must comply with Section 507 of the New York City
Mechanical Code (2022). Listed and labeled UL solid fuel-fired ovens that are
constructed of solid masonry or reinforced Portland or refractory cement
concrete, that are vented by natural draft or a power chimney system in
accordance with NFPA 211 (2013) and that are installed in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions and NFPA 96 (2013) are exempt from using a Type I
hood.
   (e)   Only treated firewood, as defined in this rule, shall be used if the
fuel source is for the cook stove is wood.
(Added City Record 10/27/2023, eff. 4/27/2024)
§ 62-05 Testing Requirements for Emission Control Devices.
Field testing must be performed on any Emissions Control Device that is not
found on the preapproved list as set forth in 15 RCNY §
62-02 before it can be used to reduce emissions from an existing cook stove.
This one-time testing may be performed in the field using the following
procedures described in this paragraph or in the laboratory as specified in
paragraph two of this section. Those devices that meet the EPA specifications
will then be listed on the Department’s and the Fire Department’s approved list
and will not require field testing.
   (a)   Field Testing. 
      (1)   Emissions Reduction Standard. Field test data must show that the
Emissions Control Device has reduced the existing cook stove’s total PM
emissions by 75 percent or more except as set forth in subdivision (a) of 15
RCNY §
62-02.
      (2)   General Requirements. Field testing must be performed during peak
load, using an OPC or NIOSH 500 for TSP. Peak load assumes that unburnt wood or
anthracite coal is introduced at the start of the testing and that the same
composition of unburnt wood or coal and embers is maintained during the
testing. Sampling must be performed with the Emissions Control Device on and
off.
      (3)   Air Filtration Devices and Electrostatic Precipitators. 
         (A)   For AFDs or ESPs, when taking samples while the unit is on,
readings must be taken from within the clean out Access Point downstream of the
device, or at the Discharge Point. When taking samples while the unit is off,
samples must be taken upstream of the Emissions Control Device.
         (B)   A field tester must remove the access plate and replace with a
Test Port Plate and place the sampling probe inside a precut hole, or place the
probe directly within the Discharge Point.
         (C)   Samples must be taken using the OPC, and must be taken for ten
minutes at two liters per minute pump speed, twice with the unit on and twice
with the unit off. If the OPC is equipped with a filter assembly, a new glass
or PVC fiber filter must be used for each test. If the OPC is equipped with RH
correction function, it should be enabled when the humidity is expected to
exceed 50 percent.
      (4)   Wet Scrubbers Systems. 
         (A)   For Wet Scrubbers Systems, samples must be taken from within the
clean out Access Point or Discharge Point.
         (B)   A field tester must remove the access plate and replace with a
Test Port Plate and place the sampling probe inside through a cutout hole, or
place the sampling probe directly within the Discharge Point.
         (C)   A minimum 20 liter sample must be drawn into a 37mm glass or PVC
fiber filter. The sample should be drawn for ten minutes at two liters per
minute pump speed, twice with the unit on and twice with the unit off. Filters
should be changed for each test.
         (D)   Samples must be taken in accordance with the following sections
of NIOSH Method 0500, Issue 2, August 15, 2004: “Equipment” section (except
that a 37mm glass or PVC fiber filter should be used), “Preparation of Filters”
section, “Sampling” section (except that the total sample volume must be a
minimum 20 liters), and “Sample Preparation” section.
         (E)   The filters must then be collected and the weight of the filters
must be determined by an Industrial Hygienist in an EPA accredited laboratory.
   (b)   Laboratory Testing. Laboratory testing must be performed in a National
Environmental Laboratory Accreditation (NELAC) or New York State Department of
Health Environmental Laboratory Approval Program (ELAP) certified Laboratory
and must follow, EPA Method 5, Appendix A-3 to 40 C.F.R. Part 60 or Method 202,
Appendix M to 40 C.F.R. Part 51, for particulate matter. During each test,
samples must be collected from the outlet of the control device. Laboratory
test data must show that the Emissions Control Device has reduced the cook
stove’s total PM emissions by 75 percent or more, except as set forth in
subdivision (b) of 15 RCNY §
62-02.
   (c)   Reporting Requirements. 
      (1)   The results of the testing required by this section must be
submitted on forms prescribed by the Department available on the Department’s
website and must include the following information:
         (A)   Name and address of the manufacturer of the existing cook stove,
brand name, trade name, model number of the cook stove, any additional
equipment installed to enhance or support the operation of the Emissions
Control Device, the maximum air flow rate, and other relevant operating
conditions during the test, as specified by the department.
         (B)   A description of the Emissions Control Device used on the
existing cook stove model being certified.
         (C)   A statement that testing has been conducted in accordance with
the requirements of this section.
      (2)   Additional reporting requirements for field testing conducted in
accordance with paragraph one of subdivision (c) of this section. For AFDs and
ESPs, the installer of the Emissions Control Device must submit a printout to
the Department with the readings of TSP, and also submit pictures of the filter
with the unit on and off. For Wet Scrubber Systems, complete laboratory results
must be submitted to the Department to document the reduction in PM.
(Added City Record 10/27/2023, eff. 4/27/2024)
§ 62-06 Emissions Control Device and Cooking Exhaust System Maintenance.
   (a)   Any Emissions Control Device installed or operated under this chapter
must be operated, cleaned, and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer’s
specifications.
   (b)   Every Emissions Control Device installed or operated pursuant to this
chapter must be inspected, cleaned and serviced in accordance with Section
609.5.3 of the New York City Fire Code (2022) by a person holding a FDNY
Certificate of Fitness as a Commercial Kitchen Exhaust & Precipitator Cleaning
Technician.
   (c)   The cooking exhaust system must be inspected, cleaned and serviced in
accordance with Section 609.5.3 of the New York City Fire Code (2022) by a
person holding a FDNY Certificate of Fitness as a Commercial Kitchen Exhaust
System Cleaning Technician.
(Added City Record 10/27/2023, eff. 4/27/2024)
§ 62-07 Emissions Control Device Certification.
   (a)   The manufacturer of an Emissions Control Device may seek Department
certification by submitting documentation that field testing has been conducted
in accordance with the procedures in subdivision (a) of 15 RCNY §
62-05 and that such device meets the requirements of 15 RCNY §
62-02. Such documentation must be submitted in accordance with the requirements
of subdivision (c) of 15 RCNY §
62-05.
   (b)   Additionally, the manufacturer or owner of an Emissions Control Device
may seek Department certification by submitting documentation from an
independent testing laboratory that tests in accordance with an EPA accredited
laboratory testing method that the Emissions Control Device has been tested in
accordance with the procedures set forth in subdivision (b) of 15 RCNY §
62-05 and that such device meets the requirements of 15 RCNY §
62-02. Such documentation must be submitted in accordance with the requirements
of subdivision (c) of 15 RCNY §
62-05.
   (c)   The Department will maintain a list of approved certified Emissions
Control Devices for use with particular models of cook stoves on the
department’s website and will update the list periodically as necessary.
(Added City Record 10/27/2023, eff. 4/27/2024)
§ 62-08 Records.
   (a)   Recordkeeping. 
      (1)   On or after the effective date of this rule, any person who owns or
operates an existing cook stove must maintain records showing all maintenance
work performed on the Emissions Control Device, including the date, time, and a
brief description of maintenance work performed.
      (2)   On or after the effective date of this rule, any person who owns or
operates an existing cook stove must maintain records regarding the date of
installation and replacement of any Emissions Control Device installed to abate
emissions from the cook stove.
      (3)   For purposes of this subdivision, maintenance includes, but is not
limited to, preventative maintenance, breakdown repair, and cleaning performed
on the Emissions Control Device.
   (b)   Retention of Records. All records required by this section must be
retained for at least one year and must be made available to the Department
upon request.
(Added City Record 10/27/2023, eff. 4/27/2024)
Chapter 63: Stationary Engines
§ 63-01 Definitions.
Emergency Stationary Reciprocating Compression Ignition Combustion Engine means
the same as set forth in 40 C.F.R. 63.6640(f).
Selective Catalytic Reduction (SCR) Technology means a control device that
creates a chemical reduction via a reducing agent and a catalyst.
Stationary reciprocating compression ignition internal combustion engine (RICE)
means the same as set forth in 40 C.F.R. 60.4219.
(Added City Record 12/16/2024, eff. 1/15/2025)
§ 63-02 Requirements for Renewal of Certificate of Operation.
A certificate of operation for a stationary reciprocating compression ignition
combustion engine (RICE) that is required to obtain a certificate of operation
pursuant to section 24-122 of the Air Pollution Control Code may be renewed on
or after January 1, 2025, only if the RICE meets the Tier IV requirements set
forth in 40 C.F.R. 60.4201, or any subsequent United States Environmental
Protection Agency emissions standard for such engines that is at least as
stringent. The certification standards are set forth in Table 1 of 40 C.F.R.
1039.101. Compliance with the Tier IV requirement may be demonstrated by
submitting proof in a form satisfactory to the Department that SCR Technology
has been installed.
(Added City Record 12/16/2024, eff. 1/15/2025)
Chapter 64: Emissions Reduction Technologies for Existing Under-Fired
Commercial Char Broilers
§ 64-01 Definitions.
Access Point means that which enables a device, appliance or equipment to be
reached through ready access or by a means that first requires the removal or
movement of a panel, door or similar obstruction.
Air Filtration Device means a device composed of fibrous materials which
removes solid particulates.
CFM means cubic feet per minute.
Commercial char broiler means a device that consists primarily of a grated
grill and a heat source and that is used to cook meat, including beef, lamb,
pork, poultry, fish, and seafood, for human consumption at a food service
establishment, as such term is defined in 24 RCNY Health Code §
81.03.
Discharge Point means the point at which particulate matter is released from a
stack into the open air.
Electrostatic Precipitator (ESP) means a filtration device that removes fine
particles, such as dust and smoke, from a flowing gas using the force of an
induced electrostatic charge minimally impeding the flow of gases through the
unit. An ESP is a type of Emissions Control Device.
Emissions Control Device means any equipment used for collecting or confining
particulate matter for the purpose of preventing or reducing the emission of
such particulate matter into the open air.
Existing means that the commercial char broiler was installed before May 6,
2016.
Meat means tissue of an animal body that is used for food and includes, but is
not limited to, beef, lamb, pork, poultry, fish, or seafood.
Optical Particle Counter (OPC) means an instrument based on the principle of
light scattering from particles. It is a real-time instrument that is used to
measure particles above 0.05 micrometers in diameter.
Particulate Matter (PM) means any air- or gas-borne material, except water,
that exists as a liquid or solid. “PM 10” means PM with an aerodynamic diameter
equal to or less than 10 micrometers.
RH Correction Function refers to relative humidity correction. When this
function is enabled, the particle growth effect due to high humidity is
corrected by computing the mass concentration based on the original dry
environment particle population.
Smoke means small gas-borne and airborne particulate matter arising from a
process of combustion in sufficient quantity to be visible.
Stack means any duct, control equipment exhaust, or similar apparatus, which
vents gases or particulate matter into the open air.
Test Port Plate means a template cover that is designed to prevent any of the
air stream from escaping when the existing access plate is removed and which
has an opening for the test probe to fit securely through the material (e.g.
cardboard or Plexiglas).
Total Suspended Particulates means small airborne particles such as dust, fume
and smoke with diameters less than 100 micrometers.
Under-fired commercial char broiler means a commercial char broiler that has a
grill, a high temperature radiant surface, and a heat source that is located
below the food.
Underwriters Laboratories (UL) means an American worldwide safety consulting
and certification company.
Week means a period of 7 consecutive days starting on Sunday, unless a
different start day is specified in the registration filed pursuant to § 24-109
of the Administrative Code.
Wet Scrubber System means any Emissions Control Device that mixes an aqueous
stream or slurry with the exhaust gases from an indirect heat exchanger to
control emissions of particulate matter.
(Added City Record 5/20/2025, eff. 11/20/2025)
§ 64-02 Emissions Control Technologies Required for Existing Under-Fired
Commercial Char Broilers and Assessment.
   (a)   No person shall operate an existing under-fired commercial char
broiler that was installed prior to May 6, 2016, to cook more than 875 pounds
of meat per week unless an Emissions Control Device that meets the requirements
of this chapter has been installed. The Emissions Control Device to be used
must have either been tested and certified in accordance with 15 RCNY §
64-05 and be on the Fire Department’s and the Department’s approved list of
Emissions Control Devices found at: https://www.nyc.gov/assets/dep/downloads/
pdf/air/approved-under-fired-technology.pdf (“certified”) or have passed a
site-specific field test that complies with the requirements of 15 RCNY §
64-06. The field test must demonstrate that a 75 percent PM emissions reduction
is achievable or that the measured PM concentration after the Emissions Control
Device is installed is no higher than 10 mg/m 3 .
   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the Emissions Control Device
must be installed within 180 days of the effective date of this rule.
   (b)   If an owner cannot install an Emissions Control Device on the
certified list or a non-certified Emissions Control Device that meets the
requirements of this chapter, the owner must retain a professional engineer or
registered architect licensed under sections 7202 or 7302 of the Education Law
who shall conduct and submit an assessment. The assessment must detail the
technical limitations of installing an Emissions Control Device, the financial
limitations of the owner, and why they preclude the installation of an
Emissions Control Device that meet the requirements of this chapter. The
assessment must be submitted to the Department within one year of the effective
date of this rule.
   (c)   If the assessment submitted pursuant to subdivision (b) of this
section concludes that an Emissions Control Device can be installed to reduce
an existing under-fired commercial char broiler’s total PM emissions by at
least 25 percent but less than 75 percent with the controlled emission being
above 10 mg/m 3 for total PM, such assessment must describe the Emissions
Control Device that can be installed to achieve such reduction. After
installation of such Emissions Control Device, the owner must conduct another
assessment in accordance with subdivision (b) of this section within two years
of the date on which the Emissions Control Device was installed to determine if
additional or different Emissions Control Devices can be installed to reduce
total PM emissions by at least 75 percent or to reduce total PM emissions to
less than or equal to 10 mg/m 3 .
   (d)   If the assessment concludes that no Emissions Control Device can be
installed on an existing under-fired commercial char broiler or that any
Emissions Control Device that could be installed cannot achieve a reduction of
the existing under-fired commercial char broiler’s total PM emissions by at
least 25 percent or achieve a controlled emission level of less than or equal
to 10 mg/m 3 , the assessment must include a technical and economic evaluation
as described in subdivision (b), and the applicant must submit a variance
petition in accordance with the procedures set forth in § 24-110 of the
Administrative Code of the City of New York.
(Added City Record 5/20/2025, eff. 11/20/2025)
§ 64-03 Types of Control Devices.
Only the following technologies may be used to achieve the reduction in PM 10:
   (a)   Wet Scrubbers Systems and Air Filtration Devices must comply with UL
1978 (2010) and be correctly sized for the cooking appliance as specified by
the manufacturer of the under-fired commercial char broiler.
   (b)   Electrostatic Precipitators must comply with UL 867 (2011) or UL 8782
(2017), must have a certificate of approval from the Fire Department, and must
be correctly sized for the cooking appliance as specified by the manufacturer.
   (c)   Air Filtration Devices such as a carbon cartridge.
   (d)   Other technology approved by the Department as posted on the
Department’s website.
(Added City Record 5/20/2025, eff. 11/20/2025)
§ 64-04 Emissions Control Device Certification
   (a)   The manufacturer of an Emissions Control Device may seek Department
certification by submitting documentation that field testing has been conducted
in accordance with the procedures in subdivisions (a) and (b) of 15 RCNY §
64-05. Such documentation must be submitted in accordance with the requirements
of subdivision (c) of 15 RCNY §
64-05.
   (b)   The Department will maintain a list of certified Emissions Control
Devices for use with particular models of under-fired commercial char broilers
on the Department’s website and will update the list when there are changes.
(Added City Record 5/20/2025, eff. 11/20/2025)
§ 64-05 Testing Requirements for Certification.
   (a)   Test Methods. Testing for filterable and condensable particulate
matter must be performed following Environmental Protection Agency Method 5,
Appendix A-3 to 40 C.F.R. Part 60, or South Coast Air Quality Management
District Method 5.1.
   (b)   Test Conditions. Tests pursuant to this section must be administered
under the following test conditions derived from ASTM International Standard
Test Method F 1695-20. Other provisions contained within ASTM F 1695-20, but
not listed here, may be used for guidance. It is recommended that the full
provisions of ASTM F 1695-20 be consulted prior to testing.
      (i)   The Emissions Control Device must have been installed per
manufacturer specifications.
      (ii)   The Emissions Control Device must be tested using the heavy load
cooking test specifications from ASTM F 1695-20.
         a.   The exhaust hood must have the capacity to operate at a nominal
net exhaust ventilation rate of 400 CFM for each linear foot of active hood
length. The hood must extend over the surface of the under-fired commercial
char broiler by at least 6 inches in the front and sides.
         b.   The under-fired commercial char broiler must be warmed up for a
minimum of 30 minutes before testing and the char broiler controls must be set
such that the broiling area does not exceed 600 degrees Fahrenheit.
         c.   Pure beef finished grind hamburgers of 0.33 lbs each must be
cooked on the under-fired commercial char broiler during testing. The patties
must be shaped into 0.625-inch thick round patties of 5-inch diameter.
         d.   The patties must consist of 18 - 22% fat by weight and 58 - 62%
moisture.
         e.   Hamburger patties must be loaded, cooked, and removed in
accordance with Section 10 of ASTM International Test Method F 1695-20 using
heavy load conditions.
   (c)   Reporting. The results of the testing required by this section must be
submitted on forms prescribed by the Department available on the Department’s
website and must include the following information:
      (i)   Name and address of the manufacturer of the under-fired commercial
char broiler, brand name, trade name, model number of the under-fired
commercial char broiler, any accoutrements installed to enhance or support the
operation of the Emissions Control Device, the maximum air flow rate, and other
relevant operating conditions during the test, as specified by the Department.
      (ii)   A description of the certified Emissions Control Device used on
the under-fired commercial char broiler model.
      (iii)   A statement that testing has been conducted in accordance with
the requirements of this section.
(Added City Record 5/20/2025, eff. 11/20/2025)
§ 64-06 Field Testing Requirements for Emission Control Devices That Are Not
Certified.
Field testing must be performed on any Emissions Control Device that is not
found on the certified emissions control list established pursuant to 15 RCNY §
64-04(b) before such Emissions Control Device may be used. This one-time
testing must comply with the requirements of this section. Approval is specific
to the location where the test was performed. The test must demonstrate that
the Emissions Control Device achieved at least a 75 percent emissions reduction
or resulted in controlled emissions no higher than 10 mg/m 3 to be approved by
the Department.
   (a)   Test methods. Tests must be performed using the OPC Method or the
NIOSH 0500 Method. AFDs or ESPs must be used with the OPC method. Wet Scrubber
Systems, ESPs, and Air Filtration Devices must be used with the NIOSH 0500
Method. The test conditions of 15 RCNY §
64-05(b) must be complied with for all methods.
   (b)   Sampling locations for all methods. For AFDs or ESPs, when taking
samples while the char broiler unit is on, readings must be taken from within
the clean out Access Point downstream of the device, or at the Discharge Point.
When taking samples while the unit is off, samples must be taken upstream of
the Emissions Control Device. When the Emissions Control Device upstream Access
Point is not reachable, the test must be conducted at a downstream Access Point
or at the chimney output point. A field tester must remove the access plate and
replace with a Test Port Plate and place the sampling probe inside a precut
hole or place the probe directly within the Discharge Point.
   (c)   Flow rate and volume for OPC samples. Samples taken using OPC must be
taken for a minimum of ten minutes at two liters per minute pump speed, or if
the flow rate is not adjustable using the constant flow, but no more than 2 L/
min. This procedure must be done with two to four samples collected with the
unit on and two to four samples with the unit off. If the OPC is equipped with
a filter assembly, a new glass or PVC fiber filter must be used for each test.
If the OPC is equipped with RH Correction Function, it should be enabled when
the humidity is expected to exceed 50 percent.
   (d)   Protocols for NIOSH samples. 
      (i)   A minimum 20-liter sample must be drawn into a 37 mm glass or PVC
fiber filter. The sample should be drawn for a minimum of ten minutes at two
liters per minute pump speed, with two to four samples collected with the unit
on and two to four samples with the unit off. Filters should be changed for
each test.
      (ii)   Samples must be taken in accordance with the following sections of
NIOSH Method 0500, Issue 2, August 15, 2004: “Equipment” section (except that a
37 mm glass or PVC fiber filter should be used), “Preparation of Filters”
section, “Sampling” section (except that the total sample volume must be a
minimum 20 liters), and “Sample Preparation” section. The filters must then be
collected, and the weight of the filters must be certified by an Industrial
Hygienist in an accredited laboratory.
      (iii)   Laboratory Testing. Laboratory testing must be performed in a
National Environmental Laboratory Accreditation (NELAC) or New York State
Department of Health Environmental Laboratory Approval Program (ELAP) certified
laboratory and must follow measurements for nuisance dust as per the NIOSH 0500
method. During each test, samples must be collected from the sampling port of
the Emissions Control Device.
   (e)   Reporting for all methods. For OPC, the installer of the Emissions
Control Device must submit a printout to the Department with the readings of
Total PM and submit pictures of the filter with the unit on and off. For NIOSH
0500, complete laboratory results certified by an Industrial Hygienist must be
submitted to the Department to document the reduction in PM. The owner must
submit a report for site-specific testing that will include a project and test
condition description, diagram of the sampling location with the cooking
equipment and emissions control information, results of testing either printout
readings from Total PM from OPC or laboratory results for NIOSH 0500, any
supporting information including calculations, photos, and a conclusion.
(Added City Record 5/20/2025, eff. 11/20/2025)
§ 64-07 Emissions Control Device and Cooking Exhaust System Maintenance.
   (a)   Any Emissions Control Device subject to the requirements of this
chapter must be installed, operated, cleaned, and maintained in accordance with
the manufacturer’s specifications.
   (b)   Every Emissions Control Device subject to the requirements of this
chapter must be inspected, cleaned and serviced in accordance with section
609.5.3 of the New York City Fire Code (2022 or subsequent standard) by a
person holding a FDNY Certificate of Fitness as a Commercial Kitchen Exhaust &
Precipitator Cleaning Technician.
   (c)   The cooking exhaust system must be inspected, cleaned and serviced in
accordance with section 609.5.3 of the New York City Fire Code (2022 or
subsequent standard) by a person holding a FDNY Certificate of Fitness as a
Commercial Kitchen Exhaust System Cleaning Technician.
   (d)   Recordkeeping. On or after the effective date of this rule, any person
who owns or operates an existing under-fired commercial char broiler must
maintain, for at least one year, records showing date of installation of and
all maintenance work performed on the Emissions Control Device, including the
date, time, and a brief description of maintenance work performed. For purposes
of this subdivision, maintenance includes, but is not limited to, preventative
maintenance, breakdown repair, and cleaning. Such records shall be made
available to the Department upon request.
(Added City Record 5/20/2025, eff. 11/20/2025)
Chapter 65: Water Penalty Schedule
§ 65-01 Water Penalty Schedule.
All citations preceded by “Admin. Code” are to the New York City Administrative
Code. All other citations are to
Title 15 of the Rules of the City of New York.
* If a respondent charged with a violation of 15 RCNY §
20-04(e) submits the annual test report by the first hearing date, the penalty
shall be mitigated from $500 to $50. For 15 RCNY §
20-04(e), the possibility of such mitigation exists only in connection with the
first summons issued to a given respondent.
Pursuant to 48 RCNY §
3-17, a late admit fee of $30.00 will be added to all the below listed
penalties for a failure to submit a payment by mail, as per 48 RCNY §
6-09(a), within 30 days of the mailing date of the default order issued against
respondent.
Section               Description                                       Penalty    Default
                     Stage I Water Shortage Emergency
Admin. Code § 24-337 Waste of city water (commercial or industrial)    $400       $1,000
Admin. Code § 24-337 Waste of city water (residential)                 $250       $1,000
15 RCNY §            Failure to post "Save Water" signs                $100       $1,000
21-06
15 RCNY §            Failure to post Water-Conserving Irrigation       $100       $1,000
21-07                 System sign
15 RCNY §            Improper use of well water                        $250       $1,000
21-08
15 RCNY §            Allowing leak or waste of water from faucets,     $250       $1,000
21-09(a)(1)           valves, pipes etc.
15 RCNY §            Using public water to wash vehicles.              $250       $1,000
21-09(a)(2)
15 RCNY §            Using water to spray or wash sidewalk, street     $250       $1,000
21-09(a)(3)
15 RCNY §            Using any water for ornamental purposes           $250       $1,000
21-09(a)(4)
15 RCNY §            Using water for lawns, golf course, plants, trees $250       $1,000
21-09(a)(5)
15 RCNY §            Illegal use of fire hydrants                      $750       $1,000
21-09(a)(6)
15 RCNY §            Serving water without request                     $250       $1,000
21-09(a)(7)
15 RCNY §            Use of public water for pools                     $250       $1,000
21-09(a)(8)
                     Stage II Water Shortage Emergency
Admin. Code § 24-337 Waste of city water (commercial or industrial)    $500       $1,000
Admin. Code § 24-337 Waste of city water (residential)                 $350       $1,000
15 RCNY §            Failure to post "Save Water" signs                $200       $1,000
21-06
15 RCNY §            Failure to post Water-Conserving Irrigation       $200       $1,000
21-07                 System sign
15 RCNY §            Improper use of well water                        $350       $1,000
21-08
15 RCNY §            Allowing leak or waste of water from faucets,     $350       $1,000
21-10(a)(1)           valves, pipes etc.
15 RCNY §            Using public water to wash vehicles               $350       $1,000
21-10(a)(2)
15 RCNY §            Using water to spray or wash sidewalk, street     $350       $1,000
21-10(a)(3)
15 RCNY §            Using any water for ornamental purposes           $350       $1,000
21-10(a)(4)
15 RCNY §            Using water for lawns, golf course, plants, trees $350       $1,000
21-10(a)(5)
15 RCNY §            Illegal use of fire hydrants                      $750       $1,000
21-10(a)(6)
15 RCNY §            Serving water without request                     $350       $1,000
21-10(a)(7)
15 RCNY §            Use of public water for pools                     $350       $1,000
21-10(a)(8)
                     Stage III Water Shortage Emergency
Admin. Code § 24-337 Waste of city water (commercial or industrial)    $600       $1,000
Admin. Code § 24-337 Waste of city water (residential)                 $450       $1,000
15 RCNY §            Failure to post "Save Water" signs                $300       $1,000
21-06
15 RCNY §            Failure to post Water-Conserving Irrigation       $400       $1,000
21-07                 System sign
15 RCNY §            Improper use of well water                        $550       $1,000
21-08
15 RCNY §            Allowing leak or waste of water from faucets,     $550       $1,000
21-11(a)(1)           valves, pipes etc.
15 RCNY §            Using public water to wash vehicles               $550       $1,000
21-11(a)(2)
15 RCNY §            Using water to spray or wash sidewalk, street     $550       $1,000
21-11(a)(3)
15 RCNY §            Using any water for ornamental purposes           $550       $1,000
21-11(a)(4)
15 RCNY §            Using water for lawns, golf course, plants, trees $550       $1,000
21-11(a)(5)
15 RCNY §            Illegal use of fire hydrants                      $750       $1,000
21-11(a)(6)
15 RCNY §            Serving water without request                     $550       $1,000
21-11(a)(7)
15 RCNY §            Use of public water for pools                     $950       $1,000
21-11(a)(8)
15 RCNY §            Use of non-air cooled air conditioning system     $550       $1,000
21-11(a)(9)           using public water with temperature below 79° F.
                     Other Water Regulations
Admin. Code § 24-    Illegal discharge of fracking waste               $2,500     $10,000
303.1
Admin. Code § 24-308 Illegal Use of Hydrant(s)                         $750       $1,000
Admin. Code § 24-337 Illegal waste of water (Residential)              $250       $1,000
Admin. Code § 24-339 Distribution/Sale/Imp ort/Installation of water   $475       $1,000
                      wasting plumbing fixtures
Admin. Code § 24-346 Failed to comply with Commissioner's Order        $750       $1,000
(b)
15 RCNY §            Plumbing work w/o permit                          $250       $1,000
20-01(b)(1)
15 RCNY §            Failed to produce permit on demand                $150       $1,000
20-01(e)
15 RCNY §            Failed to obtain/return emergency permit          $250       $1,000
20-01(f)
15 RCNY §            Unlawful connection to City main                  $700       $1,000
20-02(b)
15 RCNY §            Failed to protect curb valve/box from damage      $250       $1,000
20-03(k)(4)
15 RCNY §            Failed to replace old service pipes upon          $250       $1,000
20-03(w)              establishment of new water service
15 RCNY §            Failed to install meter on unmetered property
20-03(x)              when service pipe is replaced/repaired/rela id/   $350       $1,000
                      installed
15 RCNY §            Failed to install a backflow preventer or submit  $700       $1,000
20-04(d)              initial test report
                                                                        $500 or
15 RCNY §            Failed to submit an annual test report for a      mitigation $1,000
20-04(e)              backflow preventer                                penalty of
                                                                        $50*
15 RCNY §            Removed / swapped / bypassed backflow device      $700       $1,000
20-04(i)              without DEP approval
15 RCNY §            No meter in place                                 $250       $1,000
20-05(a)
15 RCNY §            Meter repair/removal w/o permit                   $350       $1,000
20-05(b)(1)
15 RCNY §            Failed to return meter permit                     $350       $1,000
20-05(b)(2)
15 RCNY §            No reading receptacle for remote pad              $250       $1,000
20-05(d)(5)
15 RCNY §            Improper size/type of meter                       $250       $1,000
20-05(g)
15 RCNY §            Meter not readily accessible                      $250       $1,000
20-05(i)(1)
15 RCNY §            Improper setting of meter                         $250       $1,000
20-05(i)(2) - (12)
15 RCNY §            Failed to design meter setting to ensure          $150       $1,000
20-05(i)(12)          electrical continuity
15 RCNY §            Prohibited meter bypass                           $500       $1,000
20-05(j)
15 RCNY §            Improper meter pit / box / vault construction     $350       $1,000
20-05(k)
15 RCNY §            Failed to install new meter after unpermitted     $750       $1,000
20-05(m)(1)           disconnection of old meter
15 RCNY §            Breaking seal on equipment w/o permit             $500       $1,000
20-05(n)
15 RCNY §            Inadequate protection of meter/remote receptacle  $250       $1,000
20-05(p)              / AMR Transmitter / wiring
15 RCNY §            Relocated remote receptacle or AMR transmitter    $250       $1,000
20-05(p)(2)           without permit
15 RCNY §            Failed to submit photo of meter to DEP            $350       $1,000
20-05(t)
15 RCNY §            A.C./refrigeration violation                      $350       $1,000
20-06
15 RCNY §            Failed to submit self-certification of domestic   $250       $1,000
20-07(c)              water service pipe installation
15 RCNY §            Lawn / garden watering prohibited time/manner     $150       $1,000
20-08(a)(6)
15 RCNY §            Sidewalk flushing prohibited time / manner        $150       $1,000
20-08(a)(7)
15 RCNY §            Prohibited use of water for car washing           $150       $1,000
20-08(a)(9)
15 RCNY §            Failed to install backflow preventer on hose      $300       $600
20-08(b)(4)           connected to fire hydrant
15 RCNY               Violation of miscellaneous rules regarding use    $150       $1,000
Chapter 20            and supply of water
                     Drilling & Excavation Rules
15 RCNY §            Drilling or excavating in restricted area without $900       $1,000
57-03                 permit
15 RCNY §            Violating general condition(s) of drilling /      $900       $1,000
57-05(b)              excavation permit
15 RCNY §            Failure to notify DEP 30 days prior to            $900       $1,000
57-05(b)(1)           commencement of drilling or excavation
15 RCNY §            Failure to drill/excavate only to depth specified $900       $1,000
57-05(b)(2)           in permit
15 RCNY §            Failure to abandon and/or seal any unpermitted
57-05(b)(3) and (b)   borehole or well                                  $900       $1,000
(5)
15 RCNY §            Failure to abandon and/or fill any unpermitted
57-05(b)(4) and (b)   excavation                                        $900       $1,000
(6)
15 RCNY §            Failure to use blowout preventer when required    $900       $1,000
57-05(b)(7)
15 RCNY §            Failure to provide required, certified
57-05(b)(10)          documentation within 30 days of completion of     $900       $1,000
                      drilling or excavation
15 RCNY §            Failure to conduct required deviation survey      $900       $1,000
57-05(b)(11)
 
(Added City Record 7/2/2025, eff. 8/1/2025)
Chapter 66: Interim Flood Risk Area Map
* Editor's note: Rule as originally published in the City Record numbered this
as Chapter 65; renumbered at the discretion of the editor.
§ 66-01 Definitions.*
10-year rainfall flood risk area. The term “10-year rainfall flood risk area”
means an area designated on a map promulgated by the department of
environmental protection that represents locations in the city where there is a
10 percent chance or greater of rainfall-induced flooding in any year,
incorporating the impacts of the projected 2050 sea level rise on sewer
outfalls and storm drains as projected by the New York city panel on climate
change, with the addition of a 50-foot wide area around the perimeter to
account for the margin of uncertainty inherent in such projections.
Coastal flood risk area. The term “coastal flood risk area” means an area
designated on a map promulgated by the department of environmental protection
that represents locations in the city where there is a 1 percent chance or
greater of flooding in any year, incorporating the impacts of sea level rise as
projected for the year 2080 by the New York City panel on climate change,
provided that if such panel provides projections for baseline years later in
time to 2080 then such baseline years may be adopted by rule for the purposes
of this definition. In initially determining such area, the department, in
consultation with other relevant agencies as described in Administrative Code §
24-809(b), shall consider the federal emergency management agency coastal flood
mapping data that defines the current 100-year floodplain, and the best
available data, as determined by the department and such agencies, including
90th percentile projections from the New York city panel on climate change and
any other data determined to be reasonable, that reflects the 1 percent chance
or greater of flooding in any year.
(Added City Record 9/23/2025, eff. 9/23/2025)
§ 66-02 Purpose and Applicability
DEP adopts as an
appendix to this chapter an interim flood risk area map showing the 10-year
rainfall flood risk area and the coastal flood risk area. This interim map is
also posted on the department’s website. The 10-year rainfall flood risk area
and the coastal flood risk area, as delineated on the interim map, will serve
as a reference for the New York City Department of Buildings to determine
allowable locations of ancillary dwelling units (ADUs), including backyard
ancillary dwelling units, in accordance with the New York City Building Code
Appendix U Section BC U202 and Zoning Resolution § 12-10. A property lot is
within the 10-year rainfall flood risk area or coastal flood risk area when all
or any portion of the lot is within such mapped area.
(Added City Record 9/23/2025, eff. 9/23/2025)
Appendix
The Interim Flood Risk Area Map included in this Appendix is adopted as a
reference standard, and is available at https://nyc.gov/dep/floodriskmap.
(Added City Record 9/23/2025, eff. 9/23/2025)
