Chapter 57: Department of Environmental Protection
Section 1401. Department; commissioner.
There shall be a department of environmental protection, the head of which
shall be the commissioner of environmental protection.
Section 1402. Deputies.
The commissioner may appoint three deputies.
Section 1403. Powers and duties of the commissioner.
Except as otherwise provided by law, the commissioner shall have charge and
control of and be responsible for all those functions and operations of the
city relating to the provision of a pure, wholesome and adequate supply of
water, the disposal of sewage and the prevention of air, water and noise
pollution, and shall be authorized to respond to emergencies caused by releases
or threatened releases of hazardous substances and to collect and manage
information concerning the amount, location and nature of hazardous substances.
Each inspector or other employee of the department who issues notices of
violation shall, for provisions of law that are enforced exclusively by the
department, have access at the time that a violation is issued to equipment
allowing such person: (1) to determine if such violation is a first-time
violation of the applicable provision of law, and (2) if permitted by law, to
issue a warning for such violation and to record that such a warning has been
issued. The powers and duties of the commissioner shall include, without
limitation, the following:
   a.   Water resources control.
      (1)   The commissioner shall have charge and control of:
         (a)   All structures and property connected with the supply and
distribution of water for public use not owned by private corporations,
including all fire and drinking hydrants and all water meters;
         (b)   Furnishing the water supply and maintaining its quality, and of
the investigation for and the construction of all works necessary to deliver
the proper and required quality of water with ample reserve for contingencies
and future demands; and
         (c)   Making and enforcing rules and regulations governing and
restricting the use and supply of water;
      (2)   The commissioner shall examine into the sources of water supply of
any private companies supplying the city or any portion thereof or its
inhabitants with water to see that the same is wholesome and the supply is
adequate, to establish such rules and regulations in respect thereof as are
reasonable and necessary for the convenience of the public and to exercise
superintendence, regulation and control in respect to the supply of water by
such water companies.
   b.   Sewage control.
      (1)   The commissioner shall have charge and control over the location,
construction, alteration, repair, maintenance and operation of all sewers
including intercepting sewers and sewage disposal plants, and of all matters in
the several boroughs relating to public sewers and drainage, and shall initiate
and make all plans for drainage and shall have charge of all public and private
sewers in accordance with such plans; and shall have charge of the management,
care and maintenance of sewer and drainage systems therein. In addition, the
commissioner shall have the authority to supervise and adopt rules regarding
private sewage disposal systems, other than community private sewage disposal
systems, and to prescribe civil penalties for the violation of such rules of no
more than ten thousand dollars per violation, and, except as otherwise provided
in section
six hundred forty-three of this charter, to issue permits pursuant to such
rules for the construction and maintenance of such private sewage disposal
systems. With regard to community private sewage disposal systems, the
commissioner shall have the authority to perform inspections, and to issue
notices of violation for violations of any provision of the New York city
health code relating to private sewage disposal, which shall be served and
returnable as provided by law for violations of the New York city health code,
and the power to perform such other duties with regard to the supervision and
regulation of such systems as may be lawfully delegated to him or her by the
board of health or department of health and mental hygiene.
      (2)   The commissioner may adopt regulations requiring the discharge of
sewage, refuse, factory waste and trade waste into the public sewers of the
city, or regulating, restricting or prohibiting the use of public sewers for
the discharge therein of any material or substance and may prescribe civil
penalties for the violation thereof.
      (3)   Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to limit the
authority or powers of the commissioner of health and mental hygiene, the
department of health and mental hygiene, or the board of health relating to the
declaration or abatement of nuisances, or the enforcement of applicable public
health laws or rules.
   b-1.   Water pollution control. 
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided by law and subject to the provisions
of this chapter, the commissioner shall have the power to administer and
enforce provisions of law, rules and regulations relating to the management and
control of discharges and runoff from public and private property, including
but not limited to stormwater discharges; regulate and control discharges into
water within and about the city of New York of harmful or objectionable
substances, contaminants and pollutants that may have an adverse impact on
waters of the state; enforce all laws, rules and regulations with respect to
discharges described in this paragraph; make such investigations and studies as
may be desirable for the purpose of such enforcement and of controlling and
eliminating pollution of waters within and about the city of New York; and, for
the purposes set forth in this paragraph, compel the attendance of witnesses
and take such witnesses' testimony under oath.
      (2)   The commissioner shall have the power to coordinate the actions of
city agencies with respect to compliance with the state pollutant discharge
elimination system (SPDES) permit for municipal separate storm sewer systems of
New York city, SPDES No. NY-0287890 or its successor.
      (3)   City agencies shall have the power to take such actions, including
but not limited to the promulgation of rules, as they determine to be necessary
to ensure compliance with the provisions of the state pollutant discharge
elimination system (SPDES) permit for municipal separate storm sewer systems of
New York city, SPDES No. NY-0287890 or its successor, and with provisions of
law related thereto.
   c.   Air resources control. The commissioner shall regulate and control the
emission into the open air of harmful or objectionable substances, including,
but not limited to, smoke, soot, dust, fumes, flyash, gas vapors, odors and any
products of combustion or incomplete combustion resulting from the use of fuel
burning equipment or from the heating of fuels or refuse. The commissioner
shall enforce all laws, rules and regulations with respect to such emissions
and shall make such investigations and studies as may be desirable for the
purpose of such enforcement and of controlling and eliminating air pollution,
and for such purpose shall have the power to compel the attendance of witnesses
and to take their testimony under oath.
   d.   Noise pollution control. The commissioner shall enforce all laws, rules
and regulations to eliminate noise pollution. The commissioner shall make
investigations and studies to develop permissible sound levels and to correct
problems related to noise control, and, for such purposes, shall have power to
compel the attendance of witnesses and to take their testimony under oath.
   e.   Review of environmental consequences of certain activities. The
commissioner shall review and comment upon the environmental consequences of
any activity requiring the approval of any agency of the city where such
activity may have a significant impact on the physical aspects of the
environment of the city, and shall be responsible for investigating, evaluating
and reporting upon activities related to fuel supply and demand, alternative
sources of energy, and resource recovery.
   f.   Reserved. 
   g.   Energy conservation and alternative fuels. The commissioner shall
participate in formulating an energy policy for the city, including assessing
the environmental costs and factors associated with all kinds of energy use and
programs developed to meet energy needs. The commissioner shall study,
establish, organize, promote, coordinate and carry out policies, activities,
projects and programs designed to encourage fuel and energy conservation,
alternate sources of fuel and energy and encourage, stimulate and foster others
to participate in such projects, programs and activities.
   h.   Emergency response. The commissioner shall have the power to respond to
emergencies caused by releases or threatened releases of hazardous substances
into the environment. The commissioner may (1) implement any response measures
deemed to be necessary to protect the public health or welfare or the
environment from a release or threat of release, (2) order responsible persons
to undertake response measures, and (3) recover the costs of response measures
incurred by the department from the responsible persons.
   i.   Community right-to-know. The commissioner shall have the power to
collect, compile and manage information concerning the amount, location and
nature of hazardous substances present in the city. This information shall be
made available to city personnel responsible for responding to emergencies
involving hazardous substances and the public.
(Am. L.L. 2017/097, 5/30/2017, eff. 6/29/2017; Am. L.L. 2021/159, 12/24/2021,
eff. 6/22/2022; Am. L.L. 2023/068, 5/29/2023, eff. 6/28/2023)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Administrative Code
Appendix A at L.L. 1987/042, L.L. 1988/026, L.L. 1990/071, L.L. 1991/050, and
L.L. 1996/065.
Section 1404. Office of environmental remediation.
There shall be an office of environmental remediation within the department.
The office shall be headed by the director of the office of environmental
remediation in accordance with subdivision e of section
fifteen of the New York city charter. The office shall exercise such powers and
duties as the director shall determine, including, but not limited to, the
power and duty to administer the E-Designation program, as defined in section
11-15 of the zoning resolution of the city of New York.
Editor's note: Former Section 1404, environmental control board, renumbered as
Section
1049-a.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Administrative Code
Appendix A at L.L. 2008/035 and L.L. 2009/027.
Section 1405. Borough commissioners.
   a.   For each borough, the commissioner of environmental protection shall
assign a borough commissioner, who shall:
      1.   Inform the commissioner of environmental protection regarding
programs, personnel, and facilities within the borough to which such borough
commissioner is assigned; and
      2.   Consult when appropriate with the relevant borough president, other
borough commissioners of the department and community boards.
   b.   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the commissioner of
environmental protection from assigning as borough commissioner under this
section an employee who is also assigned to a position in the department
pursuant to subdivision f of section
2704 or subdivision a of section
2706.
(L.L. 2022/023, 1/9/2022, eff. 4/9/2022)
