Title 17: Health
Chapter 1: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
§ 17-101 Definitions.
Whenever used in this title the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   (a)   "Board" means the board of health.
   (b)   "Commissioner" means the commissioner of the department of health and
mental hygiene.
   (c)   "Department" means the department of health and mental hygiene.
§ 17-102 Secretary; certification by chief clerk.
   a.   The secretary of the department, subject to the direction of the
commissioner, shall keep and authenticate the acts, records, papers and
proceedings of the department, preserve its books and papers, conduct its
correspondence, and aid generally in accomplishing the purposes of the
department.
   b.   Papers certified by the chief clerk of the department or by an
assistant chief clerk shall be of the same effect as evidence and otherwise, as
if certified by the secretary.
§ 17-103 Proofs and affidavits.
Proofs, affidavits and examinations as to any matter under the jurisdiction of
the department may be taken by or before the board or other person as the
commissioner or board shall authorize. The commissioner, the secretary and any
member of the department, shall, severally have authority to administer oaths
in such matters.
§ 17-104 Measures to prevent the spread of disease.
   a.   It shall be the duty of the department:
      1.   To cause any avenue, street, alley or other passage whatever, to be
fenced up or otherwise inclosed if it shall deem the public safety requires it,
and to adopt suitable measures for preventing all persons from going to any
part of the city so inclosed;
      2.   To forbid all communication with the house or family infected with
any communicable disease except by means of physicians, nurses or messengers to
carry the necessary advice, medicines and provisions to the afflicted;
      3.   To adopt such means for preventing all communication between any
part of the city infected with a disease of communicable character and all
other parts of the city, as shall be prompt and effectual.
   b.   Failure to comply with the provisions adopted by the department
pursuant to this section shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine
of not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars, or imprisonment not exceeding six
months, or both.
§ 17-105 Commercial paper during epidemic; duties of city clerk.
   a.   Whenever the board of health, by public notice, shall designate any
portion or district of the city as being the seat of any infectious or
contagious disease, and declare communication with such portion or district to
be dangerous, or shall prohibit such communication, the city clerk, during the
continuance of such disease in such district, shall provide and keep in his or
her office a book for the purpose of registering in alphabetical order, the
names, firms and places of business of any inhabitant of the city who shall
request such registry to be made.
   b.   All persons and firms usually resident or doing business within such
infected district shall register, in the books so provided, their names or
firms, with the place or places out of such infected district, but within the
city to which they may have removed the transaction of their business, or to
which they may desire any notices to be sent or served, or any notes, drafts,
or bills to be presented for acceptance or for payment. Twenty-five cents may
be claimed and received by the city clerk for every such registry; but the book
in which the same shall be entered shall be open to public examination free of
all charges at all times during office hours.
   c.   During the continuance of any such disease in such infected district,
all drafts, notes and bills, which by law are required to be presented for
acceptance or for payment, may be presented for such purpose at the place so
designated in such registry, and all notices of nonacceptance and non-payment
of any note, draft or bill, or of protest for such non-acceptance or non-
payment, may be served by leaving the same at the place so designated.
   d.   In case any person or firm usually resident or doing business within
such infected district shall neglect to make and cause to be entered in the
book so provided, the registry herein required, all notes, drafts or bills
which by law are required to be presented to such person or firm for acceptance
or for payment, may be presented to the city clerk during the continuance of
such disease, at any time during office hours, and demand of acceptance or
payment thereof may be made of such city clerk, to the same purpose and with
the same effect as if the same had been presented and acceptance or payment
demanded of such person or firm at their usual place of doing business.
   e.   In case of omission to make the registry herein required, all notices
of the non-acceptance or non-payment of any note, draft, or bill, or of protest
for such non-acceptance or non-payment, may be served on any person or firm
usually resident or doing business within such infected district, by leaving
the same at one of the post-offices in the city. Such service shall be as valid
and effectual as if the notices had been served personally on such person or
one of such firm at his, her or their usual place of doing business.
   f.   Whenever proclamation shall be made by the board of health, that an
infectious or contagious disease in any infected district has subsided, it
shall be deemed to have subsided for all purposes contemplated in this section.
§ 17-106 Inspection of sick; reports.
Any officer or employee of the department may visit any person who shall be
reported to the department as being apparently or presumably sick of any
communicable disease and report his or her opinion of such sickness to it in
writing.
§ 17-107 Inspection of vessels; removal; violation of orders, punishment for.
   a.   An officer or employee of the department shall visit and inspect all
vessels coming to the wharves, landing places, or shores of the city, or within
three hundred yards thereof, which are suspected of having on board any
communicable disease, or of being likely to communicate such disease to the
inhabitants of the city. Such officer or employee shall report in writing,
stating the vessel so inspected and the nature, state, and situation thereof,
and his or her opinion as to the probability of disease being communicated by
or from the same, and shall file such report in the main office of the
department.
   b.   If the department deem it probable that any such disease may be brought
into the city or communicated to the inhabitants thereof, it may by order
direct any vessel lying at a place within three hundred yards of any wharf,
landing place or shore of the city to be removed at least three hundred yards
therefrom within six hours after a copy of such order, certified by the
secretary of the department, shall be delivered to the person or persons having
command of such vessel, or to the master, owner or consignee thereof. Every
person to whom such copy of such order shall be delivered shall forthwith
comply with the same.
   c.   Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall constitute
a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars,
or imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both.
§ 17-108 Infected places outside the city; proclamation.
   a.   The board may issue a proclamation declaring any place where there
shall be reason to believe a communicable disease actually exists, to be an
infected place within the meaning of the health laws of this state. Such
proclamation shall fix the time when it shall cease to have effect but such
period, from time to time, may be extended by the board if it shall judge the
public health to require such extension. Notice of an extension shall be
published in one or more newspapers of the city.
   b.   After such proclamation shall have been issued, all vessels arriving in
the port of New York from such infected place shall be subject to a quarantine
of at least thirty days or until the termination of the proclamation period,
and together with their officers, crews, passengers and cargoes, shall be
subject to all the provisions, regulations and penalties in relation to vessels
subject to quarantine.
   c.   The board may prohibit or regulate the internal intercourse by land or
water between the city and the infected place; and may direct that all persons
who come into the city contrary to its prohibition or regulations shall be
apprehended and conveyed to the vessel or places from where they last came, or
if sick, to such place as the board shall direct.
   d.   Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall constitute
a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars,
or imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both.
§ 17-109 Vaccinations.
   a.   The department is empowered to collect and preserve pure vaccine lymph
or virus, produce diphtheria antitoxin and other vaccines and antitoxins, and
add necessary additional provisions to the health code in order to most
effectively prevent the spread of communicable diseases.
   b.   The department may take measures, and supply agents and offer
inducements and facilities for general and gratuitous vaccination,
disinfection, and for the use of diphtheria antitoxin and other vaccines and
antitoxins.
§ 17-110 Sale and exchange of lymph and antitoxin.
   a.   The department may authorize the sale at reasonable rates to be fixed
by it, of surplus vaccine lymph, virus, diphtheria antitoxin and other vaccines
and antitoxins, when the amount collected shall exceed the amount required by
it in the proper performance of its duties. The avails of such sales shall be
credited by the department to the general fund of the city of New York and
included in its semi-monthly transmission of revenue collections to the
commissioner of finance of the city of New York.
   b.   The bureau of laboratories of the department may also exchange, upon
authority and approval of the commissioner, and upon the written approval of
the mayor, a portion of its laboratory products for other and different
laboratory products, manufactured by the laboratories of the United States
government and of other cities and laboratories, which the department may need
for the prevention of the spread of disease.
§ 17-111 Appropriation for prevention of communicable diseases.
The city shall appropriate funds for the use of the department, for the
prevention of dangers from communicable diseases found to exist in any part of
the city, or for the care of persons exposed to danger from communicable
diseases.
§ 17-112 Publication of reports and statistics.
The department, to promote the public good and public service, may establish
reasonable regulations as to the publicity of any of its papers, files,
reports, records and proceedings; and may publish such information as, in its
opinion, may be useful, concerning births, deaths, marriages, sickness and the
general sanitary conditions of the city, or any matter, place or thing therein.
§ 17-113 Repairs of buildings; removal of obstructions; regulation of public
markets.
   a.   The powers of the department shall include the ordering and enforcing
in the same manner as other orders are provided to be enforced, the repairs of
buildings, houses and other structures; the regulation and control of all
public markets in relation to the cleanliness, ventilation and drainage thereof
and the prevention of sale or offering for sale of improper articles; the
removal of any obstruction, matter or thing in or upon the public streets,
sidewalks or places, which, in the opinion of the department, may lead to
conditions dangerous to life or health; the prevention of accidents by which
life or health may be endangered; and generally the abatement of all nuisances.
   b.   The department shall possess full power with reference to the
ventilation, drainage and cleanliness, of the stands or stalls in or around all
markets.
§ 17-114 Nuisances; abatement without suit.
The department shall have within the city all common law rights to abate any
nuisance without suit, which can or does in this state belong to any person.
§ 17-115 Right of inspection.
It is hereby made the duty of all departments, officers, and agents, having the
control, charge or custody of any public structure, work, ground, or erection,
or of any plan, description, outline, drawing or charts thereof, or relating
thereto, made, kept or controlled under any public authority, to permit and
facilitate the examination and inspection, and the making of copies of the same
by any officer or person, authorized to do so by the department of health and
mental hygiene.
§ 17-116 Medical examiners' returns.
The department, from time to time may make rules and regulations fixing the
time of rendering, and defining the form of returns and reports to be made to
it by the chief medical examiner, in all cases of death which shall be
investigated by him or her. The chief medical examiner shall conform to such
rules and regulations.
§ 17-117 Removal of bodies.
   a.   It shall be the duty of the department upon receiving a certificate of
death, made in accordance with its rules, to grant a permit for the removal
from the city, of the body of the person described in such certificate if such
body has not been buried.
   b.   It may grant a permit for the removal of the remains of any person
interred within the city to a place without the city, on the application of a
relative or friend of such person, when there shall appear to be no just
objection to the same.
§ 17-118 Putrid cargoes, et cetera, may be destroyed.
The department, when it shall judge it necessary, may cause any cargo or part
thereof, or any matter or thing within the city, that may be putrid or
otherwise dangerous to the public health, to be destroyed or removed. Such
removal, when ordered, shall be to such place as the department shall direct;
such removal or destruction shall be made at the expense of the owner or owners
of the property so removed or destroyed. Money expended for the same may be
recovered from such owner or owners, in an action at law by the department.
§ 17-119 Drainage; orders therefor; maps.
   a.   Whenever in its opinion the protection of the public health requires
the drainage of any lands in the city, by means other than sewers, the
department may make an order describing the location of such lands, and
directing the proper drainage thereof, and construction of drains therefor, by
the commissioner of design and construction.
   b.   The department after making such order, shall cause a map to be made on
which shall be shown the location of such proposed drains and the lands
required for the construction thereof.
   c.   The order shall be entered at length in the records of the department
and a copy thereof shall be delivered to the commissioner of design and
construction.
   d.   The map shall be filed in the department. A copy thereof shall be filed
in the office of the register or county clerk of the county in which the lands
are situated; another copy thereof shall be filed with the borough president of
the borough in which the lands are situated; another copy with the copy of the
order shall be filed with the commissioner of design and construction, who
shall immediately thereafter have the power, and is hereby directed to make and
adopt proper and suitable plans for the construction of such drains.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1996/059.
§ 17-120 Orders for paving, et cetera, yards and cellars; notice.
An order for the paving, filling, concreting, draining or regulating of any
yards or cellars within the city shall be made by the department only upon
reasonable notice to the owner or agent thereof.
§ 17-121 Care and treatment of physically handicapped children.
   a.   As used in this section, the following terms shall mean or include:
      1.   "Physically handicapped child." A person under twenty-one years of
age who, by reason of a physical defect or infirmity, whether congenital or
acquired by accident, injury or disease, is or may be expected to be totally or
partially incapacitated for education or for remunerative occupation.
      2.   "Legally responsible relatives." The parent or parents of a
physically handicapped child or any other person or persons liable under the
law for the support of such child.
      3.   "Legal custodian." The parent or parents of a physically handicapped
child having lawful custody of such child, or any other person or persons
having lawful custody of such child.
   b.   Whenever the commissioner shall find, after investigation, that any
physically handicapped child is in need of surgical, medical or therapeutic
treatment or hospital care or appliances or devices, the commissioner, upon the
request or with the consent of the legal custodian of such child, may order
such surgical, medical or therapeutic treatment, hospital care or appliances or
devices, and after investigation as provided in subdivision c hereof, may order
the legally responsible relatives to pay the cost thereof.
   c.   The commissioner shall investigate the financial responsibility of the
legally responsible relatives of such physically handicapped child. If the
commissioner shall find, after such investigation, that the legally responsible
relatives of such child are able to pay the whole or any part of the cost of
such treatment, care or appliances and devices, and if such legally responsible
relatives shall fail or refuse to comply with an order of the commissioner
requiring them to pay the whole or any part of such cost, he or she may
institute a proceeding in the family court of the state of New York within the
city of New York, pursuant to the provisions of sections two hundred thirty-two
through two hundred thirty-five of the family court act. Such a proceeding may
likewise be instituted in the absence of an order requiring payment, where
ability to pay is found.
§ 17-122 Judicial notice of seal and presumptions.
All courts shall take judicial notice of the seal of the department and of the
signature of its secretary, chief clerk and assistant chief clerks.
§ 17-123 Window guards; notification to tenants.
   a.   All leases offered to tenants in multiple dwellings must contain a
notice, conspicuously set forth therein, which advises tenants of the
obligation of the owner, lessee, agent or other person who manages or controls
a multiple dwelling to install window guards, and where further information
regarding the procurement of such window guards is available.
   b.   The owner, lessee, agent or other person who manages or controls a
multiple dwelling must cause to be delivered to each residential unit a notice
advising occupants of the obligation of such owner, lessee, agent or other
person who manages or controls a multiple dwelling to install window guards and
where further information regarding the procurement of such window guards is
available. Such notice must be provided on an annual basis in a form and manner
approved by the department.
   c.   The department of health and mental hygiene shall promulgate such
regulations as it deems necessary to comply with the provisions of this
section, with respect to the annual notice to tenants, and the notice
requirement in all multiple dwelling leases.
   d.   Any person who violates the provisions of this section, or the
regulations promulgated hereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
by a fine of up to five hundred dollars or imprisonment for up to six months or
both. In addition, any violation of this section shall constitute a civil
violation subject to a penalty of not more than five hundred dollars per
violation. A civil violation under this section shall be adjudicated before the
administrative tribunal of the department.
§ 17-124 Aliens.
The commissioner may send to such place as he or she may direct, all aliens and
other persons in the city, not residents thereof, who shall be sick of any
communicable disease. The expense of the support of such aliens or other
persons shall be defrayed by the city, unless such aliens or other persons
shall be entitled to support from the commissioner of immigration and
naturalization of the United States.
§ 17-125 Community air quality surveys and annual report.
   a.   For the purposes of this section, "pollutants" means particulate matter
that is less than 2.5 micrometers in diameter, nitrogen dioxide, nitric oxide,
sulfur dioxide and ground-level ozone.
   b.   The department shall conduct a community air quality survey on an
annual basis. Such survey shall:
      1.   Measure pollutants at street-level at monitoring sites across the
city of New York over every season of the year, selected to ensure that the
number of monitoring sites provides adequate information to assess the range of
common emissions sources and neighborhood pollutant concentrations across the
city, as determined by the department. At the discretion of the department,
data on ozone may be measured in the summer months only and data on sulfur
dioxide may be measured in the winter months only;
      2.   Determine whether and how concentrations of pollutants near monitor
sites vary across the city and the relationship, if any, of such concentrations
to local traffic, building emissions and other factors;
      3.   Identify the major local sources of pollutants that contribute to
local variation in the concentrations thereof;
      4.   Identify patterns of pollutants by geographic area, by source, and
by season or time of year;
      5.   Produce maps indicating the varying concentration levels of
pollutants across neighborhoods and by pollutant;
      6.   Write an annual report summarizing the results of the activities
described in paragraphs one through five of this subdivision;
      7.   Include in such report the findings of any completed or ongoing
health surveillance or research studies using community air quality survey data
to estimate population exposure to pollutants; and
      8.   Describe in the report the scientific methodology used to select
monitor locations for measuring pollutants and for studying variations in
pollutant concentrations.  
   c.   Beginning April 22, 2016, and on or before April 22 annually
thereafter, the department shall submit to the speaker of the council a report
with the results of the annual community air quality survey for the most
recently available year's analysis. The department shall post a copy of such
annual report on the department's website. The data included in such posted
report shall be in a machine-readable format.
(L.L. 2015/103, 11/4/2015, eff. 3/3/2016)
§ 17-127 Oxygen in courthouses.
There shall be placed at least two resuscitation devices in every courthouse in
the city which shall be maintained in a conventionally available and safe
place. The commissioner of citywide administrative services shall promulgate
such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the training of department
of citywide administrative services personnel in the operation and use of same
and at the end of their course they shall receive a certification from the
department.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1996/059.
§ 17-128 The department as party.
The department may institute and maintain all suits and proceedings which are
reasonable, necessary and proper, to carry out the provisions of the laws under
which it acts.
§ 17-129 Proceedings presumed legal; presumptions.
   a.   The actions, proceedings, authority, and orders of the department shall
at all times be regarded as in their nature judicial, and be treated as prima
facie just and legal.
   b.   In any action or proceeding the right of such department or police
department to make any order or cause the execution thereof, shall be presumed.
   c.   All meetings of the board shall in every action and proceeding be taken
to have been duly called and regularly held, and all orders and proceedings to
have been duly authorized, unless the contrary be proved.
§ 17-130 Copies of records; authentication.
Copies of the records of the proceedings of the department or board, of the
rules, regulations, by-laws and books and papers, constituting part of their
archives and at any time in force in the city, when authenticated by the
secretary or secretary pro tempore of the department, shall be presumptive
evidence of the facts, statements and recitals therein contained, and the
authentication taken as presumptively correct, in any court of justice or
judicial proceeding, when they may be relevant to the point or matter in
controversy.
§ 17-131 Order for examination before justice of supreme court.
   a.   Any justice of the supreme court of the first or second department, or
who is holding court or chambers therein, upon the written application of the
commissioner, may issue his or her order by him or her subscribed, for the
examination without unreasonable delay by or before such justice of any person
or persons, and the production of books or papers or the inspection and taking
of copies of the whole or parts thereof, at a time and place within the city,
and in such order to be named, provided it shall appear to the satisfaction of
such justice or court that any matter or point affecting life or health is
involved. It shall be the duty of such justice to take or superintend such
examination, which shall be under oath, and shall be signed by the party or
parties examined and be certified by the justice, and with any copies of books
or papers, to be delivered to the department for the use of the department.
   b.   Such examination, and any proceeding connected therewith, or under such
order, may wholly or in part be had, conducted or continued by or before any
other of such justices, as well as that one who made the order; and in and
about the same, every such justice shall have as full power and authority to
punish for contempt, and enforce obedience to such or other order or direction
or that of any other judge respecting the matter as any such justice of the
supreme court may now have, or shall possess, to enforce obedience or punish
contempt in any case or matter whatsoever. Such application shall name or
describe the person or persons whose examination is sought, and so far as
possible the books or papers desired to be inspected, and the matter or points
affecting life or health as to which the commissioner requests the examination
to take place, and the justice shall on the proceedings, decide what questions
are pertinent and allowable in respect thereto, and shall require the same to
be properly answered; but no answer of any person so examined shall be used in
any criminal proceeding. Service of any order of any such justice may be made,
and the same proved in the same manner as the service of either an injunction
or a subpoena. And it shall be the duty of the justice to facilitate the early
determination of the proceedings.
§ 17-132 Appearance and examination of witnesses.
Upon the application of any party in interest in any matter pending examination
before the department, by affidavit, stating the grounds of such application,
to any judge of a court of record, and asking that any person or persons
therein named shall appear before the department, or any person taking or about
to take such examination, at some time or times and place to be stated in the
affidavit, it shall be the duty of such judge, if he or she shall discover
reasonable cause so to do, to issue his or her order requiring such person or
persons named to appear and submit to such examination as, and to the extent
such order may state, at the time and place to be in the order named; and the
order, signed by such judge, may be served, and shall in all respects be obeyed
as a subpoena duly issued. A refusal to submit to the proper examination may be
punished by such judge or by any judge of such court as a contempt of court,
upon the facts as to such refusal being brought before any such judge by
affidavit.
§ 17-133 Penalties.
Every person, corporation, or body that shall violate or not conform to any
provisions of the health code of the city of New York, or any rule or sanitary
regulation duly made, shall be liable to pay a penalty not exceeding the
maximum amount allowed by the health code of the city of New York, or any other
applicable law, rule or regulation. The judge, justice, administrative law
judge or hearing examiner who presided at a trial or hearing where such penalty
is determined and assessed shall fix, in writing, the amount of the penalty to
be recovered, and shall direct that such amount be included in the judgment or
decision.
§ 17-133.1 Failure to abate rodents; penalties.
Every person, corporation, or body that shall violate or not conform to any
provisions of the health code of the city of New York or any applicable law,
rule or regulation pertaining to the eradication of rodents, the elimination of
rodent harborages or other rodent related nuisances shall be liable to pay a
civil penalty of not less than three hundred dollars for the first violation.
The penalty for each subsequent violation of the same provision of law, rule or
regulation, at the same premises and under the same ownership or control,
within a two-year period, shall be double the amount of the previous violation;
provided, however, that such penalty shall not exceed the maximum allowable
penalty set forth in section
17-133 of this code. Such penalties may be sued for and recovered by and in the
name of the department, with costs, before any judge, justice, administrative
law judge or hearing examiner in the city having jurisdiction of such or
similar actions. The judge, justice, administrative law judge or hearing
examiner who presided at a trial or hearing where such penalty is determined
and assessed shall fix, in writing, the amount of the penalty to be recovered,
and shall direct that such amount be included in the judgment or decision.
§ 17-133.2 Rat mitigation zones.
   a.   No later than April 1, 2023, the department shall designate, by rule,
one or more rat mitigation zones. In designating such zones, the department
shall consider the following criteria:
      1.   The number and percentage of inspections for rat activity for
properties within a given sanitation district or community district that
resulted in the issuance of an order pursuant to section 151.02 of the New York
city health code or an agency referral letter related to rat activity, and the
location of such properties within such sanitation or community district;
      2.   The number and percentage of inspections for rat activity for
properties within a given sanitation district or community district that have
resulted in the issuance of a notice of violation pursuant to section 3.05 or
section 151.02 of the New York city health code, and the location of such
properties within such sanitation or community district;
      3.   The number of rat exterminations at properties within a given
sanitation district or community district executed by the department pursuant
to section
17-147, following a failure to comply with an order issued pursuant to section
151.02 of the New York city health code, and the location of such properties
within such sanitation or community district;
      4.   The number and nature of 311 requests for service or complaints
related to rat activity within any 12-month period within a given sanitation
district or community district; and
      5.   The susceptibility of any properties managed by the department of
parks and recreation within a given sanitation district or community district
to rat infestation.
   b.   The department shall periodically review the criteria set forth in
subdivision a of this section and may, by rule, and in accordance with such
review, eliminate existing rat mitigation zones, change the boundaries of
existing rat mitigation zones, or designate new rat mitigation zones.
   c.   The department may, in conjunction with any action taken pursuant to
subdivision a or b of this section, and in consultation with the department of
sanitation, review the boundaries of sanitation districts, or sections within
sanitation districts, and may establish boundaries of rat mitigation zones that
are, in whole or in part, coterminous with sanitation districts, or sections
within sanitation districts.
   d.   The department may, in conjunction with any action taken pursuant to
subdivision a or b of this section, consider the availability of resources to
implement rat mitigation measures and, in designating rat mitigation zones,
eliminating existing rat mitigation zones, or changing the boundaries of
existing rat mitigation zones, exercise its discretion to maximize the
efficient use of such resources.
   e.   If the department, following any review of a rat mitigation zone
conducted pursuant to subdivision b of this section, determines, in
consultation with the department of sanitation, that any rat mitigation measure
applicable pursuant to law or rule only within a rat mitigation zone should be
continued, then the department need not eliminate or change the boundaries of a
rat mitigation zone, even if such review otherwise indicates that such rat
mitigation zone should be eliminated, or its boundaries changed.
(L.L. 2022/110, 11/18/2022, eff. 11/18/2022)
§ 17-133.3 Rat mitigation reporting.
   a.   No later than November 1, 2023, and by November 1 annually thereafter,
the department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and
make publicly available online, a report that details rat mitigation efforts in
the rat mitigation zones designated by the department pursuant to subdivision a
of section
17-133.2.
   b.   Such report shall include, but not be limited to:
      1.   The metrics that the department is using to measure the efficacy of
rat mitigation in such zones, including a description of whether the department
has seen improvement, as measured by such metrics, and, if so, how such
improvement has been achieved;
      2.   An overview of current and planned rat mitigation measures,
including goals and specific benchmarks and timelines, in each such zone;
      3.   A description of the public outreach measures undertaken by the
department in relation to rat mitigation in each such zone;
      4.   Explanations of the creation or elimination of rat mitigation zones,
or any change of boundaries of such zone, since the previous report, if
applicable; and
      5.   Explanations of any changes to the rat mitigation measures used in
each such zone since the previous report, if applicable.
(L.L. 2022/108, 11/18/2022, eff. 11/18/2022)
§ 17-133.4 Inspections for rats.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the term “covered complaint”
means a complaint or service request submitted to the department through the
311 customer service center or other means relating to rats or conditions that
attract rats in a building.
   b.   Inspections. Within 14 days of receipt of a covered complaint, the
department shall make its best effort to inspect the building to which such
complaint pertains for signs of rat activity or conditions that attract rats,
unless the department has inspected such building for the same within 90 days
of the submission of such complaint or the department is otherwise currently
engaged in pest control activities at the location of such building. If during
such an inspection the department is unable to access the interior of a
building as necessary to conduct the inspection, or otherwise unable to
complete the inspection, the department shall make its best effort to conduct a
subsequent inspection of the building within 20 days of the initial inspection.
During an inspection, the department shall record the following information:
      1.   The date of the inspection;
      2.   The street address of the building so inspected;
      3.   Whether such building passed or failed such inspection, as
determined by the department;
      4.   If any notice of violation relating to the presence of rats or order
to abate a condition related to the presence of rats is issued to the person in
charge of such building in response to such inspection, the number of such
notices of violation or orders to abate so issued; and
      5.   The inspector’s observations of signs of rats or conditions that
attract rats during such inspection or any subsequent inspection.
   c.   Reporting. Within 30 days of completing an inspection pursuant to
subdivision b of this section, or pursuant to any other lawful rat mitigation
program inspection conducted by the department related to rats or conditions
that attract rats, the department shall make publicly available on a website
the information collected during such inspection, including the information
required to be recorded pursuant to subdivision b of this section, to the
extent such information is available for such inspection. Such information may
be made available as part of an interactive map on rat activity on a city
website wherein such information may be viewed upon selecting an individual
address or as described in explanatory text on such website.
(L.L. 2026/008, 1/3/2026, eff. 7/2/2026)
§ 17-134 Joinder of defendants.
Any suit instituted by the department for the recovery of a penalty may be
against one or more of those who participate in the acts, refusals or omissions
complained of, and the recovery may be against one or more of those joined in
the action as the justice of the court shall direct.
§ 17-135 Court fees not to be charged.
The department shall not be subject to the payment of any fees to any court,
magistrate or clerk for the issuance of any paper or process or for the
performance of any duty in suits brought for the recovery of a penalty.
§ 17-136 Costs.
   a.   If the department, in an action for a penalty, recover judgment in any
amount, costs of the court in which the action is brought shall also be
recovered without reference to the amount of the recovery, provided payment was
demanded before suit brought, and the defendant or defendants against whom
recovery is had, did not, as article thirty-two of the civil practice law and
rules authorizes, offer to pay an amount equal to the recovery against him or
them, except that where the recovery shall be less than fifty dollars, the
amount of costs shall be ten dollars.
   b.   The department shall not be subject to the payment of costs unless the
judge or justice, at the conclusion of the trial, shall certify in writing that
there was not reasonable cause for bringing the action. In such case the costs
shall not exceed ten dollars, unless the amount claimed exceeded fifty dollars.
§ 17-137 Jurisdiction; title to real estate.
If the defendant is sought by the pleadings to be charged in an action for the
recovery of a penalty on any grounds other than by virtue of ownership of real
estate, no court shall lose jurisdiction by reason of the plea that title to
such real estate is involved.
§ 17-138 Officers to be peace officers.
Every officer and inspector of the department is hereby declared to be a peace
officer, pursuant to section 2.10 of the criminal procedure law, and is hereby
authorized and empowered, subject to the regulations of the department, to
proceed in the same manner and with like force and effect as a police officer
in respect to procuring, countersigning and serving the summons referred to
therein.
§ 17-139 Injunctions against department; undertakings.
   a.   A preliminary injunction shall be granted against the department or its
officers, only by the supreme court at a special term thereof after service of
at least five days notice of a motion for such injunction, together with copies
of the papers on which the motion for such injunction is to be made.
   b.   Whenever the department shall seek any provisional remedy or prosecute
any appeal, it shall be unnecessary to give any undertaking before obtaining or
prosecuting the same.
§ 17-140 Officers and judges to act promptly.
It shall be the duty of all prosecuting officers of criminal courts, and judges
of the New York city criminal court to act promptly upon all complaints, and in
all suits or proceedings for a violation of any health law, and in all
proceedings approved or promoted by the department, and to bring the same to a
speedy hearing and termination and to render judgment and direct execution
therein without delay.
§ 17-141 Service of orders.
   a.   Service of any order of the department or board shall be deemed
sufficient if made:
      1.   Upon a principal person interested in the business, property, matter
or thing, or the nuisance or abuse to which such order relates; or
      2.   Upon a principal officer charged with a duty in relation thereto; or
      3.   Upon a person, officer or department, or an officer or employee of
such a department, who may be most interested in or affected by its execution.
   b.   If such order relate to any building or the drainage, sewerage,
cleaning, purification or ventilation thereof, or of any lot or ground on or in
which such building stands, used for or intended to be rented as the residence
or lodging place of several persons or as a multiple dwelling, service of such
order on the agent of any person or persons for the renting or for the
collecting of rent thereof, or of the parts thereof to which such order may
relate, shall be of the same effect and validity as due service made upon the
principal of such agent or upon the owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of
such buildings, or parts thereof, or of the subject matter to which such order
relates.
§ 17-142 Definition of nuisance.
The word "nuisance", shall be held to embrace public nuisance, as known at
common law or in equity jurisprudence; whatever is dangerous to human life or
detrimental to health; whatever building or erection, or part or cellar
thereof, is overcrowded with occupants, or is not provided with adequate
ingress and egress to and from the same or the apartments thereof, or is not
sufficiently supported, ventilated, sewered, drained, cleaned or lighted in
reference to its intended or actual use; and whatever renders the air or human
food or drink, unwholesome. All such nuisances are hereby declared illegal.
§ 17-143 Nuisances; punishment.
A wilful omission or refusal of any individual, corporation or body to
forthwith abate any nuisance, as ordered by the department or board, such order
having been duly served upon them, shall be a misdemeanor.
§ 17-144 Nuisances; who is liable.
   a.   It is hereby declared to be the duty, of which there shall be a joint
and several liability, of every owner, part owner, person interested, and every
lessee, tenant, and occupant, of, or in, any place, water, ground, room, stall,
apartment, building, erection, vessel, vehicle, matter and thing in the city,
and of every person conducting or interested in business therein or thereat,
and of every person who has undertaken to clean any place, ground or street
therein, and of every person, public officer and board having charge of any
ground, place, building or erection therein, to keep, place and preserve the
same and every part, and the sewerage, drainage and ventilation thereof in such
condition, and to conduct the same in such manner that it shall not be
dangerous or prejudicial to life or health, subject to the health code and
orders of the department.
   b.   A food service establishment that violates this section or any rule
promulgated thereunder in a manner that does not present an imminent health
hazard or public health hazard, as such terms are defined in section 81.03 of
the health code of the city of New York, shall be subject to a civil penalty of
$500; except that such food service establishment shall not be subject to a
civil penalty for a first-time violation if such food service establishment
proves to the satisfaction of the department, within seven days of the issuance
of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of
the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a
cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured,
shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of
presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of
any settlement offer made by the department to a food service establishment
that has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of this section or
any rules promulgated pursuant thereto. The department shall permit such proof
to be submitted electronically or in person. A food service establishment may
seek review, in the office of administrative trials and hearings, of the
determination that the food service establishment has not submitted proof of a
cure within 15 days of receiving written notification of such determination.
(Am. L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 1/14/2022)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2021/080.
§ 17-145 Dangerous buildings, places and things; declaration as nuisance.
Whenever any building, erection, excavation, premises, business pursuit, matter
or thing, or the sewerage, drainage or ventilation thereof, in the city, in the
opinion of the board, whether as a whole or in any particular, shall be in a
condition or in effect dangerous to life or health, and whenever there shall be
growing on any property any ragweed or other species of weed, plant or growth
which is noxious or detrimental to the public health, or the seed, pollen or
other emanation whereof, when carried through the air or otherwise dispersed,
is noxious or detrimental to the public health, the board may take and file
among its records what it shall regard as sufficient proof to authorize its
declaration that the same, to the extent it may specify, is a public nuisance,
or dangerous to life or health; and may thereupon enter the same in its records
as a nuisance, and order the same to be removed, abated, suspended, altered, or
otherwise improved or purified, as such order shall specify. The borough
presidents and the commissioner of transportation are authorized to furnish the
department with information in writing as to properties and locations where
such noxious weeds and growths may be found.
§ 17-146 Stay of execution; modification.
If any party, within three days after service or attempted service of such
order upon him or her and before its execution is commenced, shall apply to the
board, or the chairperson thereof, to have such order or its execution stayed
or modified, it shall then be the duty of the board to temporarily suspend or
modify it at the execution thereof, save in cases of imminent peril to the
public health, when the board may exercise extraordinary powers, as specified
in section five hundred sixty-three of the charter and to give such party or
parties together, as the case in the opinion of such board may require, a
reasonable and fair opportunity to be heard before it and to present facts and
proofs, according to its rules and directions, against such declaration and the
execution of such order, or in favor of its modification, according to the
regulation of the board. Such board shall enter in its minutes such facts and
proofs as it may receive and its proceedings on such hearing, and any other
proof it may take; and thereafter may rescind, modify or reaffirm its
declaration and order, and require execution of the original, or of a new or
modified order to be made in such form and effect as it may finally determine.
§ 17-147 Execution.
If such order is not complied with, or so far complied with as the board may
regard as reasonable, within five days after service or attempted service or
within any shorter time, which, in case of imminent peril to the public health,
the board may have designated, or is not thereafter speedily and fully
executed, then such order may be executed as any of the orders of the board or
department. Any agency of the city is authorized to act as agent of the
department in executing such order. In the event that any agency shall so act,
it shall certify and transmit to the department its expenses in the execution
of such order separately in respect of each separately owned parcel of
property. Such expenses shall be reimbursed to such agency and shall be
chargeable and collectible as expenses of the department in connection with the
execution of an order as referred to in this chapter.
§ 17-148 Substituted service; posting; service by publication.
   a.   If personal service of any such order cannot be made by reason of
absence from the district, or inability to find one or more of the owners,
occupants, lessees or tenants of the subject matter to which such order
relates, or one or more of the persons whose duty it was to have done what is
therein required to be done, as the case may render just and proper in the
opinion of the board, to be shown by the official certificates of the officer
having such order to serve, then service may be made through the mail, or by
copy left at the residence or place of business of the person sought to be
served, with a person of suitable age and discretion.
   b.   In any case where personal service of any such order cannot be made for
the reasons stated in subdivision a of this section and service cannot be made
as provided in such subdivision through the mail or by leaving a copy with a
person of suitable age and discretion, because of inability to obtain the name
or address of the person sought to be served, and such inability to effect
service is shown by the official certificate of the officer having such order
to serve, service may be made by conspicuously posting a copy of such order
upon the property to which it relates. The posting of such order shall be
sufficient notice of such order and of the nuisance therein mentioned to all
persons having any duty or liability in relation thereto under the provisions
of this chapter.
   c.   Whenever the board shall have declared any condition, matter or thing
to be a nuisance, including ragweed or any other species of weed, plant or
growth, and has entered the same in its records as a nuisance, the board may
also take and file among its records what it shall regard as sufficient proof
to authorize a declaration that such nuisance is widespread throughout the city
or in any area thereof, and that personal service or service pursuant to
subdivision a or b of this section of an order or orders requiring the
abatement, removal or correction of such nuisance would result in delay
prejudicial to the public health, welfare or safety, and upon the filing of
such proof and the making of such declaration, the board may order that such
nuisance be removed, abated or corrected, as prescribed by the board, by an
order addressed generally, without specification of names or addresses, to all
persons who, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, have any duty or
liability in relation to any such nuisance which may exist upon or in any real
or personal property or place located within the area or areas specified in
such order. Such order may be served by publishing the same for a period of not
less than three days in the City Record and in a newspaper circulated in the
area or areas mentioned in such order. Service of such order shall be complete
at the expiration of the third day of such publication and such publication
shall be sufficient notice of such order and of the nuisance therein mentioned
to all persons having any duty or liability in relation thereto under the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 17-149 On what expenses to be a lien.
The expenses attending the execution of any and all orders duly made by the
department shall respectively be a several and joint personal charge against
each of the owners or part owners and each of the lessees and occupants of the
building, business, place, property, matter or thing to which such order
relates, and in respect to which such expenses were incurred; and also against
every person or body who was by law or contract bound to do that in regard to
such business, place, street, property, matter or thing which such order
requires. Such expenses shall also be a lien on all rent and compensation due,
or to grow due, for the use of any place, room, building, premises, matter or
thing to which such order relates, and in respect of which such expenses were
incurred, and also a lien on all compensation due, or to grow due, for the
cleaning of any street, place, ground, or thing, or for the cleaning, or
removal, of any matter, thing, or place, the failure to do which by the party
bound so to do, or doing of the same in whole or in part by order of such
department, was the cause or occasion of any such order or expense.
§ 17-150 Suits for expenses.
The department, in case it has incurred any expense, or has rendered service
for which payment is due, and as the rules of the department may provide, may
institute and maintain a suit against any one liable for such expenses, or
against any person, firm, or corporation, owing or who may owe such rent or
compensation, and may recover the expenses so incurred under any such order.
One or more of such parties liable or interested may be made parties to such
action as the department may elect; but the parties made responsible herein for
such expenses shall be liable to contribute or to make payment as between
themselves, in respect of such expenses, and of any sum recovered for such
expenses or compensation, or by any party paid on account thereof, according to
the legal or equitable obligation existing between them.
§ 17-151 Lien on premises.
   a.   There shall be filed in the office of the department a record of all
work caused to be performed by or on behalf of the department in executing any
order of the board or department. Such records shall be kept on a building by
building basis and shall be accessible to the public during business hours.
Within thirty days after the issuance of a purchase or work order to cause such
work to be done, entry of such order shall be made on the records of the
department. Such entry shall constitute notice to all parties.
   b.   All expenses incurred by or on behalf of the department for such work,
pursuant to this title or any other applicable provision of law, shall
constitute a lien upon the land and buildings upon or in respect to which, or
either of which, the work required by such order has been done, or expenses
incurred, when the amount thereof shall have been definitely computed as a
statement of account by the department and the department shall cause to be
filed in the office of the city collector an entry of the account stated in the
book in which such charges against the premises are to be entered. Such lien
shall have a priority over all other liens and encumbrances except for the lien
of taxes and assessments. However, no lien created pursuant to this title shall
be enforced against a subsequent purchaser in good faith or mortgagee in good
faith unless the requirements of subdivision a of this section are satisfied;
this limitation shall only apply to transactions occurring after the date such
record should have been entered pursuant to subdivision a and before the date
such entry was made.
   c.   A notice thereof, stating the amount due and the nature of the charge,
shall be mailed by the city collector, within five days after such entry, to
the last known address of the person whose name appears on the records in the
office of the city collector as being the owner or agent or as the person
designated by the owner to receive tax bills or, where no name appears, to the
premises, addressed to either the owner or the agent.
   d.   If such charge is not paid within thirty days from the date of entry,
it shall be the duty of the city collector to receive interest thereon at the
rate of interest applicable to such property for a delinquent tax on real
property, to be calculated to the date of payment from the date of entry.
   e.   Such charge and the interest thereon shall continue to be, until paid,
a lien on the premises. Such lien shall be a tax lien within the meaning of
sections
11-319 and
11-401 of the code and may be sold, enforced or foreclosed in the manner
provided in chapters three and four of title eleven of the code or may be
satisfied in accordance with the provisions of section thirteen hundred fifty-
four of the real property actions and proceedings law.
   f.   Such notice mailed by the city collector pursuant to this section shall
have stamped or printed thereon a reference to this section of the code.
§ 17-152 Validity of lien; grounds for challenge.
   a.   In any proceedings to enforce or discharge the lien, the validity of
the lien shall not be subject to challenge based on:
      (1)   The lawfulness of the work done; or
      (2)   The propriety and accuracy of the items of expenses for which a
lien is claimed, except as provided in this section.
   b.   No such challenge may be made except by (1) the owner of the property,
or (2) a mortgagee or lienor whose mortgage or lien would, but for the
provision of section
17-151, have priority over the department's lien.
   c.   With respect to any issue specified in subdivision a of this section
the certificate of the department filed pursuant to section
17-153 shall be presumptive evidence of the facts stated therein.
§ 17-153 Statement of expenses of executing orders.
   a.   When the department shall have executed, or so far executed as the
department may require, any order, a certificate setting forth the expenses of
such execution, itemized generally, and the date thereof shall be filed among
the records of the department with the order so executed; and the department
shall take care by, or through some proper officer, or otherwise, that the
expenses of such execution be so stated with fairness and accuracy.
   b.   When it shall appear that such execution or the expenses thereof,
related to several lots or buildings belonging to different persons, such
certificate shall state what belongs to, or arose in respect to each lot of
such several lots or buildings, as the department or its authorized officer may
direct; and the department may revise the correctness of such apportionment of
expenses as truth and justice may require.
   c.   Whenever the expenses attending the execution of any order of the
department may be made the subject of a suit by it, there may be joined in the
same suit a claim or claims for any penalty or penalties for violation of any
health provisions, or for the violation or omission to perform or obey such
order, or any prior order of the department, or for the not doing of that, or
any portion of that, for the doing of which such expenses arose or were
incurred; and the proper joint or several judgment may be had against one or
more of the defendants in the suit, as they or either of them may be liable in
respect of both such claims, or either or any of them.
§ 17-154 Service of order or judgment.
The department may serve a copy of the order under or by reason of which such
expenses were authorized or incurred with a copy of the affidavit stating the
expenses of the execution of such order, or if the claim be a judgment, may
serve a transcript of such judgment, and an affidavit showing the expense of
its execution if there be any, upon any person or corporation, owing, or who is
about to owe any such compensation, or owing or about to owe any rent or
compensation for the use or occupation of any grounds, premises or buildings or
any part thereof, to which such order or judgment relates, and in respect of
which such expenses embraced in such judgment related or were incurred, and
may, at the time of such service, demand in writing that such rent, or any such
compensation to the extent of such claim for such expenses, or for any such
judgment or expenses in executing the same, when such rent or compensation
becomes due and payable, be paid to the department.
§ 17-155 Payments to department.
After the service of such papers and such demand, any tenant, lessee, occupant,
or other person owing, or about to owe, any such rent or any such compensation
when it shall mature, or become payable, shall pay the same, and from time to
time pay any other amount thereof, as the same may become due and payable, or
so much thereof as is sufficient to satisfy any such judgment or claim for
expenses, or both, so served, to the department, and a receipt shall be given
therefor, stating on account of what order or judgment and expenses the same
has been paid and received; and the amount so received shall be deposited where
other funds of the department are kept, to the special account of the
department.
§ 17-156 Refusal to pay department.
Any person or corporation refusing or omitting to make such payment to the
department after service of such paper and demand, shall be personally liable
to the department for the amount that should have been paid to it, and may by
the department be sued therefor; and such persons shall not in such suit
dispute or call in question the authority of the department to incur, or order
such expense or the validity or correctness of such expenses of judgment in any
particular, or the right of the department to have the same paid from such rent
or compensation.
§ 17-157 Payment to department; effect.
The receipt of the department for any sum so paid, in all suits and
proceedings, and for every purpose, shall be as effectual in favor of any
person holding the same as actual payment of the amount thereof to the proper
landlord, lessor, owner, or other person or persons who would, except for the
provisions of section
17-155 of this title, and of such demand, have been entitled to receive the sum
so paid. No tenant or occupant of any lot, building or premises, shall be
dispossessed or disturbed, nor shall any lease or contract, or rights, be
forfeited or impaired, nor any forfeiture or liability be incurred by reason of
any omission to pay to any landlord, owner, lessor, contractor, party, or other
person, the sum so paid to the department, or any part thereof.
§ 17-158 Department to retain moneys until twelve days after notice.
The department shall retain money so paid until twelve days after it shall be
made to appear to it or some proper officer thereof, by satisfactory affidavit,
that the party or parties, or his, her or their agent for the collection of any
such rent or compensation, who, but for the provisions hereof would have been
entitled to receive the same, has had written notice of such payment being
made; and if at the end of such twelve days such party or parties, so notified,
have not instituted suit to recover such money, then it shall, by the
department be paid to the commissioner of finance.
§ 17-159 Infected and uninhabitable houses; vacation orders.
Whenever it shall be certified to the department by an officer or inspector of
the department that any building or any part thereof in the city is infected
with communicable disease, or by reason of want of repair has become dangerous
to life or is unfit for human habitation because of defects in drainage,
plumbing, ventilation, or the construction of the same, or because of the
existence of a nuisance on the premises which is likely to cause sickness among
its occupants, the department may issue an order requiring all persons therein
to vacate such building or part thereof for the reasons to be stated therein.
The department shall cause such order to be affixed conspicuously in such
building or part thereof and to be personally served on the owner, lessee,
agent, occupant, or any person having the charge or care thereof. If the owner,
lessee or agent can not be found in the city or does not reside therein, or
evades or resists service, then such order may be served by depositing a copy
thereof in the post-office in the city, properly enclosed and addressed to such
owner, lessee or agent, at his or her last known place of business and
residence, and prepaying the postage thereon; such building or part thereof
within ten days after such order shall have been so posted and mailed, or
within such shorter time, not less than twenty-four hours, as in such order may
be specified, shall be vacated, but the department whenever it shall become
satisfied that the danger from such building or part thereof has ceased to
exist, or that such building has been repaired so as to be habitable, may
revoke such order.
§ 17-160 Proceedings for condemnation.
Whenever any building or part thereof in the city, in the opinion of the
department, by reason of:
   1.   Age, or
   2.   Defects in drainage, plumbing or ventilation, or
   3.   Infection with communicable disease, or
   4.   The existence of a nuisance on the premises, which is likely to cause
sickness among its occupants, or among the occupants of other property in such
city, or
   5.   Its stopping ventilation in other buildings, or otherwise making or
conducing to make them unfit for human habitation, or dangerous or injurious to
health, or
   6.   Its preventing proper measures from being taken for remedying any
nuisance injurious to health, or
   7.   Other sanitary evils in respect of such other buildings, is so unfit
for human habitation that the evils in, or caused by such building, can not be
remedied by repairs or otherwise except by the destruction of such building or
a portion thereof, the department having first made an order to vacate such
building, if it deem such course just and proper, may condemn the same and
order it removed. The department may institute proceedings in the supreme court
in the city for the condemnation of such building, provided, however, that the
owner or owners of such building may demand that it be surveyed in the manner
provided for in case of unsafe buildings.
§ 17-161 Institution of proceedings.
Such proceeding shall be instituted through a petition addressed to such court
containing a brief statement of the reasons therefor, and shall not be required
to contain further allegations of facts than those which have actuated the
department in this proceeding, which shall then be carried on in the manner
prescribed for a capital project proceeding by subchapter one of chapter three
of title five of the code. The owner of such building or any person interested
therein may in his or her answer dispute the necessity of the destruction of
such building or part thereof, as the case may be. In such case, the court
shall not take steps to ascertain the value of the property unless proof is
made of the necessity of such destruction.
§ 17-162 Admissible evidence.
In such proceeding, evidence shall be receivable by the court without a jury to
prove:
   1.   That the rental of the building was enhanced by reason of the same
being used for illegal purposes, or being so overcrowded as to be dangerous or
injurious to the health of the inmates; or
   2.   That the building is in a state of defective sanitation, or is not in
reasonably good repair; or
   3.   That the building is unfit, and not reasonably capable of being made
fit, for human habitation.
§ 17-163 Amount of compensation.
If the court is satisfied by such evidence, then the compensation:
   1.   Shall in the first case, so far as it is based on rental, be on the
rental of the building, as distinct from the ground rent, which would have been
obtainable if the building was occupied for legal purposes, and only by the
number of persons whom the building, under all circumstances of the case, was
fitted to accommodate without such overcrowding as is dangerous or injurious to
the health of the inmates; and
   2.   Shall in the second case be the amount estimated as the value of the
building if it had been put into a sanitary condition, or into reasonably good
repair, after deducting the estimated expense of putting it into such condition
or repair; and
   3.   Shall in the third case be the value of the materials of the building.
§ 17-164 Inspection reports; publication.
The department may make and publish a report of the sanitary condition and the
result of the inspection of any place, matter or thing in the city, so far as,
in the opinion of the department, such publication may be useful.
§ 17-165 Inspection and removal of articles.
   a.   An officer or employee of the department shall visit and inspect all
stores and places within the city which are suspected of containing putrid or
unsound provisions or other articles unfit for human consumption or use or
likely to communicate disease to the inhabitants, and make and sign a report in
writing stating the stores, places and articles so inspected and the nature,
state and situation thereof and such officer's or employee's opinion in
relation thereto. Such report shall be filed in an office of the department.
   b.   The department may by order direct the removal, to a place to be
designated by it, of all things within the city which, in its opinion are unfit
for human consumption or use or which shall be infected in any manner likely to
communicate disease to the inhabitants.
   c.   Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall constitute
a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars,
or imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both.
§ 17-166 Record of births, fetal deaths and deaths.
   a.   The department shall keep a record of the births, fetal deaths and
deaths filed with it, the births, fetal deaths and deaths shall be numbered
separately and recorded in the order in which they are respectively received.
   b.   There shall be no specific statement on the record or report of birth
as to whether the child is born in or out of wedlock or as to the marital name
or status of the mother.
   c.   It shall be unlawful to demand or receive any fees by reason of the
duties imposed by this section.
   d.   The name of the putative father of a child born out of wedlock shall
not be entered on the birth certificate by the person preparing the birth
certificate without the putative father's consent in writing, duly verified by
him and given to the physician, midwife or person acting as midwife who was in
attendance upon the birth and filed with the hospital record of the birth, or,
in the case of a birth in a place other than a hospital or on an ambulance
service connected therewith, filed with the records of the physician, midwife
or person acting as midwife who was in attendance upon the birth. In the event
the consent in writing of the putative father is not given, particulars
relating to the putative father, other than his name, may be entered.
   e.   The certificate of induced termination of pregnancy shall not, unless
requested by the woman contain the name of the woman, her social security
number or any other information which would permit her to be identified except
as provided in this subdivision. The department shall develop a unique,
confidential identifier to be used on the certificate of induced termination of
pregnancy, to be used in connection with the exercise of the commissioner's
authority to monitor the quality of care provided by any individual or entity
licensed to perform an abortion in this state and to permit coordination of
data concerning the medical history of the woman for purposes of conducting
surveillance scientific studies and research.
§ 17-166.1 Sex designation on death records.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Gender identity. The term “gender identity” has the same meaning as set
forth in section
3-162.
      Supporting documentation. The term “supporting documentation” means
documentation memorializing a decedent’s gender transition, which may include:
a court order approving the decedent’s gender change; written communication
from a medical professional as to decedent’s sex designation; proof of clinical
treatment for gender transition; an advance healthcare directive; written
instructions from the decedent regarding their gender identity on a legally
executed document, including written instructions on the instrument to appoint
an agent to control disposition of remains; or, any documentation of a change
to, or proof that an application was submitted by the decedent to change, the
decedent’s sex designation on a vital record or a state, federal, or local
identification card.
   b.   The department shall establish a procedure to request correction of sex
designation on a death record and shall post an application form and
instructions for making such a request on its website. The instructions shall
address, at a minimum, who is eligible to apply and the supporting
documentation that must be submitted with the application. The application form
shall allow the applicant to request a new death certificate with the amended
sex designation if such application is approved. If the department approves the
application, the department shall correct the death record and any subsequent
death certificate shall be issued without marking to show that it was
corrected.
   c.   [Reserved.]
   d.   Where supporting documentation provides conflicting information on the
decedent’s gender identity, the department shall accept the most recently dated
supporting documentation.
   e.   A formal sex designation change on the decedent’s birth certificate,
state or city identification document, or driver’s license prior to death, or
proof of gender-affirming surgery, shall not be required to issue a death
record or a correction of a death record with a sex designation that is
consistent with the decedent’s gender identity when other supporting
documentation is present.
(L.L. 2025/141, 10/10/2025, eff. 4/8/2026)
§ 17-167 Supplemental birth records.
   a.   A new birth record shall be made whenever:
      1.   Proof is submitted to the department that the previously unwed
parents of a person have intermarried subsequent to the birth of such person;
      2.   Notification is received by the department from the clerk of a court
of competent jurisdiction or proof is submitted of a judgment, order or decree
relating to the parentage of the person;
      3.   Notification is received by the department from the clerk of a court
of competent jurisdiction or proof is submitted of a judgment, order or decree
relating to the adoption of the person.
   b.   On every birth record made because of adoption, a notation that it is
filed pursuant to paragraph three of subdivision a of this section of the code
shall be entered.
   c.   When a new birth record is made the department shall substitute such
new record for the birth record then on file. The department shall place the
original birth record and the proof, notification and papers pertaining to the
new birth record under seal. Seals shall not be broken except by order of a
court of competent jurisdiction. Thereafter when a certified copy of the
certificate of birth of such a person is issued, it shall be a copy of the new
certificate of birth, except when an order of a court of competent jurisdiction
shall require the issuance of a copy of the original certificate of birth and
provided further however, that information contained in the original
certificate of birth shall be divulged to the state commissioner of health
pursuant to section forty-one hundred thirty-eight-c or forty-one hundred
thirty-eight-d of the public health law.
§ 17-167.1 Sex designation on birth records.
   a.   For the purposes of this section, "x" means a designation used to
indicate a sex that is not exclusively male or female.
   b.   The department shall make a new birth record when an applicant submits
an application and supporting documentation pursuant to this subdivision and
subdivision c of this section requesting the correction of sex designation to
the applicant's birth record. Such application shall be made in a form or
manner to be provided or approved by the department. If the department requests
information, documentation or a copy of an acceptable current signed
photographic identification, the department may not take into account the sex
designation listed on such identification in reviewing such application.
   c.   An application made pursuant to subdivision b of this section shall be
accompanied by a signed and notarized statement from the applicant requesting
that the sex designation be changed to female, male, or x in order to conform
to the applicant's gender identity.
   d.   In the event the applicant is less than 18 years old, an application
made pursuant to subdivision b of this section requesting that the sex
designation on the record be changed to female, male, or x to conform to the
applicant's gender identity shall be made in a manner consistent with the
requirements of section 207.05 of the New York city health code, or successor
provision thereto.
(L.L. 2015/001, 1/8/2015, eff. 2/22/2015; Am. L.L. 2018/163, 10/9/2018, eff. 1/
1/2019)
§ 17-167.2 Signage regarding patient rights and hospital services for
transgender individuals.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Gender-affirming health care. The term “gender-affirming health care” has
the same meaning as the term “gender-affirming care” as set forth in paragraph
2 of subdivision a of section
10-184.1.
      Hospital. The term “hospital” has the same meaning as the term “general
hospital” as defined in subdivision 10 of section 2801 of the public health
law.
      Transgender. The term “transgender” means a person whose gender identity
does not conform to the sex assigned at birth.
   b.   Transgender patient rights. The department shall design signs
describing the rights of transgender patients and make such signs available to
hospitals in the city. Such signs shall include, but need not be limited to,
information on an individual’s right to be referred to by their preferred name,
title, gender, and pronoun. The department shall post information about the
rights of transgender patients on its website and make such information
available in the designated citywide languages as defined in section
23-1101.
   c.   Transgender-specific services offered. To the extent practicable, the
department shall:
      1.   Coordinate with hospitals in the city to identify the services
offered by each hospital to meet the specific needs of transgender individuals,
including, but not limited to, gender-affirming health care;
      2.   Provide guidance to hospitals in the city encouraging such hospitals
to post in a conspicuous location a list of any such services offered;
      3.   Coordinate with hospitals in the city to update the lists of such
services offered by each hospital, as needed; and
      4.   Publish such guidance and such lists of services on the department’s
website and on the 311 citizen center website. Such guidance shall be published
in the designated citywide languages as defined in section
23-1101.
(L.L. 2025/126, 9/13/2025, eff. 3/12/2026)
Editor's note: Former § 17-167.2, based on L.L. 2015/002, 1/8/2015, eff. 2/22/
2015, expired by its own terms. See Appendix A at
L.L. 2015/002.
§ 17-167.3 Report on training by hospitals regarding medical care for
transgender individuals.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Hospital. The term “hospital” has the same meaning as set forth in
subdivision a of section
17-167.2.
      Transgender. The term “transgender” has the same meaning as set forth in
subdivision a of section
17-167.2.
   b.   No later than February 1, 2026, and annually thereafter, the
commissioner shall submit to the speaker of the council and publish on the
department’s website a report on training provided by hospitals in the city to
medical staff regarding medical care for transgender individuals. To the extent
such information is available to the department, such report shall include, but
need not be limited to, the following information, disaggregated by hospital:
      1.   The number and percentage of physicians, nurses, and other medical
staff, disaggregated by hospital department, who have received training on the
provision of medical care to transgender individuals, including, but not
limited to (i) common medical needs of transgender patients; (ii) medical and
surgical treatment; and (iii) treatment and care related to social and medical
transitions;
      2.   A summary of the information included in any training provided by a
hospital to medical staff relating to the provision of medical care to
transgender individuals, including whether such training includes information
on culturally sensitive care;
      3.   Whether the completion of any such training is voluntary or
required, and how frequently such training is administered, disaggregated by
hospital department; and
      4.   The length and format of any such training.
   c.   Information reported pursuant to this section shall be reported in a
manner that does not violate any applicable provision of federal, state or
local law relating to the privacy of information.
(L.L. 2025/127, 9/13/2025, eff. 9/13/2025)
§ 17-168 Certificate of registration of birth.
Within ten days after the receipt of the report of any birth, the department
shall furnish, without charge, to the parents or guardian of the child or to
the mother at the address designated by her for the purpose, a certificate of
registration of birth. Such certificate of registration shall be issued on
forms furnished by the department.
§ 17-168.1 Resource materials for parents and guardians of newborn children.
   a.   The department shall make available written materials that identify
resources available to parents and guardians of newborn children, and shall
update such materials periodically and as necessary to ensure accuracy. Such
materials shall include information regarding:
      1.   Essential items needed for the care of a child;
      2.   Child safety;
      3.   Breast feeding and child nutrition;
      4.   Social services programs available to parents or guardians of
newborn children, including:
         (a)   the supplemental nutrition assistance program;
         (b)   the special supplemental nutrition program for women, infants,
and children;
         (c)   cash assistance;
         (d)   rental assistance;
         (e)   food assistance;
         (f)   child care subsidies; and
         (g)   any other federal, state, or local program available to parents
or guardians of newborn children;
      5.   Resources available for postpartum care;
      6.   Support services and groups for parents and guardians of newborn
children administered by the city;
      7.   The child and adolescent vaccine schedule recommended by the federal
centers for disease control and prevention;
      8.   The text or description of laws relating to employment and workplace
protections for parents or guardians of newborn children, including such laws
relating to reasonable accommodations for lactation; temporary schedule
changes; disability benefits; and paid and unpaid leave benefits;
      9.   College savings plan materials described in subdivision b of section
3-209.2; and
      10.   Any other information that the commissioner determines could
promote awareness of resources relevant to parents or guardians of newborn
children.
   b.   The department shall compile the materials required by this section in
consultation with the city commission on human rights, the department of
consumer and worker protection, the administration for children’s services, the
department of social services, relevant taskforces and advisory boards, and any
other agency or person the commissioner deems appropriate.
   c.   Within 30 days following the registration of any birth, the department
shall provide the resource materials described in subdivision a of this section
to the parents or guardians of a newborn child at the address designated for
receipt of the child’s certificate of registration of birth pursuant to section
17-168. Such resource materials may be distributed by including a card or flyer
with a printed code that provides electronic access to such materials. The
physical materials distributed pursuant to this subdivision shall also indicate
how the recipient may identify their local elected officials.
   d.   The department shall make such resource materials available on its
website in English and each of the designated citywide languages as defined in
section
23-1101 of the administrative code.
   e.   The department shall create and maintain on its website a publicly
accessible, searchable directory of (i) community-based organizations that
maintain contracts with the department to provide services supporting maternal
health and (ii) organizations contracted with agencies and entities consulted
pursuant to subdivision b of this section to support maternal health. The
directory shall be simultaneously searchable by multiple factors including, but
not limited to, location and service provided. The directory shall include the
following information regarding the community-based organizations, to the
extent known by the department: the services they provide, the languages in
which they provide services, and contact and location information for each
organization.
(L.L. 2017/073, 5/10/2017, eff. 9/7/2017; Am. L.L. 2024/110, 11/9/2024, eff.
11/9/2025)
§ 17-168.2 Newborn home visiting program.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Newborn home visiting program. The term “newborn home visiting program”
means a program administered by the department that provides in-person and
virtual home visits from social workers, nurses, and lactation professionals
for new parents during the first 12 weeks after the birth of a child at no cost
to such parents.
      Priority neighborhood. The term “priority neighborhood” means a
neighborhood determined by the department to experience significant health and
socioeconomic disparities.
   b.   Program. The commissioner shall maintain a newborn home visiting
program. No later than December 1, 2028, the department shall make such program
available in 75 percent of priority neighborhoods and no later than December 1,
2030, the department shall make such program available in 100 percent of
priority neighborhoods.
(L.L. 2025/167, 11/28/2025, eff. 11/28/2025)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2025/167.
§ 17-169 Certified copies of records of birth, fetal death, and death;
certificates of birth.
   a.   Upon request the department shall issue a certified copy of the birth
record or a certification of birth under the following conditions:
      1.   A certified copy of the record of birth shall be issued only upon
order of a court of competent jurisdiction or, if the person for whom the
record of birth relates is still living, upon a specific request therefor by
the person, if eighteen years of age or more, or by a parent or to the legal
representative of the person to whom the record of birth relates or by an
attorney of law authorized in writing by the person if of the age of eighteen
years or over to whom the record of birth relates. If the person for whom the
record of birth relates is deceased, the department may allow family members of
that person to have access to a certified copy of the record of birth. The
department may issue a certified copy of a birth record of any person for
official use upon the request of a department, agency, or officer of any state
government or subdivision thereof or the United States government.
      2.   Upon request in all other cases, a certification of birth shall be
issued by the department unless it does not appear to be necessary or required
for a proper purpose. A certification of birth shall contain only the name,
sex, date of birth and place of birth and date of filing in the department of
the original certificate of birth of the person to whom it relates, and if upon
request by, or on behalf of the person to whom it relates, or by a parent or
legal representative of such person, the name or names of the parent or parents
listed on the original certificate of birth, and none of the other data on the
record of birth. Whenever a certification of birth may be issued, the
department may, upon request, issue a wallet-size certification of birth, in a
form and bearing a design provided by the department. Each applicant for a
wallet-size certification of birth shall remit to the department with such
application, a fee determined by the department.
      3.   When the license to practice medicine of an attending physician
listed on a given birth record has been surrendered or revoked by the New York
state office of professional medical conduct, then upon request by either (i)
the person whose birth the record documents, if eighteen years of age or older,
or that person's legal representative or (ii) the parent or legal
representative of a person under the age of eighteen whose birth the record
documents, the department shall issue a certified copy of the birth record with
the identity of such physician redacted. Such request shall be made in the form
or manner to be provided or approved by the department. Nothing in this
paragraph requires a court order.
   b.   A transcript of a record of fetal death, or death, upon such forms as
the department shall prescribe, shall be issued upon request unless it does not
appear to be necessary or required for a proper purpose. The board may
prescribe reasonable fees for searches made of records of birth, fetal death,
or death, and the usual fees for copies of records to be paid for
certifications of birth and for transcripts of records of birth, fetal death,
or death, and in what cases the payment of fees may be waived.
   c.   The United States department of health and human services may obtain,
without expense to the city, transcripts of records of birth, fetal deaths and
deaths without payment of fees here prescribed for use solely as statistical
data. Any copy of the record of a birth, fetal death, or death, or any
certificate of registration of birth, or certification of birth, when properly
certified by the commissioner or persons authorized to act for such
commissioner, shall be prima facie evidence of the facts therein stated, in all
courts, and places, and in all actions, proceedings or applications, judicial,
administrative or otherwise, and any such certificate of registration of birth
or certification of birth shall be accepted with the same force and effect with
respect to the facts therein stated as the original birth record or a certified
copy thereof.
   d.   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any person born in the city
of New York being released from a New York state correctional facility shall,
prior to release, be provided by the department, at no cost to such person, a
certified copy of his or her birth certificate to be used for any lawful
purpose; provided that such person has requested a copy of his or her birth
certificate at least ninety days prior to his or her release, from the (a)
department, or (b) New York state department of correctional services and the
New York state department of correctional services has submitted such request
to the department. No person shall receive more than one birth certificate
without charge pursuant to this subdivision.
   e.   The department, in accordance with the authorization in section 207.13
of the New York city health code to waive any fee to correct a transcript of a
record of death for good cause, shall not charge a fee for an amendment of such
a transcript that would change or supplement the cause of death by citing the
disease caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-
CoV-2) known as COVID-19, or to health complications related thereto.
(Am. L.L. 2018/163, 10/9/2018, eff. 1/1/2019; Am. L.L. 2019/080, 4/28/2019,
eff. 1/1/2020; Am. L.L. 2021/139, 11/21/2021, eff. 11/21/2021)
§ 17-170 Records of births, deaths and marriages on file with the department
and the clerk of the county of Kings; transfer to the department of general
services; certification.
   a.   The department and the clerk of the county of Kings are authorized to
transfer to and the department of general services is authorized to receive all
original records of births, deaths and marriages filed prior to the year
eighteen hundred sixty-six with the department or the office of the city
inspector or any such records transferred to the clerk of the county of Kings
together with the indexes to such records and the department of general
services shall file and maintain such records as public records.
   b.   Original records of births, deaths, and fetal deaths filed with the
department or the office of the city inspector subsequent to the year eighteen
hundred sixty-five and the indexes to such records shall be transferred by the
department to the department of records and information services at such times
as the board of health shall determine; said records shall be filed and
maintained by the department of records and information services as public
records.
   c.   Upon the transfer of such records the commissioner of the department of
records and information services shall have the authority to issue upon request
certified copies of or extracts from such records.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1996/059.
§ 17-171 Records of marriages on file with the department of health and mental
hygiene; transfer to the city clerk; certification.
   a.   The department is authorized to transfer to and the city clerk of the
city of New York is authorized to receive and maintain all original records of
marriages filed with the department or the office of the city inspector
subsequent to the year eighteen hundred sixty-six together with the indexes to
such records.
   b.   Upon the transfer of such records the city clerk of the city of New
York shall have the authority to issue upon request certified copies of or
extracts from such records.
   c.   Any copy or extract of the record of marriage, when properly certified
by the city clerk or his or her deputy duly authorized to act for such city
clerk, shall be prima facie evidence of the facts therein stated, in all
courts, and places, and in all actions, proceedings or applications, judicial,
administrative or otherwise, and any such certificate of marriage shall be
accepted with the same force and effect with respect to the facts therein
stated as the original marriage record or a certified copy thereof.
§ 17-172 Dislodging food from person choking; poster.
   a.   Every establishment where food is sold and space is designated
specifically as eating areas shall have posted in a conspicuous place, easily
accessible to all employees and customers, a sign graphically depicting the
Heimlich Maneuver or a comparable technique instructing on how to dislodge food
from a choking person. Such sign shall be drafted and printed by the
department.
   b.   No duty to act. Nothing contained in this section shall impose any duty
or obligation on any proprietor, employee or other person to remove, assist in
removing, or attempt to remove food from the throat of the victim of a choking
emergency.
   c.   Fees. The department shall make signs available at no cost to such an
establishment.
(Am. L.L. 2023/151, 11/17/2023, eff. 11/17/2023)
§ 17-173 Dangers of consuming alcoholic beverages during pregnancy; warning
sign.
   a.   For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall be defined
and applied as follows:
      1.   "Alcoholic beverage" means and includes alcohol, spirits, liquor,
wine and beer.
      2.   "Vendor" means any person who owns or operates a business
establishment such as a bar or restaurant, which sells at retail any alcoholic
beverages for on-premises consumption; and any person who owns or operates a
liquor store, or any other business establishment which has as its primary
purpose, the retail sale of alcoholic beverages.
   b.   All vendors of alcoholic beverages shall have posted, in a conspicuous
place, a sign which clearly reads, "Warning: Drinking alcoholic beverages
during pregnancy can cause birth defects."
   c.   The department shall make such warning signs available to vendors of
alcoholic beverages, and shall promulgate regulations with respect to the
posting of said signs. A fee may be charged by the department to cover
printing, postage and handling expenses.
   d.   Any violation of the provisions of this section or any of the
regulations promulgated hereunder, shall be prosecuted as a civil violation
subject to a penalty of a sum ranging from zero to not more than one hundred
dollars. A civil violation under this section, shall be adjudicated before the
administrative tribunal of the department.
§ 17-174 Provision of interpretation services in hospitals.
The board shall require the immediate provision of interpretation services for
non-English speaking residents in all hospital emergency rooms located in New
York City, when such non-English speaking residents comprise at least ten
percent of the patient population of the service area of a particular hospital.
§ 17-174.1 [Language access services for abortion providers.]
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Abortion. The term "abortion" means (i) a procedure to terminate a
pregnancy for purposes other than producing a live birth, including, but not
limited to, a termination using pharmacological agents, and (ii) any services
related to such procedure, including, but not limited to, any counseling before
and after such procedure.
      Abortion provider. The term "abortion provider" means a person who
provides abortion procedures in accordance with New York state law, including,
but not limited to, a hospital or a licensed medical provider.
      Designated citywide languages. The term "designated citywide languages"
has the same meaning as such term is defined in section
23-1101.
      Healthcare provider. The term "healthcare provider" means a person who
provides healthcare procedures in the city in accordance with New York state
law, including, but not limited to, a hospital or a licensed medical provider.
      Language access services. The term "language access services" means
services provided in order to convey information to, or facilitate
communication with, an individual whose preferred language is not English, and
may include, but need not be limited to, interpretation services, translation
services or communication by a person who is fluent in both English and the
non-English speaker's preferred language.
   b.   Online abortion resource. No later than March 1, 2023, the department
shall post on its website, and update as appropriate, information and resources
for a potential patient of an abortion provider, which shall include, but need
not be limited to, information outlining methods used to provide an abortion,
attendant health risks and recovery from an abortion. Such information and
resources shall be translated into the designated citywide languages.
   c.   Language access services needs assessment. No later than July 1, 2023,
the department shall survey abortion providers in the city to assess the
availability of language access services for abortion and the demand for such
services. Such needs assessment shall include, but need not be limited to, a
survey of:
      1.   Language access services used in connection with providing
abortions;
      2.   Preferred methods for delivery of language access services used in
connection with providing abortions;
      3.   Public and private funding for language access services used in
connection with providing abortions; and
      4.   Implementation challenges with language access services used in
connection with providing abortions.
   d.   Language access services needs report. No later than 30 days after
completion of the needs assessment required by subdivision c of this section,
the department shall submit a report to the mayor and the speaker of the
council with recommendations resulting from such needs assessment and shall
post such report on its website. Such report shall include, but not be limited
to, the following information:
      1.   A summary of the findings of such needs assessment;
      2.   Recommendations for language access services based on such findings;
      3.   In consultation with the mayor's office of immigrant affairs,
recommended best practices for language access services and for identifying
providers of language access services; and
      4.   An assessment of actions the city could take to assist abortion
providers with access to language access services, including, but not limited
to, the practicability of providing grants to abortion providers to assist in
such access, and methods of connecting abortion providers with healthcare
providers that have implemented language access services.
(L.L. 2022/093, 10/15/2022, eff. 2/12/2023)
§ 17-175 Waste reduction study.
   a.   The department shall, within six months of the effective date of this
section, complete a study of the feasibility of reducing the amount of medical
waste and other solid waste generated by any person licensed by the city or
state of New York to provide health, medical, pharmaceutical or laboratory
services. The study shall include, but not to be limited to, an analysis of:
      1.   the feasibility of switching from the use of disposable to reusable
medical equipment, laboratory equipment, clothing, food service equipment and
any other product for which there is a reusable substitute;
      2.   availability of reusable medical equipment, laboratory equipment,
clothing, food service equipment and any other product for which there is a
reusable substitute;
      3.   the historical shift from the use of reusable to disposable
products;
      4.   the current composition of medical and other solid waste generated
by hospitals and other health care facilities;
      5.   the present and future cost of using reusable products compared to
the cost of using disposable products, including the costs associated with
substituting products and any special physical needs, such as space
requirements or new equipment;
      6.   the effects of waste reduction on hospital costs and the city's
economy;
      7.   the environmental impacts of an increased use of reusable products
compared to the continued incineration and landfilling of disposable products,
both on and off-site of the generating facility; and
      8.   all relevant federal, state and local legislation and regulations.
   b.   The study shall also include a comprehensive waste reduction plan for
medical waste and other solid waste generated by any person licensed by the
city or state of New York to provide health, medical, pharmaceutical or
laboratory services that shall include annual waste reduction goals for the
next five years, a strategy for implementing such goals, a list of reusable
materials and products that can be substituted for disposable materials and
products where feasible, and any revisions to the city health code that are
necessary to implement the waste reduction plan.
   c.   The commissioner shall, within six months of the effective date of this
section, submit to the council a report on the findings of such study and any
recommendations as to legislation or regulations that are necessary to
implement the recommendations of the study.
§ 17-176 Prohibitions on the distribution of tobacco products.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section:
      (1)   "Distribute" means to give, sell, deliver, offer to give, sell or
deliver, or cause or hire any person to give, sell, deliver or offer to give,
sell or deliver.
      (2)   "Less than basic cost" means free of charge, a nominal or discount
price, or any other price less than the distributor's cost, to which shall be
added the full value of any stamps or taxes which may be required by law.
      (3)   "Person" means any natural person, corporation, partnership, firm,
organization or other legal entity.
      (4)   "Public event" means any event to which the general public is
invited or permitted, including but not limited to musical concerts or
performances, athletic competitions, public fairs, carnivals, flea markets,
bazaars and artistic or cultural performances or exhibitions. A private
function such as a wedding, party, testimonial dinner or other similar
gathering in which the seating arrangements are under the control of the
organizer or sponsor of the event, and not the person who owns, manages,
operates or otherwise controls the use of the place in which the function is
held, is not a public event within the meaning of this paragraph.
      (5)   "Public place" means any area to which the general public is
invited or permitted, including but not limited to parks, streets, sidewalks or
pedestrian concourses, sports arenas, pavilions, gymnasiums, public malls and
property owned, occupied or operated by the city of New York or an agency
thereof.
      (6)   "Tobacco product" means any product which contains tobacco that is
intended for human consumption, including any component, part, or accessory of
such product. Tobacco product shall include, but not be limited to, any cigar,
little cigar, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, roll-your-own tobacco, snus, bidi,
snuff, tobacco-containing shisha, or dissolvable tobacco product. Tobacco
product shall not include cigarettes, electronic cigarettes or e-liquid or any
product that has been approved by the United States food and drug
administration for sale as a tobacco use cessation product or for other medical
purposes and that is being marketed and sold solely for such purposes.
   b.   Distribution of tobacco products to the general public at less than
basic cost prohibited in public places and at public events. No persons shall
distribute a tobacco product for commercial purposes at less than the basic
cost of such product to members of the general public in public places or at
public events.
   c.   [Reserved.]
   d.   Penalties.
      (1)   Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and liable for a civil penalty of not more than five hundred
dollars for the first violation and not more than one thousand dollars for the
second and each subsequent violation.
      (2)   A proceeding to recover any civil penalty authorized pursuant to
the provisions of this section shall be commenced by the service of a notice of
violation which shall be returnable to the administrative tribunal established
by the board of health or to any body succeeding the administrative tribunal.
Such tribunal or its successor shall have the power to impose the civil
penalties prescribed by this section.
      (3)   The corporation counsel may make an application to the supreme
court for an order restraining the continued violation of this section or
enjoining the future commission of such practice.
(Am. L.L. 2019/228, 12/16/2019, eff. 7/1/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1990/027,
L.L. 2013/097, and
L.L. 2019/228.
§ 17-176.1 Prohibition on the sale of discounted cigarettes and tobacco
products.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section:
      "Cigar" means any roll of tobacco for smoking that is wrapped in leaf
tobacco or in any substance containing tobacco, with or without a tip or
mouthpiece. Cigar does not include a little cigar as defined in this section.
      "Cigarette" means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco
or any other substance, irrespective of size or shape and whether or not such
tobacco or substance is flavored, adulterated or mixed with any other
ingredient, the wrapper or cover of which is made of paper or any other
substance or material but is not made in whole or in part of tobacco.
      "Listed price" means the price listed for cigarettes or tobacco products
on their packages or on any related shelving, posting, advertising or display
at the place where the cigarettes or tobacco products are sold or offered for
sale, including all applicable taxes.
      "Little cigar" means any roll of tobacco for smoking that is wrapped in
leaf tobacco or in any substance containing tobacco and that weighs no more
than four pounds per thousand or has a cellulose acetate or other integrated
filter.
      "Loose tobacco" means any product that consists of loose leaves or pieces
of tobacco that is intended for use by consumers in a pipe, roll-your-own
cigarette, or similar product or device.
      "Non-tobacco shisha" means any product that does not contain tobacco or
nicotine and is smoked or intended to be smoked in a hookah or water pipe.
      "Person" means any natural person, corporation, partnership, firm,
organization or other legal entity.
      "Price reduction instrument" means any coupon, voucher, rebate, card,
paper, note, form, statement, ticket, image, or other issue, whether in paper,
digital, or any other form, used for commercial purposes to receive an article,
product, service, or accommodation without charge or at a discounted price.
      "Retail dealer" means retail dealer as defined in section
20-201 of the code, and any employee or other agent of such retail dealer.
      "Shisha" means any product that contains tobacco or nicotine and is
smoked or intended to be smoked in a hookah or water pipe.
      "Smokeless tobacco" means any tobacco product that consists of cut,
ground, powdered, or leaf tobacco and that is intended to be placed in the oral
or nasal cavity.
      "Snus" means any smokeless tobacco product marketed and sold as snus, and
sold in ready-to-use pouches or loose as a moist powder.
      "Tobacco product" means any product which contains tobacco that is
intended for human consumption, including any component, part, or accessory of
such product. Tobacco product shall include, but not be limited to, any cigar,
little cigar, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, roll-your-own tobacco, snus, bidi,
snuff, shisha, or dissolvable tobacco product. Tobacco product shall not
include cigarettes, electronic cigarettes or e-liquid or any product that has
been approved by the United States food and drug administration for sale as a
tobacco use cessation product or for other medical purposes and that is being
marketed and sold solely for such purposes.
   b.   Prohibition on the sale of cigarettes for less than the listed price.
No person shall:
      (1)   honor or accept a price reduction instrument in any transaction
related to the sale of cigarettes to a consumer;
      (2)   sell or offer for sale cigarettes to a consumer through any multi-
package discount or otherwise provide to a consumer any cigarettes for less
than the listed price in exchange for the purchase of any other cigarettes by
the consumer;
      (3)   sell, offer for sale, or otherwise provide any product other than
cigarettes to a consumer for less than the listed price in exchange for the
purchase of cigarettes by the consumer; or
      (4)   sell, offer for sale, or otherwise provide cigarettes to a consumer
for less than the listed price.
   c.   Prohibition on the sale of tobacco products for less than the listed
price. No person shall:
      (1)   honor or accept a price reduction instrument in any transaction
related to the sale of tobacco products to a consumer;
      (2)   sell or offer for sale tobacco products to a consumer through any
multi-package discount or otherwise provide to a consumer any tobacco product
for less than the listed price in exchange for the purchase of any other
tobacco product by the consumer;
      (3)   sell, offer for sale, or otherwise provide any product other than a
tobacco product to a consumer for less than the listed price in exchange for
the purchase of a tobacco product by the consumer; or
      (4)   sell, offer for sale, or otherwise provide tobacco products to a
consumer for less than the listed price.
   d.   Price floors for cigarettes and tobacco products. No person shall sell
or offer for sale to a consumer a package of cigarettes, tobacco products, or
non-tobacco shisha, as such package is described in section
17-704, for a price less than the applicable price floor described in this
subdivision. Any such price floor may be modified pursuant to paragraph 9 of
this subdivision.
      (1)   The cigarette price floor shall be $13 per package of cigarettes,
including all applicable taxes.
      (2)   The little cigar price floor shall be $10.95, excluding all
applicable taxes.
      (3)   The cigar price floor shall be $8 for any cigar sold individually,
excluding all applicable taxes. Notwithstanding subdivision c of section
17-176.1, the price floor for any package of cigars that contains more than one
cigar and that has been delivered to a retail dealer in a package described by
subdivision a of section
17-704 shall be computed by multiplying the number of cigars in the package by
$1.75 and adding $6.25 to the total, excluding all applicable taxes.
      (4)   The smokeless tobacco price floor shall be $8 per 1.2 ounce
package, excluding all applicable taxes. The price floor for packages larger
than 1.2 ounces shall be computed by adding $2 for each 0.3 ounces or any
fraction thereof in excess of 1.2 ounces, excluding all applicable taxes.
      (5)   The snus price floor shall be $8 per 0.32 ounce package, excluding
all applicable taxes. The price floor for packages larger than 0.32 ounces
shall be computed by adding $2 for each 0.08 ounces or any fraction thereof in
excess of 0.32 ounces, excluding all applicable taxes.
      (6)   The shisha price floor shall be $17 per 3.5 ounce package,
excluding all applicable taxes. The price floor for packages larger than 3.5
ounces shall be computed by adding $3.40 for each 0.7 ounces or any fraction
thereof in excess of 3.5 ounces, excluding all applicable taxes.
      (7)   The non-tobacco shisha price floor shall be $17 per 3.5 ounce
package, excluding all applicable taxes. The price floor for packages larger
than 3.5 ounces shall be computed by adding $3.40 for each 0.7 or any fraction
thereof ounces in excess of 3.5 ounces, excluding all applicable taxes.
      (8)   The loose tobacco price floor shall be $2.55 per 1.5 ounce package,
excluding all applicable taxes. The price floor for packages larger than 1.5
ounces shall be computed by adding $0.51 for each 0.3 ounces or any fraction
thereof in excess of 1.5 ounces, excluding all applicable taxes.
      (9)   The department may modify by rule the price floors described in
this subdivision to account for changes in the New York - northern New Jersey -
Long Island consumer price index, adjusted for inflation, or changes in taxes
for any of these products.
   e.   The department shall promulgate any rules as may be necessary for the
purpose of carrying out this section.
   f.   Penalties.
      (1)   Any person who violates subdivision b, c, or d of this section or
any rule promulgated pursuant to any of such subdivisions shall be liable for a
civil penalty in the following amounts:
         (i)   one thousand dollars for a first violation within a five-year
period;
         (ii)   two thousand dollars for a second violation within a five-year
period; and,
         (iii)   five thousand dollars for a third violation within a five-year
period.
      (2)   No person shall be liable under this section for more than one
violation of any of subdivisions b, c, or d during a single day.
      (3)   A violation of subdivision b, c, or d of this section by a retail
dealer shall constitute a basis, pursuant to section
20-206 of the code, for the suspension or revocation of the license issued to
such retail dealer for the place of business where such violation occurred.
   g.   Enforcement. The department, the department of consumer affairs, and
the department of finance shall enforce the provisions of this section at the
tribunals that are authorized to hear violations issued by such departments.
(Am. L.L. 2017/145, 8/28/2017, eff. 6/1/2018; Am. L.L. 2019/228, 12/16/2019,
eff. 7/1/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2013/097,
L.L. 2017/145, and
L.L. 2019/228.
§ 17-177 Prohibition on the distribution of tobacco products through vending
machines.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section:
      (1)   "Distribution" means to give, sell, deliver, dispense, issue, offer
to give, sell, deliver, dispense or issue, or cause or hire any person to give,
sell, deliver, dispense, issue or offer to give, sell, deliver, dispense or
issue.
      (2)   "Person" means any natural person, corporation, partnership, firm,
organization or other legal entity.
      (3)   "Public place" means any area to which the public is invited or
permitted.
      (4)   "Retail dealer" means "retail dealer" as defined in section
20-201.
      (5)   "Tavern" means an establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold
and served for on-site consumption and in which the service of food, if served
at all, is incidental to the sale of such beverages. Service of food shall be
considered incidental if the food service generates less than forty percent of
total annual gross sales. As used herein, the term "tavern" shall not be deemed
to include a bar located in a public place in which the sale of alcoholic
beverages is incidental to the primary purpose of the business or establishment
conducted therein, except for a bar located in a public place which offers
overnight accommodations. Examples of public places not deemed to be taverns
within the definition of this paragraph include, but are not limited to,
restaurants, catering halls, bowling alleys, billiard parlors, discotheques,
theatres and arenas.
      (6)   "Tobacco product" means any substance which contains tobacco,
including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, smoking tobacco and smokeless
tobacco.
      (7)   "Wholesale dealer" means "wholesale dealer" as defined in section
11-1301 of the administrative code.
      (8)   "Vending machine" means any mechanical, electronic or other similar
device which dispenses tobacco products.
   b.   Distribution of tobacco products through vending machines prohibited.
No person shall permit the distribution of a tobacco product through the
operation of a vending machine in a public place. This prohibition shall not
apply to the distribution of tobacco products in a tavern.
   c.   Distribution of tobacco products in a tavern. Tobacco products may be
distributed in a tavern only in the following ways:
      (1)   through a vending machine which must be (i) placed at a distance of
a minimum of 25 feet from any entrance to the premises; and (ii) directly
visible by the owner of the premises, or his or her employee or agent, during
the operation of such vending machine; or
      (2)   directly by the owner of the premises, or his or her employee or
agent.
   d.   Identification of vending machines. A wholesale dealer or retail dealer
shall post a durable sign on any vending machine which such dealer is licensed
to own, operate or maintain. Such sign shall be visible to the general public
and provide the applicable license number and expiration date and the license
holder's name, place of business and phone number.
   e.   Enforcement. The department shall enforce the provisions of this
section. In addition, designated enforcement employees of the department of
buildings, the department of consumer and worker protection, the department of
environmental protection, the fire department and the department of sanitation
shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this section.
   f.   Violations and penalties.
      (1)   Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be liable
for a civil penalty of not more than three hundred dollars for the first
violation; not more than five hundred dollars for the second violation; and not
more than one thousand dollars for the third and all subsequent violations. In
addition, for a third and subsequent violations, any person who engages in
business as a wholesale dealer or retail dealer shall be subject to the
suspension of his or her license, for a period not to exceed one year, after
notice and the opportunity for a hearing before the commissioner of finance or
his or her designee. A wholesale dealer who owns, operates or maintains a
vending machine placed in violation of subdivision b or paragraph (1) of
subdivision c of this section shall be liable only if he or she has knowledge
of the violation. The department shall promptly give written notice to the
wholesale dealer identified on the sign required by subdivision d of this
section of any such violation by an owner of the premises, or his or her
employee or agent. For purposes of this section, such notice shall be prima
facie evidence that the wholesale dealer has knowledge of future violations of
subdivision b or paragraph (1) of subdivision c of this section.
      (2)   A proceeding to recover any civil penalty authorized pursuant to
the provisions of this subdivision shall be commenced by the service of a
notice of violation which shall be returnable to the administrative tribunal
established by the board of health or to any body succeeding the administrative
tribunal. Such tribunal or its successor shall have the power to impose the
civil penalties prescribed by this section.
      (3)   The penalties provided by this subdivision shall be in addition to
any other penalty imposed by any other provision of law or regulation
thereunder.
   g.   Construction. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit
the following:
      (1)   the transfer of an existing vending machine from placement in a
premises prohibited pursuant to subdivision b of this section to placement in a
tavern; or
      (2)   the initial placement of a vending machine in a tavern.
(Am. L.L. 2017/146, 8/28/2017, eff. 2/24/2018; Am. L.L. 2020/080, 8/28/2020,
eff. 8/28/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1990/067,
L.L. 2017/146, and
L.L. 2020/080.
§ 17-178 Availability of resuscitation equipment in certain public places.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
shall be defined as follows:
      1.   "Bar" means any establishment which is devoted to the sale and
service of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption and in which the
service of food, if served at all, is incidental to the consumption of such
beverages.
      2.   "Health club" means any commercial establishment offering
instruction, training or assistance or the facilities for the preservation,
maintenance, encouragement or development of physical fitness or well being.
"Health club" as defined herein shall include, but not be limited to health
spas, sports, tennis, racquet ball, and platform tennis clubs, figure salons,
health studios, gymnasiums, weight control studios, martial arts and self-
defense schools or any other commercial establishment offering a similar course
of physical training.
      3.   "Owner or operator" means the owner, manager, operator or other
person having control of an establishment.
      4.   "Public place" means a restaurant, bar, theatre or health club.
      5.   "Restaurant" means any commercial eating establishment which is
devoted, wholly or in part, to the sale of food for on-premises consumption.
      6.   "Resuscitation equipment" means (i) an adult exhaled air
resuscitation mask, for which the federal food and drug administration has
granted permission to market, accompanied by a pair of latex gloves and (ii) a
pediatric exhaled air resuscitation mask, for which the federal food and drug
administration has granted permission to market, accompanied by a pair of latex
gloves.
      7.   "Theatre" means a motion picture theatre, concert hall, auditorium
or other building used for, or designed for the primary purpose of, exhibiting
movies, stage dramas, musical recitals, dance or other similar performances.
   b.   Resuscitation equipment required. The owner or operator of a public
place shall have available in such public place resuscitation equipment in
quantities deemed adequate by the department. Such equipment shall be readily
accessible for use during medical emergencies. Any information deemed necessary
by the commissioner shall accompany the resuscitation equipment. Resuscitation
equipment shall be discarded after a single use.
   c.   Notice required. The owner or operator of a public place shall provide
notice to patrons, by means of signs, printed material or other means of
written communication, indicating the availability of resuscitation equipment
for emergency use and providing information on how to obtain cardiopulmonary
resuscitation training. The type, size, style, location and language of such
notice shall be determined in accordance with rules promulgated by the
commissioner. In promulgating such rules, the commissioner shall take into
consideration the concerns of the public places within the scope of this
section. If the department shall make signs available pursuant to this
subdivision, it may charge a fee to cover printing, postage and handling
expenses.
   d.   Rescuer liability limited. Any owner or operator of a public place, his
or her employee or other agent, or any other person who voluntarily and without
expectation of monetary compensation renders emergency treatment using the
resuscitation equipment required pursuant to this section, to a person who is
unconscious, ill or injured, shall not be liable for damages for injuries
alleged to have been sustained by such person or for damages for the death of
such person alleged to have occurred by reason of an act or omission in the
rendering of such emergency treatment unless it is established that the
injuries were or death was caused by gross negligence on the part of the
rescuer.
   e.   No duty to act. Nothing contained in this section shall impose any duty
or obligation on any owner or operator of a public place, his or her employee
or other agent, or any other person to provide resuscitation assistance to the
victim of a medical emergency.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1992/012.
§ 17-179 Department screening, diagnosis and treatment.
   a.   The department shall refer to appropriate medical providers any person
who requests assistance in blood lead screening, testing, diagnosis or
treatment, and upon the request of a parent or guardian, arrange for blood lead
screening of any child who requires screening and whose parent or guardian is
unable to obtain a lead test because the child is uninsured or the child's
insurance does not cover such screening.
   b.   The department shall develop a pamphlet explaining the hazards
associated with lead-based paint and lead-contaminated dust and describing the
procedures to be used in order for a violation of sections
27-2056.6,
27-2056.7,
27-2056.8 and
27-2056.11 of this code to be corrected. The pamphlet shall include appropriate
telephone numbers to obtain lead poisoning screening, diagnosis and treatment
information and to report unsafe lead-based paint work practices. Such pamphlet
shall also describe building owners' responsibilities under
article 14 of subchapter 2 of chapter 2 of title 27, including such building
owners' responsibilities to remediate all lead-based paint hazards and
underlying defects upon turnover of any dwelling unit, and such building
owners' responsibilities to annually inspect any dwelling unit where a child of
applicable age resides for lead-based paint hazards. Such pamphlet shall be
made available in accordance with section
27-2056.9 of this code. Such pamphlet shall also be made available on the
department's website and to any member of the public upon request, and shall be
available in any designated citywide language, as defined by section
23-1101 of this code.
   c.   As part of the investigation required by section
17-911, the department shall provide to the parent or guardian of any child
under the age of 18 determined to have an elevated blood lead level information
regarding special education services available from the department of
education.
   d.   Whenever a lead-based paint hazard or unsafe lead paint is identified
in a dwelling unit pursuant to an investigation required by section
17-911, the department shall post in a common area accessible to all occupants
of the dwelling in which the dwelling unit is located a notice regarding lead-
based paint hazards, the availability of inspections pursuant to subdivision a
of section
27-2056.9 and a copy of the pamphlet described in subdivision b of this
section.
   e.   Whenever a lead-based paint hazard or unsafe lead paint is identified
in a covered facility, such covered facility shall provide notice to the parent
or guardian of every child attending the covered facility that a lead-based
paint hazard has been identified in the covered facility. Such notice shall be
provided in the same form that the results of the annual survey of lead-based
paint hazards are reported to such parent or guardian, as described in section
17-924.
(Am. L.L. 2019/073, 4/14/2019, eff. 8/12/2019; Am. L.L. 2021/039, 4/18/2021,
eff. 10/18/2022; Am. L.L. 2021/040, 4/18/2021, eff. 4/18/2022)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1999/038 and
L.L. 2004/001.
§ 17-180 Training of department personnel.
The department, in conjunction with the department of housing preservation and
development, shall provide training for lead-based paint inspection and
supervisory personnel. No department personnel shall conduct an inspection for
lead-based paint pursuant to the health code unless that individual has
received such training. At a minimum, such training shall (1) be equivalent to
the training required under regulations issued by the United States
environmental protection agency for the certification of lead-based paint
inspectors and supervisors, (2) include background information pertaining to
applicable state and local lead-based paint laws and guidance on identifying
violations in a multiple dwelling, and (3) require that the individual has
successfully demonstrated knowledge of the responsibilities of a certified
inspector or certified supervisor, as the case may be, and the requirements of
sections 173.13 and 173.14 of the health code or successor rules. The
department shall provide for the continuing education of inspection and
supervisory personnel.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2004/001.
§ 17-180.1 Overdose prevention and reversal training; needle, syringe, and
sharps buyback.
Editor's note: this section has been amended by L.L._2026/020,_1/17/2026,_eff.
5/17/2026 and L.L._2026/029,_1/17/2026,_eff._5/17/2026.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have
the following meanings:
      Opioid. The term "opioid" means an opiate as defined in section 3302 of
the public health law.
      Opioid antagonist. The term "opioid antagonist" means naloxone, narcan or
other medication approved by the New York state department of health and the
federal food and drug administration that, when administered, negates or
neutralizes in whole or in part the pharmacological effects of an opioid in the
human body.
   b.   For as long as the department determines there is an urgent public
health need, the department shall offer overdose prevention and reversal
training to the general public. Such training shall include:
      1.   How to recognize an opioid overdose; and
      2.   How to properly administer common opioid antagonists to reverse an
opioid overdose.
   c.   For as long as the department determines there is an urgent public
health need, the department shall offer a public awareness strategy to inform
the public of the existence of such trainings and the danger of opioid
addiction and abuse.
   d.   For as long as the department determines there is an urgent public
health need, the department shall provide opioid antagonists to all syringe
exchange programs operating within the city.
   e.   The department shall require that the staff at all syringe exchange
programs operating in the city receive overdose prevention and reversal
training. Such training shall teach staff:
      1.   How to recognize an opioid overdose; and
      2.   How to properly administer common opioid antagonists to reverse an
opioid overdose.
   f.   Thirty days prior to the department's determination that there is no
longer an urgent public heath need, pursuant to subdivisions b, c and d of this
section, the department shall submit a report to the speaker of the council
detailing the reasons for such determination.
   g.   1.   Needle, syringe, and sharps buyback pilot program. The department
shall establish a needle, syringe, and sharps buyback pilot program. Such
program shall offer financial incentives to individuals who collect and return
needles, syringes, and sharps that were used for non-medical consumption. In
implementing such program, the department shall establish at least 1 buyback
location in each of the 5 highest-need council districts in the city, as
determined by the department. The department shall set the amount of the
buyback incentive for such program, except that such incentive shall not exceed
20 cents per needle, syringe, or sharp and shall not exceed a maximum payout of
$10 per day to any individual. The department shall determine eligibility for
such program and may consult with overdose prevention centers, the New York
city health and hospitals corporation, or any other entity deemed relevant by
the commissioner in administering such program.
      2.   Implementation. The pilot program shall commence no later than 30
days after the effective date of the local law that added this subdivision and
conclude one year after the date such program commences. On or before the date
the pilot program commences, the department shall conspicuously post on its
website a list of the buyback locations included in the pilot program.
      3.   Report. No later than six months following the conclusion of the
pilot program, the department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the
council, and post conspicuously on the department's website, a report on the
pilot program established pursuant to this subdivision. Such report shall
include, at a minimum, the following information:
         (a)   The names and addresses of all buyback locations included in the
pilot program;
         (b)   The number of needles, syringes, and sharps returned or disposed
of under the pilot program, disaggregated by buyback location;
         (c)   The total amount of money disbursed to individuals; and
         (d)   The department's recommendation as to whether to establish a
permanent buyback program and whether and how to expand such program.
   h.   1.   Community-based plan of action. The department, in conjunction
with stakeholders, community-based organizations, providers, and all other
entities deemed relevant by the commissioner, shall create a community-based
plan of action to address the opioid epidemic in communities that the
department deems are at highest risk for opioid abuse and overdose deaths. Such
plan shall include, at a minimum:
         (a)   The creation of a community-based working group, which shall
include relevant stakeholders and providers from each community identified by
the department pursuant to this paragraph;
         (b)   A public awareness strategy that targets and addresses each
community identified by the department pursuant to this paragraph; and
         (c)   Information on how and where to access opioid antagonists, as
defined in subdivision a of this section, in the community.
(L.L. 2018/128, 6/26/2018, eff. 10/24/2018; Am. L.L. 2018/124, 6/26/2018, eff.
10/24/2018; Am. L.L. 2022/124, 12/23/2022, eff. 1/22/2023)
§ 17-180.2 Trauma-informed care.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Client. The term “client” means anyone served by the providers.
      Provider. The term “provider” means a city agency, or a community-based
organization or not-for-profit organization that works directly with refugees,
asylees, asylum seekers, and migrants, and is under contract or similar
agreement with the department.
      Trauma-informed care. The term “trauma-informed care” means trauma-
informed care as described by the substance abuse and mental health services
administration of the United States department of health and human services, or
any successor agency, department, or governmental entity.
   b.   Training on trauma-informed care. The department shall review existing
training on trauma-informed care that the department offers to providers and
include in such training appropriate information on refugee, asylee, asylum
seeker, and migrant experiences. Such training shall:
      1.   Include, but not be limited to, methods for recognizing signs of
trauma exposure, strategies for understanding common behaviors of individuals
exposed to trauma, trauma-informed principles for interacting with such
individuals, and resources on addressing secondary trauma, traumatic stress,
and post-traumatic stress disorder;
      2.   Recognize the variation in signs of trauma across a client’s
lifespan and include a range of age-appropriate tools according to the
different developmental needs of those served; and
      3.   Include culturally competent tools and resources for providing
trauma-informed care.
   c.   Outreach. The department shall offer the training on trauma-informed
care reviewed and revised pursuant to subdivision b of this section to eligible
providers deemed appropriate by the department.
   d.   Reporting. Not later than 6 months after the effective date of the
local law that added this section and annually thereafter, the department shall
publish on its website a report on the following:
      1.   The components of the training on trauma-informed care developed
pursuant to subdivision b of this section; and
      2.   The number of individuals who accepted and completed the training on
trauma-informed care.
(L.L. 2023/158, 11/19/2023, eff. 3/18/2024)
§ 17-181 Lead-based paint; dry scraping and dry sanding prohibited.
The dry scraping or dry sanding of lead-based paint or paint of unknown lead
content in any dwelling, day care center or school is hereby declared to
constitute a public nuisance and a condition dangerous to life and health. For
the purpose of this section, dry scraping and dry sanding shall mean the
removal of paint or similar surface-coating material by scraping or sanding
without using water misting to reduce dust levels or other method approved by
the department. The department shall promulgate such additional rules as
necessary for the enforcement of this section.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1999/038 and
L.L. 2004/001.
§ 17-182 City-funded public hospitals and health facilities required to utilize
peace officers.
   a.   Any corporation of government, the expenses of which are paid in whole
or in part from the city treasury, which provides health and medical services
and operates health facilities and which is authorized to employ special
officers having peace officer status as defined in New York Criminal Procedure
Law §2.10(40), shall utilize peace officers appointed pursuant to said
subdivision to perform the duties of special officer, senior special officer
and hospital security officer. The commissioner of the department of health and
mental hygiene shall enforce this requirement.
   b.   Any person, including but not limited to any labor organization,
claiming to be aggrieved by a violation of subdivision a of this section shall
have a cause of action in any court of competent jurisdiction for damages,
including punitive damages, and for injunctive relief and such other remedies
as may be appropriate.
§ 17-183 Publication and dissemination of public health insurance program
options.
   a.   The department shall develop a pamphlet containing information
regarding the availability of public health insurance programs. At a minimum,
such pamphlet shall include: (i) the name and a brief description of each
public health insurance program available to New York city residents; and (ii)
appropriate telephone numbers to obtain enrollment information for such
programs. Such pamphlet shall be produced annually and shall be printed in
multiple languages, including, but not limited to, English, Spanish, Chinese,
Russian, Yiddish, Korean, and Haitian-Creole, and shall be made available to
any member of the public upon request.
   b.   The department shall ensure that pamphlets on public health insurance
program options are provided to all day care centers in sufficient quantity to
enable such day care centers to satisfy the requirements of section 1069.1 of
the New York city charter. For the purposes of this subdivision, "day care
center" shall mean any child day care facility operating in New York city that
is required to obtain a license from, or to register with, the department
pursuant to section 47.05 of the New York city health code and/or the New York
state department of social services pursuant to section 390 of the New York
state social services law.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2002/001.
§ 17-184 Availability of contraception.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have
the following meanings:
      Emergency contraception. The term "emergency contraception" means one or
more medications, used separately or in combination, to be administered to or
self-administered by a patient in a dosage and manner intended to prevent
pregnancy when used within a medically recommended amount of time following
unprotected or inadequately protected vaginal receptive sexual intercourse and
dispensed for that purpose in accordance with professional standards of
practice, and which has been found safe and effective for such use by the
United States food and drug administration.
      Long-acting reversible contraception. The term "long-acting reversible
contraception" means one or more reversible contraceptive methods, including,
but not limited to, intrauterine devices and subdermal contraceptive implants,
to be inserted or removed by trained clinicians in accordance with accepted
standards of medical practice, in a manner intended to prevent pregnancy for an
extended period of time without user action, and which has been found safe and
effective for such use by the United States food and drug administration.
   b.   Availability. The department shall make available non-surgical
contraception which has been found safe and effective for such use by the
United States food and drug administration, emergency contraception, and long-
acting reversible contraception, to all patients served by health centers,
health stations, health clinics or other health facilities operated or
maintained by the department which also offer services relating to the
diagnosis and treatment of sexually transmitted infections. The department
shall provide information on free or low-cost access to the administration,
insertion, and removal of long-acting reversible contraception methods. Timely
referrals will be provided to such health centers, health stations, health
clinics, or other health facilities which offer long-acting reversible
contraception, as well as to qualified family planning providers, if needed,
for other services.
   c.   Cultural sensitivity training. The department shall annually offer
training to all employees of health centers, health stations, health clinics,
and other health facilities maintained by the department which also offer
services relating to the diagnosis and treatment of sexually transmitted
infections. The training should include, but not be limited to:
      1.   The history of the provision of long-acting contraceptive, including
the history of sterilization abuse;
      2.   Comprehensive, scientifically accurate information about the full
range of contraceptive options in a medically ethical and culturally sensitive
manner; and
      3.   Implicit and explicit biases which can result in the harm of a
patient, particularly those which can impede the fair and equal treatment of
all patients.
(Am. L.L. 2022/009, 1/9/2022, eff. 1/9/2023)
§ 17-184.1 Availability of medication abortion.
   a.   Subject to sufficient appropriations to meet the requirements of this
subdivision, the department shall make available medication approved by the
United States food and drug administration for medication abortion at no cost
to a patient at health clinics operated by the department where services
relating to sexual health are offered and where the department determines
making such medication available would be appropriate for the patient
population served by such clinic. At such clinics, the department shall make
medication for medication abortion available to a patient who seeks to
terminate a pregnancy when the use of such medication is indicated and in
accordance with the medically reasonable and good faith professional judgment
of such patient's medical provider.
   b.   The department shall provide counseling and timely referrals to other
health facilities and family planning providers in accordance with the
assessment of the needs of a patient by the department.
   c.   Nothing in this section shall require the department to provide to a
patient any medication that the department or a medical provider providing
services in a health clinic described in subdivision a of this section does not
find to be indicated in such provider's professional judgment. Nor shall
anything in this section prevent the department from offering any other service
not described in this section at any location where it provides medical care.
   d.   Nothing in this section shall create a private right of action, nor be
the basis of a claim of medical malpractice against the department or against
any medical provider providing services in a health clinic described in
subdivision a of this section.
(L.L. 2022/078, 8/12/2022, eff. 8/12/2023)
§ 17-184.2 Availability of rapid testing for sexually transmitted infections.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the term “rapid testing”
means testing for chlamydia, gonorrhea, or HIV that produces results in the
same day.
   b.   Availability. The department shall make rapid testing available at
sites in at least 4 boroughs. Three such sites shall be operational by February
15, 2026, and the fourth such site shall be operational by February 15, 2027.
In determining the location of rapid testing sites, the department shall
consider community and geographic factors including rates of sexually
transmitted infections, availability of other testing services, social
determinants of health, including, but not limited to, race, ethnicity, sexual
orientation, and gender identity, and other factors the department deems
relevant. Within 30 days of determining each such location, the commissioner
shall notify in writing the mayor and speaker of the council of the
considerations that went into such determination.
   c.   Outreach. Upon the establishment of any rapid testing site required
pursuant to subdivision b of this section, the department shall consult or
partner with relevant community-based organizations and shall conduct an
education campaign in English and the designated citywide languages as defined
in section
23-1101 to inform communities of the locations and availability of rapid
testing services. In determining relevant community-based organizations to
consult or partner with, the department shall consider community and geographic
factors including rates of sexually transmitted infections, availability of
other testing services, social determinants of health, including, but not
limited to, race, ethnicity, sexual orientation, and gender identity, and other
factors the department deems relevant.
   d.   Disclaimer. Nothing in this section shall require the department to
provide rapid testing services to a patient for whom the department or the
medical provider administering such services does not find such rapid testing
to be clinically appropriate.
(L.L. 2024/084, 8/17/2024, eff. 8/17/2024)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2024/084.
§ 17-185 Inspection by the department of unsafe work practices.
The department shall promulgate rules requiring the department to respond to
complaints regarding unsafe lead-based paint work practices.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2004/001.
§ 17-186 Lead poisoning prevention in children.
   a.   The department shall develop a brochure which, at a minimum, advises
all appropriate medical providers of their obligations to screen and test
children for lead poisoning according to all relevant federal, state and local
laws, rules and regulations. Such pamphlet shall be distributed to all
appropriate medical providers on an annual basis, starting on September 15,
2004.
   b.   The department shall develop a pamphlet regarding lead poisoning
prevention in children. Such pamphlet shall, at a minimum, be printed in
English and Spanish and shall include, at a minimum: (i) the manner in which
children are most likely poisoned by lead; (ii) the effects of lead poisoning
on a child's health; (iii) the intervals at which a child is required by New
York state law to be tested for blood lead levels; (iv) the appropriate
telephone numbers to obtain lead poisoning screening, diagnosis and treatment
information; (v) the steps a parent or guardian may take to protect his or her
child from lead poisoning; and (vi) the requirement of landlords to inspect and
repair lead-based paint hazards.
   c.   At a minimum, the department shall distribute the pamphlet produced
pursuant to paragraph b of this section with each birth certificate furnished
to the parent or guardian of a child pursuant to section
17-168 of this title. Such pamphlet shall also be made available to any member
of the public upon request.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2004/001.
§ 17-186.1 Education and outreach regarding childhood lead poisoning
prevention.
   a.   The department shall establish and implement an education and outreach
program to increase awareness of childhood lead poisoning prevention. Such
education and outreach program shall at a minimum include the following
information:
      1.   Health effects of lead poisoning in children and pregnant women;
      2.   Major sources of lead exposure for children;
      3.   Ways to prevent lead exposure and to address lead hazards;
      4.   Importance of lead screening and blood lead testing requirements for
children and pregnant women; and
      5.   Requirements related to inspection and remediation of lead hazards
in certain housing and facilities.
   b.   The education and outreach program required by subdivision a of this
section shall include linguistically and culturally competent education and
outreach tailored to limited English proficient individuals and specific
immigrant populations. To meet such requirement, the department, in
consultation with the mayor's office of immigrant affairs, shall identify and
implement measures including but not limited to production of educational
materials, language assistance tools, community outreach and advertisements in
multiple languages in public locations.
   c.   Any educational materials produced pursuant to subdivision b of this
section shall be made available on the department's website and submitted to
the commissioner of the mayor's office of immigrant affairs. The educational
materials made available on the department's website pursuant to this
subdivision shall be made available in English; in the six languages most
commonly spoken by limited English proficient individuals in the city as
determined by the department of city planning; and in any other languages
deemed appropriate by the commissioner.
(L.L. 2019/069, 4/14/2019, eff. 4/14/2020)
§ 17-187 School nurses.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following items shall
have the following meanings:
      (1)   "Nurse" means an individual licensed as a registered professional
nurse pursuant to section 6905 of the New York state education law.
      (2)   "Public health advisor" includes, but is not limited to, an
individual who supports medical and/or professional staff in schools by
performing health related duties and who has satisfied the requirements set
forth by the department.
   b.   Primary Schools. The department shall provide on a full-time basis at
least one nurse at each public and private primary school which i) had at least
two hundred students enrolled on the last day of the second month of the
preceding school year; ii) submits a written request to the department that
such nurse be provided; and iii) maintains, pursuant to any rules promulgated
by the commissioner, an appropriate medical room wherein such nurse can carry
out his or her nursing duties.
   c.   Intermediate Schools. The department shall provide at least one nurse,
provided that a nurse has not been provided pursuant to subdivision b of this
section, or public health advisor or school health service aide, as
appropriate, at each public and private intermediate school which i) had at
least two hundred students enrolled on the last day of the second month of the
preceding school year; ii) submits a written request to the department that
such nurse or public health advisor or school health service aide be provided;
and iii) maintains pursuant to any rules promulgated by the commissioner, an
appropriate medical room wherein such nurse or public health advisor or school
health service aide can carry out his or her duties.
   d.   The provision of any nurses, or public health advisors when applicable,
assigned to a school pursuant to this section shall be consistent with any
applicable collective bargaining agreements.
   e.   For the purposes of this section, references to the "department" shall
mean the department, either individually or jointly with the board of education
as appropriate. The requirements or implementation of this section shall not be
construed to cause the layoff or loss of any wages, benefits or other terms and
conditions of employment of, and shall not be construed to reduce the
employment opportunities of nurses, public health advisors, public health
assistants, or school health services aides, as defined by the department, or
any other health related position, currently employed, or to be employed by
primary and intermediate schools.
   f.   The commissioner may promulgate any rules deemed necessary for the
purposes of implementing and carrying out the provisions of this section.
§ 17-187.1 Epinephrine devices.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Child care facility. The term "child care facility" has the same meaning
as the term "facility" as defined in section 47.01 of the New York city health
code.
      Child care program. The term "child care program" has the same meaning as
in section 47.01 of the New York city health code.
      Epinephrine device. The term “epinephrine device” has the same meaning as
in section 3000-c of the public health law.
      School premises. The term “school premises” means any building or
facility, or any portion thereof, in which there is a school of the city school
district of the city of New York, charter school, or nonpublic primary or
secondary school.
   b.   The department of education and any entity operating a charter school
or nonpublic primary or secondary school shall maintain an epinephrine device
in each school premises under its control in accordance with section 3000-c of
the public health law.
   c.   A child care program shall maintain at least 2 epinephrine devices in
each child care facility under its control in accordance with section 3000-c of
the public health law and section 47.29 of the New York city health code.
(L.L. 2026/002, 1/3/2026, eff. 5/3/2026)
§ 17-188 Automated external defibrillators.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:
      1.   "Automated external defibrillator" means a medical device, approved
by the United States food and drug administration, that:
         (i)   is capable of recognizing the presence or absence in a patient
of ventricular fibrillation and rapid ventricular tachycardia;
         (ii)   is capable of determining, without intervention by an
individual, whether defibrillation should be performed on a patient;
         (iii)   upon determining that defibrillation should be performed,
automatically charges and requests delivery of an electrical impulse to a
patient's heart; and (iv) upon action by an individual, delivers an appropriate
electrical impulse to a patient's heart to perform defibrillation.
      2.   "Owner or operator" means the owner, manager, operator, or other
person or persons having control of a public place.
      3.   "Public place" means the publicly accessible areas of the following
places to which the public is invited or permitted:
         (i)   public buildings maintained by the division of facilities
management and construction of the department of citywide administrative
services or any successor;
         (ii)   pool facilities under the jurisdiction of the department of
parks and recreation that have a capacity of more than 100 people;
         (iii)   parks under the jurisdiction of the department of parks and
recreation identified pursuant to subdivision e of this section;
         (iv)   ferry terminals owned and operated by the city of New York
served by ferry boats with a passenger capacity of one thousand or more
persons;
         (v)   nursing homes, as defined in section 2801 of the New York state
public health law;
         (vi)   senior centers, which include facilities operated by the city
of New York or operated by an entity that has contracted with the city to
provide services to senior citizens on a regular basis, such as meals and other
on-site activities;
         (vii)   golf courses, stadia and arenas; and
         (viii)   health clubs that are commercial establishments offering
instruction, training or assistance and/or facilities for the preservation,
maintenance, encouragement or development of physical fitness or well-being
that have a membership of at least two hundred and fifty people, and which
shall include, but not be limited to, health spas, health studios, gymnasiums,
weight control studios, martial arts and self-defense schools or any other
commercial establishment offering a similar course of physical training.
   b.   Automated external defibrillators required. Except as provided in
subdivision j of this section, the owner or operator of a public place shall
make available in such public place automated external defibrillators in
quantities and locations deemed adequate in accordance with rules promulgated
pursuant to subdivisions e and f of this section and in accordance with section
3000-b of the New York state public health law. Such automated external
defibrillators shall be readily accessible for use during medical emergencies.
Any information regarding use of automated external defibrillators deemed
necessary by the department in accordance with rules promulgated pursuant to
subdivision f of this section shall accompany and be kept with each automated
external defibrillator. Any automated external defibrillator required pursuant
to this subdivision shall be acquired, possessed and operated in accordance
with the requirements of section 3000-b of the New York state public health
law.
   c.   Notice required. The owner or operator of a public place shall provide
written notice to the public, by means of signs, printed material or other form
of written communication, indicating the availability of automated external
defibrillators for emergency use in such public place and providing information
on how to obtain automated external defibrillator training. The type, size,
style, location and language of such notice shall be determined in accordance
with rules promulgated by the department pursuant to subdivision f of this
section. Should such rules require or allow the posting of signs made available
by the department to owners or operators of a public place to serve as
appropriate notice pursuant to this subdivision, the department may charge a
fee to cover printing, postage and handling expenses.
   d.   Reports. No later than January 1, 2024, and every 6 months thereafter,
the department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council and
post on the department’s website a report indicating the quantities and
locations of automated external defibrillators placed in public places pursuant
to subdivision b of this section. Such report shall include:
      1.   Location data for each such device;
      2.   Location names;
      3.   Location addresses; and
      4.   Where practicable, specific information describing the placement of
each such device at a location, such as the floor, room, or stairwell.
   Such report shall additionally specify whether each such automated external
defibrillator is equipped with pediatric-attenuated pads or otherwise equipped
with child-appropriate functionality. The department shall submit to the
speaker of the council in a machine-readable format all raw data upon which the
report required by this subdivision is based.
   e.   Parks. The commissioner of the department of parks and recreation shall
promulgate rules identifying at least six parks in each borough under the
jurisdiction of the department of parks and recreation to be considered a
public place for the purposes of this section, which would not otherwise be
considered such a place, and determining the quantity and location of automated
external defibrillators to be placed in such parks; provided, however, that at
least one of the parks identified in each borough must be over one hundred and
seventy acres.
   f.   Rules. The department shall promulgate such rules as may be necessary
for the purpose of implementing the provisions of this section, including, but
not limited to, rules regarding the quantity and location of automated external
defibrillators to be placed in a particular public place or general category of
public place; the form of notice in which the availability of automated
external defibrillators in a public place shall be made known to the public and
any accompanying fee; and any information on the use of automated external
defibrillators that must accompany and be kept with each automatic external
defibrillator; provided, however, that the department of parks and recreation
shall determine the quantity and location of automated external defibrillators
placed in parks, pursuant to subdivision e of this section. Such rules shall
also include, but not be limited to, required training in the use of automated
external defibrillators.
   g.   Liability limited. Any person who, in accordance with the provisions of
this section, voluntarily and without expectation of monetary compensation
renders first aid or emergency treatment using an automated external
defibrillator that has been made available pursuant to this section, to a
person who is unconscious, ill or injured, and any person, owner or operator,
entity, partnership, corporation, firm or society that purchases or makes
available an automated external defibrillator as required by this section,
shall be entitled to the limitation of liability provided in section 3000-a of
the New York state public health law.
   h.   No duty to act. Nothing contained in this section shall impose any duty
or obligation on any owner or operator of a public place, his or her employee
or other agent, or any other person to provide assistance with an automated
external defibrillator to a victim of a medical emergency.
   i.   Standard of care. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to
affect the obligations or liability of emergency health providers pursuant to
section 3000-b of the New York state public health law.
   j.   Exception. During such times as an owner or operator of a public place
provides, at such public place, advanced life support by a physician,
registered professional nurse or advanced emergency medical technician acting
within his or her lawful scope of practice, or the use of automated external
defibrillators by a physician, registered professional nurse, or advanced
emergency medical technician acting within his or her lawful scope of practice,
such provision shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of subdivision b of
this section, subject to rules of the department promulgated pursuant to
subdivision f of this section. For purposes of this subdivision, advanced
emergency medical technician shall mean an advanced emergency medical
technician as defined in section three thousand one of the New York state
public health law.
   k.   Training. At least one employee who is trained in the operation of an
automated external defibrillator shall be present at the facilities of any pool
under the jurisdiction of the department of parks and recreation during all
hours of required supervision.
(Am. L.L. 2019/139, 7/27/2019, eff. 1/1/2020; Am. L.L. 2023/091, 7/9/2023, eff.
7/9/2023)
§ 17-188.1 Information on cardiopulmonary resuscitation courses available to
the public.
The department shall post in a conspicuous location on the department’s website
in English and in each of the designated citywide languages, as defined in
section
23-1101, information on free adult, child, and infant cardiopulmonary
resuscitation courses open to the public. Such information shall include the
location, date, and time of such courses. The department shall perform outreach
as necessary to identify courses that are open to the public and the location,
date, and time of such courses. Such information shall be updated at least
annually.
(L.L. 2023/094, 7/9/2023, eff. 7/9/2023)
§ 17-188.2 Blood pressure machines in public places.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Blood pressure machine. The term “blood pressure machine” means an
automated machine that provides for self-administered testing and measurement
of an individual’s blood pressure and expresses that measurement as 2 numbers
indicating a systolic pressure over a diastolic pressure.
      Public place. The term “public place” means a location accessible to the
public, and includes, but is not limited to, a place of worship, a local
business that requests a blood pressure machine, a pharmacy, a healthcare
organization, a community center, a community-based organization, or a
nonprofit organization.
      High-need area. The term “high-need area” means an area of the city
determined by the department to warrant the placement of a blood pressure
machine based on relevant social determinants of health such as high rates of
hypertension.
   b.   No later than January 1, 2024, the department shall post on the
department’s website in plain language public places in the city where blood
pressure machines are known or reported to be located, and instructions on the
use and operations of such blood pressure machines. Such information shall be
provided in the designated citywide languages, as defined in section
23-1101, and shall be updated at least annually. The department shall post a
form on the department’s website for a public place to report the placement of
a blood pressure machine.
   c.   No later than January 1, 2024, the department shall provide a report to
the speaker of the council on the location of all blood pressure machines in
public places and provide recommendations on locations in high-need areas in
which blood pressure machines should be placed.
   d.   No later than January 1, 2024, and subject to appropriation, the
department shall support making at-home blood pressure machines available at no
cost to the public at federally qualified health centers in 5 high-need areas.
The department shall post the locations of such federally qualified health
centers on its website in plain language and in the designated citywide
languages as defined in section
23-1101.
(L.L. 2023/097, 7/9/2023, eff. 1/5/2024)
§ 17-188.3 Airway clearance devices in schools.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Airway clearance device. The term “airway clearance device” means a
medical device registered as a class II acute upper airway obstruction device
with the FDA.
      FDA. The term “FDA” means the federal food and drug administration.
      School building. The term “school building” means any building or
facility in which there is a public school, private school, or charter school.
   b.   Within 180 days after (1) airway clearance devices have received
authorization from the FDA for use as choking-rescue devices during choking
emergencies for school aged children and (2) either the American Heart
Association or the American Red Cross has issued choking-rescue protocols that
recommend the use of airway clearance devices during choking emergencies for
school aged children, the department of education and each private school and
charter school shall stock airway clearance devices in all school buildings
under their respective control. FDA registration or listing alone shall not
constitute authorization from the FDA for purposes of this section.
   c.   Prior to stocking airway clearance devices pursuant to subdivision b of
this section, the department of health and mental hygiene shall offer training
to relevant staff from the department of education, private schools, and
charter schools in accordance with nationally recognized choking-rescue
protocols, including, but not limited to, those issued by the FDA, the American
Heart Association, or the American Red Cross. Such training shall be consistent
with the most current nationally recognized choking-rescue protocols and shall
emphasize that airway clearance devices are intended for use only in the
circumstances and sequence specified by such instructions and protocols.
(L.L. 2026/004, 1/3/2026, eff. 1/3/2026)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2026/004.
§ 17-189 Prohibition on sale of certain substances containing lead.
   a.   For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
      1.   "Candy products containing lead" shall mean any confection
containing lead which the department, pursuant to rules promulgated hereunder,
determines to present a risk to public health or a nuisance as defined in § 17-
142 of this code.
      2.   "Litargirio" shall mean any powder containing lead intended for sale
for personal use, including, but not limited to, use as an antiperspirant,
deodorant, foot fungicide or as a treatment for burns and wounds.
      3.   "Person" shall mean any natural person, individual, corporation,
unincorporated association, proprietorship, firm, partnership, joint venture,
joint stock association or other entity or business organization.
   b.   No person shall sell or offer for sale, or cause any person to sell or
offer for sale, candy products containing lead or products containing
litargirio.
   c.   Violations and penalties.
      1.   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
liable for a civil penalty not to exceed two hundred and fifty dollars for each
violation, provided that for a first such violation, such person may be issued
a written warning in lieu of such civil penalty. Notwithstanding any provision
of law to the contrary, any person who intentionally or knowingly violates any
provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine
of not more than two hundred and fifty dollars for each violation and/or a
prison term of not more than six months, and a civil penalty of not more than
two hundred and fifty dollars for each violation.
   d.   Enforcement. The department and the department of consumer and worker
protection shall enforce the provisions of this section. A proceeding to
recover any civil penalty authorized pursuant to subdivision c of this section
shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation returnable to the
administrative tribunal established by the board of health where the department
issues such a notice or, where the department of consumer and worker protection
issues such a notice, to any tribunal established within the office of
administrative trials and hearings. The notice of violation or copy thereof
when filled in and served shall constitute notice of the violation charged. The
administrative tribunal of the board of health and tribunals established within
the office of administrative trials and hearings shall have the power to render
decisions and to impose the remedies and penalties provided for in subdivision
c of this section, in addition to any other remedies or penalties provided for
the enforcement of such provisions under any other law including, but not
limited to, civil or criminal actions or proceedings.
   e.   Rules. The commissioner shall promulgate any rules as may be necessary
for the purposes of carrying out the provisions of this section.
(Am. L.L. 2020/080, 8/28/2020, eff. 8/28/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/049 and
L.L. 2020/080.
§ 17-190 Deaths of homeless persons and homeless shelter residents; report.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
shall be defined as follows:
      1.   "Homeless person" means a person who at the time of death did not
have a known street address of a residence at which he or she was known or
reasonably believed to have resided.
      2.   "Homeless shelter resident" means a person who at the time of death
lived in a homeless shelter as defined in paragraph 3 of this subdivision.
      3.   "Homeless shelter" means (i) a residence operated by or on behalf of
the department of homeless services; (ii) an emergency residence operated by or
on behalf of the department of social services/human resources administration
which is available primarily for homeless persons with HIV or AIDS related
illness; or (iii) a residence operated by or on behalf of the department of
housing preservation and development to the extent that such residence houses
clients of the department of homeless services; provided, however, that such
term shall not include any residence that is available primarily for battered
women.
   b.   Annual report regarding deaths of homeless persons and homeless shelter
residents.
      1.   The department shall, by January first, April first, July first and
October first of each year collect information as necessary to comply with the
provisions of paragraph 3 of this subdivision regarding the incidence of deaths
of homeless persons and homeless shelter residents during the quarter year
which began on the first day of the sixth month preceding the month by which
the information is required to be collected.
      2.   In addition to the collection of quarterly information required
pursuant to this subdivision, the department shall, subject to paragraph 4 of
this subdivision, submit an annual report to the council and the mayor by
January fifteenth of each year, (i) summarizing and aggregating, as well as
updating and amending if necessary, the information collected in the
immediately preceding four quarter years for which information was collected
pursuant to paragraph 1 of this subdivision; and (ii) indicating the causes of
death for all deaths in such report disaggregated by cause, including, but not
limited to, how many such deaths were related to exposure to outdoor
conditions.
      3.   Such report shall also include, at a minimum, (i) the number of
homeless persons who died during the preceding year, disaggregated by month,
for whom there was an investigation by the office of chief medical examiner as
required pursuant to section 557 of the charter, the number of homeless shelter
residents who died during the preceding year, disaggregated by month, and, to
the extent such information is readily available, the number of other homeless
persons who died during the preceding year, disaggregated by month; (ii) the
community board district where each such decedent died, disaggregated within
each such district by whether the death occurred outdoors, in a hospital, in a
nursing home and/or other residential health care facility, in a homeless
shelter, or, to the extent such information is available, in another facility,
residence or other type of location, provided, however, that the location of
decedents who died in a residence operated by or on behalf of the department of
social services/human resources administration which is available primarily for
homeless persons with HIV or AIDS related illness shall be provided by borough;
(iii) an indication as to whether the decedent was known to be living in a
homeless shelter at the time of death and the community board district in which
such homeless shelter is located, provided, however, that the location of the
residence of decedents known to be living in a homeless shelter operated by or
on behalf of the department of social services/human resources administration
which is available primarily for homeless persons with HIV or AIDS related
illness shall be provided by borough; and (iv) the age or approximate age and
gender of each such decedent; provided, however, that in cases where the
identity of a decedent is unknown or in cases where it is unknown whether such
decedent was a homeless person or a homeless shelter resident, the department
shall provide the information required by this paragraph during the year that
such information becomes available, as well as the date or approximate date
such death occurred.
      4.   The department may withhold information from an annual report about
an individual decedent otherwise required pursuant to this subdivision to the
extent that such withholding is necessary to avoid disclosing the identity of
such decedent, provided that the department shall specify when such information
is withheld and shall report all other information about such decedent that
will not reveal the identity of such decedent.
      5.   In each annual report required pursuant to this subdivision, the
department shall describe the methodologies used to identify homeless persons
and homeless shelter residents and provide an analysis of the reliability and
validity of such methodologies.
      6.   The quarterly information and annual reports required pursuant to
this subdivision shall be made available to any member of the public upon
request.
   c.   Rules. The department after public hearings shall promulgate such rules
as are necessary to implement the provisions of this section.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/063 and
L.L. 2012/007.
§ 17-191 Child fatality review advisory team.
   a.   For purposes of this section, the term "child fatality" shall mean the
death of any person in the city of New York under the age of thirteen where (1)
the death is unanticipated, (2) the death is the result of trauma, or (3) the
circumstances of the death are suspicious, obscure or otherwise unexplained;
provided, however, that such term shall not include the death of any person
under the age of thirteen where such death is the subject of a pending criminal
investigation, prosecution or appeal.
   b.   There shall be established within the department, in accordance with
all applicable state and local laws, a child fatality review advisory team to
examine the facts and circumstances relating to child fatalities. The team
shall consist of the commissioner of the administration of children's services,
or his or her designee; the commissioner of the police department, or his or
her designee; the chief medical examiner, or his or her designee; the
commissioner of the department of health and mental hygiene, or his or her
designee; and, if required by applicable law, the commissioner of the New York
state office of children and family services, or his or her designee. The
chancellor of the department of education, or his or her designee, may become a
member of the team at his or her discretion. The mayor shall appoint to the
team a maximum of two additional individuals, including at least one
pediatrician and at least one person who advocates on child-related issues;
provided, however, that such individuals shall not hold any other public
office, employment or trust. The speaker of the city council shall appoint to
the team a maximum of two additional individuals, including at least one
pediatrician and at least one person who advocates on child-related issues;
provided, however, that such individuals shall not hold any other public
office, employment or trust. The public advocate shall appoint to the team one
additional individual; provided, however, that such individual shall not hold
any other public office, employment or trust.
   c.   Each member of the child fatality review advisory team, other than any
member serving in an ex officio capacity, or such member's designee, and, if he
or she chooses to serve, the chancellor of the department of education, or his
or her designee, shall serve for a term of two years, and may be removed from
office for cause. Any vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as the
original appointment.
   d.   All members of the child fatality review advisory team shall serve
without compensation, except that each member shall be allowed actual and
necessary expenses to be audited in the same manner as other city charges.
   e.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall be
ineligible for membership on the child fatality review advisory team because
such person holds any other public office, employment or trust, nor shall any
person be made ineligible to or forfeit such person's right to any public
office, employment or trust by reason of such appointment.
   f.   The child fatality review advisory team shall meet at least four times
a year. The commissioner of the department of health and mental hygiene shall
serve as chairperson of the team and shall convene the first meeting of the
team within ninety days after the effective date of the local law that added
this section.
   g.   The child fatality review advisory team's work shall include, but not
be limited to, reviewing aggregate data relating to child fatalities and
formulating recommendations regarding methods of improving the protection of
children in order to decrease the future incidence of child fatalities in the
city of New York.
   h.   The child fatality review advisory team may request information from
any agency as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section, in
accordance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations, including, but not
limited to, laws related to attorney-client privilege, attorney work product,
material prepared for litigation and disclosure of agency records under the
public officers law. The team may also request such information from any not-
for-profit organization which provided services to the victim of a child
fatality or to the family members of such victim, in accordance with all
applicable laws, rules and regulations, including, but not limited to, laws
related to attorney-client privilege, attorney work product, material prepared
for litigation and confidentiality. Nothing in this subdivision shall be
construed as limiting any right or obligation of agencies pursuant to the
public officers law, including the exceptions to disclosure of agency records
contained in such law, with respect to access to or disclosure of records or
portions thereof. The team shall keep confidential all information that it
receives and protect the privacy of all individuals involved in the child
fatality cases that it reviews to the extent provided by law.
   i.   The child fatality review advisory team shall submit to the mayor, the
speaker of the city council and the public advocate, annually, a report
including, but not limited to, the number of child fatality cases which
occurred in the city of New York during the previous year; statistics regarding
the causes of child fatalities; specific non-identifying data with respect to
the victims of child fatalities, such as gender, age and race, and, if
available, religion and ethnicity; statistics regarding the location of child
fatalities, disaggregated by borough; and recommendations regarding ways to
decrease the future incidence of child fatalities in the city of New York.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/115 and
L.L. 2012/006.
§ 17-192 Foods containing artificial trans fat.
   a.   Definitions. The following terms shall have the following meanings:
      1.   "Artificial trans fat" shall have the meaning as such term is
defined in section 81.08 of the health code of the city of New York or any
successor provision.
      2.   "Food service establishment" shall have the meaning as such term is
defined in section 81.03 of the health code of the city of New York or any
successor provision.
      3.   "Mobile food unit commissary" shall have the meaning as such term is
defined in section 89.01 of the health code of the city of New York or any
successor provision.
   b.   Artificial trans fat restricted. No foods containing artificial trans
fat shall be stored, distributed, held for service, used in preparation of any
menu item or served by any food service establishment or by any mobile food
unit commissary; provided that this subdivision shall not apply to food that is
served directly to patrons in a manufacturer's original sealed package.
   c.   Rules. The department may promulgate such rules as may be necessary to
implement the provisions of this section.
   d.   Labels required. Food service establishments and mobile food unit
commissaries shall comply with the requirements set forth in subdivision (c) of
section 81.08 of the health code of the city of New York regarding labeling for
food products containing artificial trans fat.
   e.   Penalties. Any food service establishment or mobile food unit
commissary that violates any of the provisions of this section or any rule
promulgated pursuant thereto by the department shall be liable for a civil
penalty of $100. Where a food service establishment or mobile food unit
commissary is found to have violated this section or any rule promulgated
pursuant thereto by the department, the department shall commence a proceeding
to recover any civil penalty authorized by this section by the service of a
summons returnable to the office of administrative trials and hearings.
   f.   Cure permitted. Any food service establishment or mobile food unit
commissary that violates this section or any rules promulgated thereunder shall
not be subject to a civil penalty for a first-time violation if such
establishment or commissary proves to the satisfaction of the department,
within seven days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the
commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been
cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as
proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of
liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation
has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the
department to a person who has received, for the first time, a notice of
violation of this section or any rules promulgated pursuant thereto. The
department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person.
A person may seek review, in the office of administrative trials and hearings,
of the determination that the person has not submitted proof of a cure within
15 days of receiving written notification of such determination.
(Am. L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 1/14/2022)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2007/012 and
L.L. 2021/080.
§ 17-193 Trauma scenes.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall
have the following meanings:
      1.   "City" shall mean the city of New York.
      2.   "City property" shall mean any property owned and managed by the
city.
      3.   "Trauma" shall mean any serious physical injury or death.
      4.   "Trauma scene" shall mean any area where a trauma occurred that has
been visibly contaminated by human blood or bodily fluids as a result of such
trauma.
      5.   "Trauma scene management" shall mean the use of procedures and
materials sufficient to clean and decontaminate a trauma scene and safely
remove human blood or bodily fluids and other appropriate waste as determined
by the department from such scene.
   b.   City property. The department shall establish guidelines for trauma
scene management on city property that shall be followed by city agencies,
subject to applicable emergency response protocols, which shall include, but
not be limited to, procedures regarding:
      1.   the immediate restriction of access to a trauma scene;
      2.   the cleaning and decontamination of a trauma scene including, but
not limited to, the application of appropriate disinfectants to such scene; and
      3.   the removal of any waste, including but not limited to, waste
generated from cleaning and decontamination activities and the disposal of such
waste in accordance with applicable laws and guidelines.
   c.   Property other than city property. The department shall establish
guidelines for trauma scene management on property other than city property
within the city and post such guidelines on an appropriate website. Where a
trauma scene occurs on or within any portion of such property, a member of the
police department or fire department responding to such scene shall inform the
owner, resident or occupant of such property that such guidelines may be
obtained by calling 311 or accessing the website established by the city for
such purpose. Such guidelines shall include, but not be limited to:
      1.   guidelines for trauma scene management established pursuant to
subdivision b of this section and modified, where appropriate, to include
procedures for trauma scene management that may be undertaken by such owner,
resident or occupant on such property;
      2.   contact information for the New York state office of victim services
and information indicating how such owner, resident or occupant can apply to
such office for financial assistance to help cover the cost of professional
clean up of a trauma scene, including how application forms can be obtained at
the office's local office or website;
      3.   contact information for any organization that certifies professional
trauma scene clean-up companies in the New York city area; and
      4.   a statement indicating that private insurance might cover the cost
of professional clean-up of a trauma scene and that such owner, resident or
occupant should contact his or her insurance carrier for further information.
   d.   Rules. The commissioner shall promulgate rules and regulations as may
be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.
§ 17-194 Drinking water tank inspections.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall
have the following meanings:
      Building. The term "building" means any building, structure, premises, or
part thereof.
      Drinking water. The term "drinking water" means water used for human
consumption or used directly or indirectly in connection with the preparation
of food for human consumption, including, but not limited to, the cleaning of
utensils used in the preparation of food.
      Owner. The term "owner" means any owner, manager, operator or other
person or persons having control of a building and any authorized agent
thereof.
      Water heater. The term "water heater" means any heating appliance or
equipment that heats potable water and supplies such water to the potable hot
water distribution system.
      Water tank. The term "water tank" means any device used to store drinking
water that is distributed as part of the water supply system of a building,
however such term shall not apply to domestic hot water heaters.
      Water tank inspector. The term "water tank inspector" means a person that
inspects a water tank pursuant to this section and is (i) a licensed master
plumber pursuant to
 article 408 of chapter 4 of title 28, (ii) works under the direct and
continuing supervision of such a licensed master plumber, or (iii) is a
registered design professional as defined in section
28-101.5.
   b.   Any owner of a building that has a water tank as part of its drinking
water supply system shall have such water tank inspected at least once
annually. Such inspection shall ensure that the water tank complies with all
provisions of the administrative code of the city of New York, the construction
codes of the city of New York and the health code of the city of New York. The
results of such inspection shall be recorded in a manner prescribed by the
commissioner. Such results shall be maintained by the owner and by the water
tank inspector for at least five years from the date of inspection and shall be
made available to the department upon request within five business days. An
owner shall ensure that documentation of such annual inspection shall be
submitted to the department by the water tank inspector, in a form and manner
prescribed by the department. Such documentation shall state whether or not all
applicable requirements were met at the time of inspection and provide a
description of any non-compliance with applicable requirements. Such
documentation shall include visual depictions, such as photographs or videos,
which display the interior and exterior of the water tank. The department may
require an owner to conduct additional inspections and provide any additional
documentation, including receipts of work orders, or visual depictions such as
photographs or videos. The department may require that any document submitted
to the department pursuant to this section be submitted electronically.
   c.   The inspection of a water tank pursuant to subdivision b of this
section shall be conducted by a water tank inspector. In addition to the
requirements of the New York city health code, the cleaning, painting or
coating of a water tank shall be conducted by a water tank inspector, or by a
person who holds a commercial pesticide applicator certification in category 7G
issued by the New York state department of environmental conservation or works
under the direct supervision of a person holding such certification.
   d.   The owner of a building shall post a notice stating that (i) the water
tank inspection results are maintained on file in a specific location and will
be made available when a person makes such a request to either the building
owner or manager and (ii) that a person may contact the department if the
inspection results are not made available to such person by the building owner
or manager. Upon receipt of such request, the owner or manager shall make a
copy of the inspection results available within five business days. Such notice
shall be posted in a location easily accessible to tenants and in a frame with
a transparent cover, and may be combined with similar notices where not
otherwise prohibited by law.
   e.   Beginning March 1, 2019, and each year thereafter, the department shall
submit to the council a report which shall provide information about water tank
inspections for the preceding calendar year including, but not limited to:
      1.   The estimated number of building water tanks and the estimated
number of buildings serviced by such tanks;
      2.   The number of complete building water tank inspection results
received by the department pursuant to subdivision b of this section;
      3.   The number of building water tank inspection results received by the
department that documented compliance with applicable requirements; and
      4.   The number of violations issued by the department pursuant to
subdivision j of this section, section 141.07 of the health code or chapter 31
of title 24 of the rules of the city of New York.
   f.   Water tank inspection information on website. Within 35 business days
of receiving the documentation of an annual inspection required pursuant to
subdivision b, the department shall post such documentation on its website and
the web portal providing access to public data sets described in section
23-502. The department's website shall provide notice that failure to conduct a
required water tank inspection is a violation of law. Information available to
the public shall include:
      1.   Guidance to assist users in accessing any prior inspection report
for a building available on the web portal providing access to public data sets
described in section
23-502;
      2.   Guidance to assist users in determining whether a building is
required to have a water tank inspection pursuant to this section or section
141.07 of the health code; and
      3.   Information about how to submit a complaint about a water tank, or
water from a water tank, to the department.
   g.   Any owner of a building shall have a duty to maintain a water tank and
such water tank's supporting structures in a safe condition. If, as a result of
an annual inspection required by subdivision b of this section, it is
determined that a water tank or its supporting structure is structurally unsafe
or dangerous, the water tank inspector or owner shall take such actions as are
required by section
28-301.1 and report such condition to the department of buildings in writing.
   h.   1.   The department shall periodically audit a sample of buildings'
documentation of the annual inspections required to be maintained pursuant to
subdivision b of this section. Such audit shall review such documentation for
accuracy and the department may conduct such audits without prior notice to a
building's owner, as authorized by law. The department shall also annually
inspect 125 water tanks, selected at random by the department, for compliance
with this section.
      2.   The department shall post the results of such periodic audits and
inspections on its website and the web portal providing access to public data
sets described in section
23-502 within 35 days of conducting such a periodic audit or inspection.
   i.   1.   Wherever harmful bacteria are found in a water tank and reported
to the department in accordance with section 141.07 of the health code, or
where a water tank has been the subject of certain violations within the prior
12 months identified by the department, the department shall review
documentation of the annual inspections required by subdivision b of this
section for such water tank. The department may review such documentation
without prior notice to the building's owner, as authorized by law.
      2.   The department shall post the results of the documentation review
required by paragraph 1 of this subdivision on its website and the web portal
providing access to public data sets described in section
23-502 within 35 days of such review.
   j.   Any owner of a building who violates subdivisions b or c of this
section or any of the rules promulgated thereunder shall be liable for a civil
penalty not less than $200 and not to exceed $2,000 for each violation. Any
owner of a building who violates subdivision d of this section or any of the
rules promulgated thereunder shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed
$250 for each violation. Any owner of a building who violates subdivision g of
this section shall be liable for a civil penalty not less than $200 and not to
exceed $2,000 for each violation.
(Am. L.L. 2017/239, 12/17/2017, eff. 4/16/2018; Am. L.L. 2019/082, 5/10/2019,
eff. 9/7/2019, Am. L.L. 2019/083, 5/10/2019, eff. 9/7/2019, Am. L.L. 2019/084,
5/10/2019, eff. 9/7/2019, Am. L.L. 2019/085, 5/10/2019, eff. 9/7/2019, Am. L.L.
2019/086, 5/10/2019, eff. 9/7/2019, Am. L.L. 2019/087, 5/10/2019, eff. 9/7/
2019, Am. L.L. 2019/088, 5/10/2019, eff. 9/7/2019)
§ 17-194.1 Cooling towers; maintenance, inspection and testing.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have
the following meanings:
      Building. The term "building" has the same meaning as in section
28-101.5 of this code.
      Cooling tower. The term "cooling tower" has the same meaning as in
section
28-317.2 of this code.
      Owner. The term "owner" has the same meaning as in section
28-101.5 of this code.
   b.   Registration. An owner of a building that has a cooling tower shall
register the cooling tower with the department of buildings in accordance with
article 317 of
chapter 3 of title 28 of this code.
   c.   Maintenance program and plan. An owner of a building that has a cooling
tower shall develop and implement a maintenance program and plan for such
cooling tower that is in accordance with sections 5, 6, and 7.2 of the American
society of heating, refrigeration and air-conditioning engineers standard 188
for the year 2015 (ASHRAE 188-2015) and with the manufacturer's instructions.
Such program and plan shall be developed by a qualified person.
   d.   Cleaning and disinfection after extended shut-down. At a minimum, an
owner shall clean and disinfect cooling towers that are shut-down for more than
five days. Cleaning and disinfection shall occur within 15 days before the use
of such tower.  
   e.   Minimum requirements for inspections and testing. At a minimum, cooling
towers, other than cooling towers whose use has been permanently discontinued
and for which a notice of such discontinuation has been sent to the department
of buildings, shall be inspected at least as frequently as every three months
and tested at least as frequently as every month during periods of the year
such cooling towers are in use.
      1.   Each inspection shall include an evaluation of the cooling tower and
associated equipment for the presence of organic material, biofilm, algae and
other visible contaminants.
      2.   Each test shall include collection of a sample to evaluate the
presence of microbes in the water of the cooling tower. The sample must be
collected at least two days after any routine or corrective action required by
the department, including the application of biocide, cleaning or disinfection.
The department shall by rule establish (i) the targets and acceptable methods
of microbial testing and laboratory analysis, (ii) the levels of microbes in
cooling towers that are indicative of a maintenance deficiency requiring
mitigation, including but not limited to maintenance to prevent potential
health risks, and (iii) the levels of microbes in cooling towers that present a
serious health threat and require corrective action and reporting.
         (a)   Where the results of any such test indicate levels of microbes
that are indicative of a maintenance deficiency requiring mitigation, including
but not limited to maintenance to prevent potential health risks, the owner of
the building that has such cooling tower shall, within 48 hours after such
owner knows or reasonably should know of such results, clean and disinfect the
cooling tower in accordance with the rules of the department.
         (b)   Where the results of any such test indicate levels of microbes
that present a serious health threat, the owner of the building that has such
cooling tower shall, within 24 hours after such owner knows or reasonably
should know of such results, (i) notify the department and (ii) clean and
disinfect the cooling tower, including an additional application of biocide, in
accordance with the rules of the department.
   e-1.   Summer cooling tower treatment. Each year, during warm weather when
there is an increased risk of legionella growth, an owner shall perform a
biocide treatment of each cooling tower in accordance with the rules of the
department.
   f.   Inspections, testing, cleaning and disinfection. All inspections,
testing, cleaning and disinfection required by this section shall be performed
by or under the supervision of a qualified person. For any tests conducted
pursuant to paragraph 2 of subdivision e of this section, such qualified person
shall, within five days of such test, report to the department the date on
which such test occurred, and the department shall make that date available on
a city website. The owner shall ensure that such report is submitted to the
department by the qualified person within five days of the test. When the
department inspects a property pursuant to paragraph 1 of subdivision i of this
section, it shall check the accuracy of the dates reported pursuant to this
subdivision against the dates of testing in the records of the property owner.
   g.   Abatement. Where an owner does not clean and disinfect a cooling tower
within the time and manner set forth in subdivision e, the department may serve
an order on the owner requiring compliance within a specified time. If such
order is not complied with the department may authorize any agency of the city
to act as agent of the department in executing such order and may recover the
costs of such execution from the owner in accordance with any of the methods
set forth in sections
17-149 through
17-158.  
   h.   Recordkeeping. 
         1.   An owner shall keep and maintain records of all inspections and
tests performed pursuant to this section for at least three years. An owner
shall maintain a copy of the maintenance program and plan required by
subdivision c of this section on the premises where a cooling tower is located.
Such records and plan shall be made available to the department immediately
upon request.
         2.   An owner shall make available the results of each inspection and
test conducted pursuant to subdivision e of this section to any member of the
public within five business days of a request, or within five business days of
the receipt of such results by such owner, whichever is later.
   i.   Enforcement.   
      1.   An officer, employee or agent of the department may enter onto any
property to inspect the cooling tower, and review and obtain a copy of any
records or plan required to be kept under subdivision h of this section, for
compliance with the requirements of this section or any of the rules
promulgated thereunder, in accordance with applicable law.  
      2.   (i)   Any owner of a building who violates any provision of this
section or any of the rules promulgated thereunder shall be liable for a civil
penalty of not more than $2,000 for a first violation, and not more than $5,000
for a second or subsequent violation, except that such owner shall be liable
for a penalty of not more than $10,000 for any violation that is accompanied by
or results in a fatality or serious injury.
         (ii)   In addition to any civil penalties under this subdivision, a
violation of an order pursuant to subdivision g of this section shall be a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $25,000 or imprisonment for
not more than one year, or both.
         (iii)   A notice of violation served for civil penalties pursuant to
this section shall be returnable at the environmental control board or any
tribunal established within the office of administrative trials and hearings.
   j.   Electronic reporting. The department may require any submission
required by this section be submitted electronically.
   k.   Guidance for building owners. The department, in consultation with the
department of buildings, shall hold information sessions, at least twice
annually, for interested building owners, regarding the requirements for
maintaining, cleaning, and inspecting cooling towers in accordance with this
section. The information provided in such information sessions shall also be
posted on the website of the department in simple and understandable terms.
   l.   The commissioner, in consultation with the department of buildings,
shall submit a report to the mayor and the speaker of the city council on or
before May 15 each year, reporting on the following information for the prior
year:
      1.   The number of new cooling tower registrations pursuant to section
28-317.3 and the number of notifications of discontinued use of a cooling tower
pursuant to section
28-317.3.1 received by the department of buildings through November 1 of the
prior year;
      2.   The number of annual certifications that a cooling tower was
inspected, tested, cleaned and disinfected pursuant to section
28-317.5 received by the department of buildings through November 1 of the
prior year;
      3.   The number of reports of tests for the presence of microbes that
reveal levels that present a serious health threat received by the department
pursuant to paragraph 2 of subdivision e of this section;
      4.   The number of inspections of cooling towers conducted pursuant to
subdivision i of this section and the rules of the department, the number and
types of any violations cited during such inspections, and the number of
buildings registered pursuant to subdivision b of this section by November 1 of
the prior year that were not inspected;
      5.   The number of cleanings, disinfections, tests, or other actions
performed by or on behalf of the department pursuant to paragraph 1 of
subdivision i of this section; and
      6.   The number of persons diagnosed with Legionnaires’ disease in the
city in each of the previous 10 years, to the extent known or reasonably
discoverable by the department.
   m.   In addition to the requirements of section
23-502, the results of each inspection of a cooling tower by the department
conducted after the effective date of this section pursuant to paragraph 1 of
subdivision i of this section shall be posted in a searchable format on the
website of the department and maintained on such website for no less than three
years.
(L.L. 2015/077, 8/18/2015, eff. 3/1/2016; Am. L.L. 2019/076, 4/28/2019, eff.
10/25/2019; Am. L.L. 2019/077, 4/28/2019, eff. 7/27/2019; Am. L.L. 2019/078, 4/
28/2019, eff. 7/27/2019; Am. L.L. 2025/159, 11/8/2025, eff. 5/7/2026)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2015/077.
§ 17-195 Food allergy posters.
   a.   Definitions.
      1.   "Covered languages" shall mean Chinese, English, Korean, Russian and
Spanish, and any other language determined by the department.
      2.   "Food service establishment" shall have the meaning as such term is
defined in section 81.03 of the health code of the city of New York, except
that it shall apply exclusively to restaurants where food is sold and space is
designated specifically as an eating area.
   b.   The department shall create a poster containing information on food
allergy to be posted in food service establishments. Such poster shall be
printed in the covered languages and shall be made available by the department
to food service establishments.
   c.   Every food service establishment shall post, in accordance with the
rules of the department, the poster containing information on food allergy
created by the department pursuant to subdivision b of this section in a
conspicuous location accessible to all employees involved in the preparation of
food and the service of food.
   d.   The department may charge a fee to cover printing, postage and handling
expenses in connection with making the poster available to food service
establishments.
   e.   Any food service establishment that violates subdivision c of this
section or any of the rules promulgated thereunder shall be liable for a civil
penalty not to exceed one hundred dollars for each violation.
§ 17-195.1 Posting of sanitary inspection grade.
   a.   Definition. "Internet-based food delivery service provider" shall mean
any food service establishment as defined in section 81.03 of the health code
of the city of New York that accepts food orders for delivery from customers
via the internet or mobile application, or any third-party website or mobile
application that accepts food orders for delivery from customers via the
internet.
   b.   Every internet-based food delivery service provider shall conspicuously
post on their website or mobile application a hyperlink to the city of New
York's health department food establishments lookup tool, which lists the most
current sanitary inspection letter grade of any food service establishment,
pursuant to section 81.51 of the health code of the city of New York, for which
food delivery services are provided to customers.
   c.   Any internet-based food delivery service provider that violates
subdivision b of this section or any of the rules promulgated thereunder shall
be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed one hundred dollars for each
violation.
(2024 N.Y. Laws Ch. 540, 11/25/2024, eff. 3/25/2025)
§ 17-196 Electronic death registration system.
   a.   Definition. For the purposes of this section, the term "responsible
person" shall mean any individual, governmental body or division thereof or
corporate entity authorized by the department to use the electronic death
registration system.
   b.   Development of an electronic death registration system. The department
shall, subject to the approval of the board of health, develop an electronic
death registration system. Such electronic death registration system shall
include an internet based electronic method of collecting, storing, recording,
transmitting, amending and authenticating information necessary to complete a
death registration. Such system shall enable the department to produce
certified death certificates and amended death certificates, as well as burial,
transportation, cremation and disinterment permits, and any such other related
documents determined by the department as capable of being produced and
transmitted by such system. Such system shall, with the exception of certified
death certificates and amended death certificates, be able to transmit
information and documents to remote local printers or facsimile machines of
responsible persons for printing. Such system shall include an electronic
payment system by which all fees, including, but not limited to, those relating
to data recordation and the issuance of permits and certified copies of death
certificates, may be transmitted to the department. The department shall ensure
that the electronic death registration system be designed in such a way so as
to best facilitate convenient access by responsible persons in a manner
consistent with ensuring system security.
   c.   Implementation.
      (i)   By October 1, 2006, the department shall ensure that at least sixty
percent of all deaths occurring within the city of New York are registered via
the electronic death registration system.
      (ii)   By October 1, 2008, the department shall ensure that the
electronic death registration system is accessible to all responsible persons
who seek to use such system for the registration of deaths occurring within the
city of New York and that at least seventy-five percent of all deaths occurring
within the city of New York are registered via such system.
   d.   Emergency events; exceptions. In the event of an emergency declared by
the commissioner or the mayor, or exigent circumstances declared by the
commissioner or chief medical examiner on a case-by-case basis, the electronic
death registration system shall not be required as the means for the
registration of deaths.
   e.   Training and certification. By October 1, 2004, the department shall
develop a training curriculum and implement a training program based on such
curriculum to train all responsible persons and their designees pursuant to
subdivision f of this section in the operation and use of the electronic death
registration system. The department shall ensure that such training program be
offered at least four times a year at various locations throughout the city of
New York at a price reasonably related to the cost of providing such training.
Such programs may be operated by the department or by a private entity,
including, but not limited to, health care facilities and relevant professional
associations and societies, pursuant to an agreement with the department. At
the successful completion of such training, such responsible persons and their
designees shall receive a certification from the department indicating that
such training was successfully completed.
   f.   Access.
      (i)   A responsible person may designate one or more employees of such
responsible person to input information into the electronic death registration
system under the supervision of such responsible person, but who are not
authorized to authenticate such information.
      (ii)   By November 1, 2004, the department shall provide at least two
computer workstations at all burial desks operated by the office of vital
statistics for the use of responsible persons to input information into the
electronic death registration system.
   g.   Violations. Any responsible person who violates any rules promulgated
pursuant to this section shall be liable to pay a penalty as provided by the
health code of the city of New York, the administrative code of the city of New
York or any other applicable law, rule or regulation.
   h.   Reserved. 
   i.   Reserved. 
   j.   Rules. By November 1, 2004, the department shall promulgate rules in
accordance with this section, and such other rules as may be necessary for the
purpose of implementing and carrying out the provisions of this section. Such
rules shall include a schedule of fees relating to the issuance of permits and
certified death certificates that are reasonably related to the cost of
operating and maintaining the electronic death registration system.
(Am. L.L. 2023/068, 5/29/2023, eff. 6/28/2023; Am. L.L. 2023/069, 5/29/2023,
eff. 6/28/2023)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2004/002.
§ 17-197 Restraining animals outdoors.
   a.   (1)   No person shall tether, leash, fasten, secure, restrain, chain or
tie an animal to a stationary object outdoors, or cause such animal to be so
restrained, for longer than three continuous hours in any continuous twelve-
hour period.
      (2)   Any person who tethers, leashes, fastens, secures, restrains,
chains or ties an animal to a stationary object outdoors for a permissible
period of time shall provide such animal with adequate food, water and shelter,
and shall restrain the animal with a device having swivels at both ends that is
of an adequate length for the type and size of animal being restrained,
provided, however, that the requirement to provide adequate food, water and
shelter shall not apply to a person who restrains an animal while completing a
task for a period of time that is fifteen minutes or less in duration.
   b.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision a of this section, no
person shall tether, leash, fasten, chain, tie, secure or restrain any animal
for any amount of time with a device that:
      (1)   is a choke collar or pinch collar;
      (2)   has weights attached or contains links that are more than one-
quarter inch thick;
      (3)   because of its design or placement is likely to become entangled;
      (4)   is long enough to allow the animal to move outside of its owner's
property; and
      (5)   would allow the restrained animal to move over an object or edge
that could result in the strangulation of or injury to such animal.
   c.   Any person who violates the provisions of this section or any of the
rules promulgated thereunder shall, for a first offense, be guilty of a
violation punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars,
provided that such person shall be issued a written warning instead of such
fine for such first offense where such animal was not injured as a result of
being restrained in violation of this section. For any subsequent offense
within a continuous twelve-month period, such person shall be guilty of a class
B misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars or by
imprisonment of not more than three months, or both. In addition to such
penalties, any person who violates this section shall be liable for a civil
penalty of not less than two hundred fifty dollars nor more than five hundred
dollars.
   d.   Authorized officers, veterinarians and employees of the department,
agents of the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and any
other persons designated by the commissioner shall be empowered to enforce the
provisions of this section or any rule promulgated hereunder. Violations of
this section may be supported by evidence including, but not limited to, time-
stamped photographs and video, records of complaints, and sworn witness
statements.
   e.   The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the
department, the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals or
any law enforcement officer from enforcing any other law, rule or regulation
regarding the humane treatment of animals.
   f.   The provisions of subdivision (a) of this section shall not apply to
the officers or employees of any federal, state or city law enforcement agency.
§ 17-197.1 Wild and exotic animal circus performances prohibited.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have
the following meanings:
      Cause a performance. The term "cause a performance" means to be
financially or operationally responsible for the management of a performance,
or to officially or financially sponsor a performance.
      Circus. The term "circus" means any live show or carnival which, along
with clown, acrobatic, or stunt performances, features performances by live
wild or exotic animals that, in order to be able to perform, have traveled in
mobile housing facilities or were taken from their permanent residence and
required to travel for any distance.
      Companion animal. The term "companion animal" means any domesticated
animal normally maintained in or near the household of the owner or person who
cares for such animal. The term "companion animal" does not include farm
animals or animals that cannot be sold, given, possessed, harbored, kept or
yarded pursuant to paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) of section 161.01 of the
New York city health code.
      Farm animal. The term "farm animal" means poultry, sheep, swine, goats,
donkeys, mules, horses, alpacas, llamas, camels, or any species of cattle.
      Wild or exotic animal. The term "wild or exotic animal" means any animal,
other than a companion animal or farm animal, from any of the following
superorders, orders, classes, families or clades, or any hybrid of any such
animal, including a hybrid with a companion animal or farm animal:
         1.   Artiodactyla (including hippopotamuses and giraffes);
         2.   Canidae (including wolves, foxes and jackals);
         3.   Cetacea (including whales and dolphins);
         4.   Crocodilia (including alligators and crocodiles);
         5.   Elephantidae (elephants);
         6.   Felidae (including tigers, lions, jaguars and leopards);
         7.   Hyaenidae (hyenas);
         8.   Kangaroos;
         9.   Non-human primates (including apes, monkeys and lemurs);
         10.   Perissodactyla (including rhinoceroses, tapirs and zebras);
         11.   Pinnipedia (including seals, sea lions and walruses);
         12.   Struthio (ostriches); and
         13.   Ursidae (bears).
   b.   Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a
performance of any wild or exotic animal that is part of a circus.
   c.   Enforcement. Any authorized employee, officer, or agent of the
department or any other city agency designated by the mayor may enforce the
provisions of this section or any rule promulgated thereunder.
   d.   Rules. The commissioner may promulgate rules as may be necessary for
the purpose of carrying out this section.
   e.   Violation and penalties. Any person who violates subdivision b of this
section or any rule promulgated thereunder shall be liable for a civil penalty
not to exceed $2,500 for each violation recoverable in a proceeding before any
tribunal established within the office of administrative trials and hearings or
within any agency of the city of New York designated to conduct such
proceedings; except that for a first such violation and other violations of
subdivision b occurring on the same day, such person shall be liable for a
civil penalty not to exceed $1,000 for each violation recoverable in a
proceeding before any such tribunal. Each performance of an individual wild or
exotic animal constitutes a separate violation of this section.
   f.   Other laws not affected. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
affect any other protections or prohibitions related to animals pursuant to any
other provision of law.
(L.L. 2017/118, 7/22/2017, eff. 10/1/2018; Am. L.L. 2017/138, 8/20/2017, eff.
8/20/2017; Am. L.L. 2023/151, 11/17/2023, eff. 11/17/2023)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2017/118.
§ 17-198 Hepatitis B and hepatitis C data compilation and reporting.
On or before September 30 of two thousand sixteen and each year thereafter, the
department shall submit an annual report to the speaker of the council and the
mayor detailing the department's efforts to identify and prevent the spread of
hepatitis B and hepatitis C during the preceding calendar year.
   a.   Such annual report shall, at minimum, provide separate data on
hepatitis B and hepatitis C, disaggregated by disease where applicable,
including:
      (i)   the number of persons newly reported to the department with
hepatitis B and hepatitis C infections;
      (ii)   the prevalence of diagnosed cases;
      (iii)   the top five causes of hepatitis B and hepatitis C infections in
newly reported cases to the department where a cause is indicated;
      (iv)   the demographic information, including age, gender, zip code or
other neighborhood-level designation, borough and, in cases where data is
available, country of birth, of persons infected with hepatitis B and persons
infected with hepatitis C;
      (v)   the demographic information, including, to the extent available,
age, gender, zip code or other neighborhood-level designation, borough, race,
ethnicity and national origin of persons infected with hepatitis B and of
persons infected with hepatitis C who receive care or treatment in a program
operated or contracted by the department or which receives funding from the
council. The department shall also report any such information provided to it
by the New York city health and hospitals corporation;
      (vi)   the number of deaths where hepatitis B and the number of deaths
where hepatitis C is listed as the immediate cause of death or the immediate or
underlying cause of death on a person's medical certificate of death, and the
number of deaths where hepatitis B, hepatitis C or liver cancer is listed as a
significant condition contributing to death on a person's medical certificate
of death;
      (vii)   the number of new liver cancers diagnosed;
      (viii)   the number of new liver cancers diagnosed for which it has been
reported to the department that the person also has hepatitis B or hepatitis C,
provided, however, that the department is able to obtain the requisite
information from the New York state department of health in order to complete
such reporting;
      (ix)   in cases of hepatitis B or hepatitis C diagnosed in a viral
hepatitis program operated or contracted by the department or which receives
funding from the council, the number of persons linked to care; the number of
persons evaluated for treatment; the number of persons who have started
treatment; and the number of persons who have completed treatment. The
department shall also report any such information provided to it by the New
York city health and hospitals corporation;
      (x)   the number of hepatitis B vaccine doses given and three-dose series
completed for hepatitis B for persons who receive care or treatment in a
program operated or contracted by the department, including those for whom care
or treatment is provided by sites that are contracted to provide department-
provided hepatitis B vaccine and those for whom care or treatment is provided
by entities that voluntarily provide such information to the department, and
the number of hepatitis B vaccine doses given and three-dose series completed
for hepatitis B for children;
      (xi)   the number of pregnant women with hepatitis B including their
race, ethnicity and geographic region of birth;
      (xii)   funding for the previous fiscal year allocated and used
specifically on hepatitis B and hepatitis C related programs through both full
time equivalent staff and from grants or funding to non-governmental
organizations; and
      (xiii)   a description and list of community outreach efforts targeting
hepatitis B and hepatitis C. Provided, however, that the information in
paragraph (i) of this subdivision shall be provided every two years beginning
in the second year of reporting, the information in paragraphs (ii) and (viii)
of this subdivision shall be provided every five years beginning in the second
year of reporting and the information in paragraph (vi) of this subdivision
shall be provided every three years beginning in the second year of reporting.
   b.   In addition to any other data the department may deem relevant, such
report shall include:
      (i)   a list of programs and measurable outcomes of such programs,
relating to hepatitis B and hepatitis C, including, but not limited to, those
programs provided through the department's perinatal hepatitis B prevention
program; and
      (ii)   identification of best practices in programs and/or strategies
that could be implemented by the department, non-governmental organizations or
other state or federal entities that effectively address hepatitis B and
hepatitis C prevention, treatment, care, outreach and education.
   c.   The annual reports required pursuant to this section as well as any
materials distributed by the department in conjunction with programs or
initiatives involving hepatitis B and C shall be made available on the
department's website and to any member of the public upon request.
   d.   Information required by this section shall be reported in a manner
consistent with the requirements of section 11.11(a)(2) of the New York city
health code, or successor provision thereto.
(L.L. 2015/043, 5/18/2015, eff. 5/18/2015)
§ 17-199 Health services in correctional facilities.
   a.   The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council
no later than July 15, 2015, and every three months thereafter, a report
regarding the medical and mental health services provided to incarcerated
individuals in city correctional facilities during the previous three calendar
months that includes, but need not be limited to:
      (i)   performance indicators reported to the department by any entity
providing such services;
      (ii)   a description of the methodology used in measuring such
performance;
      (iii)   the metrics utilized to determine whether such performance
measures meet targets established by the department and any entity providing
such services;
      (iv)   the results of such determinations; and
      (v)   any actions that the department has taken or plans to take in
response to the data reported, including the imposition of liquidated damages.
   b.   The report required by subdivision a of this section shall also be
posted on the department's website, with the data in such report posted in a
non-proprietary searchable machine-readable format, and shall be maintained on
such website for no fewer than ten years.
   c.   If no such performance indicators relating to (i) intake, (ii) follow-
up care, (iii) patient safety, (iv) preventable hospitalizations, or (v)
preventable errors in medical care, are reported to the department, the
department shall include performance data relating to such indicators as a part
of the report required by subdivision a of this section.
   d.   Notwithstanding any other requirement of this section, personally
identifiable information contained in health records shall not be included in
the report required by subdivision a of this section if such disclosure of such
information would violate any federal, state or local law or regulation.
(L.L. 2015/058, 6/16/2015, eff. 6/16/2015; Am. 2021 N.Y. Laws Ch. 322, 8/2/
2021, eff. 8/2/2021)
§ 17-199.1 Lactation rooms.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, "lactation room" means a
sanitary place, other than a restroom, that can be used to express breast milk
shielded from view and free from intrusion and that includes at minimum an
electrical outlet, a chair, a surface on which to place a breast pump and other
personal items, and nearby access to running water.
   b.   Every job center, SNAP center, or medical assistance program center of
the department of social services/human resources administration; city-owned
borough office of the administration for children's services and the Nicholas
Scoppetta children's center; and health center operated or maintained by the
department shall, where practicable, make at least one lactation room available
upon request to an individual utilizing on-site services. The presence of such
a lactation room shall not affect such an individual's right to breastfeed in
public pursuant to article 7 of the civil rights law.
   c.   Every city jail operated by the department of correction that accepts
visitors and precinct operated by the police department shall, where
practicable in a publicly-accessible and non-secure area, and provided that the
functions of the department of correction or police department will not be
materially affected, make at least one lactation room available upon request to
an individual utilizing on-site services. The department of correction and the
police department shall submit to the speaker of the council (i) on or before
August 1, 2019, a report in a machine-readable format providing each such city
jail and precinct where such department has determined that it is not
practicable to make a lactation room available in accordance with this
subdivision, along with an explanation for why it is not practicable,
disaggregated by building, and (ii) on or before every August 1 thereafter,
information regarding any plans to improve access to or provide for lactation
rooms. The presence of such a lactation room shall not affect such an
individual's right to breastfeed in public pursuant to article 7 of the civil
rights law.
   d.   The department shall create a poster containing information on breast-
feeding, an individual's right to nurse in public, and the availability of
lactation rooms pursuant to this section. Such poster shall be made available
on the department's website, shall be displayed in any lactation room required
to be made available pursuant to this section, and shall be displayed in a
clear and conspicuous manner in the waiting room of any public space where a
lactation room is required to be made available pursuant to this section. No
later than one year after the effective date of the local law adding this
subdivision, the department shall create a list of all locations with lactation
rooms available pursuant to this section. Such list shall be made available on
the department's website.
   e.   The department of education shall submit to the speaker of the city
council on or before August 1, 2017, and on or before every August 1
thereafter, a report summarizing the policies at New York city public schools
to allow a student or the parent or guardian of a student access to a lactation
room upon request. Such report shall indicate how information regarding such
policies was communicated to students, parents and guardians during the
previous school year.
   f.   The department may promulgate rules to implement the provisions of this
section including, but not limited to, establishing training programs for staff
working at locations required to make a lactation room available pursuant to
subdivision b, and providing guidelines concerning the location of a lactation
room.
(L.L. 2016/094, 8/11/2016, eff. 7/1/2017; Am. L.L. 2018/184, 11/17/2018, eff.
2/15/2019)
§ 17-199.2 Contraceptives reporting.
No later than September 30, 2017, and annually no later than September 30 of
each year, the department shall submit to the speaker and post on its website,
or shall include in the mayor's management report prepared pursuant to section
12 of the charter, the most recent fiscal year data available regarding
commonly used contraceptive methods. Such data shall be collected no less than
annually for adults, and no less than biennially for high school students. Such
data shall also be disaggregated by age group, education, race or ethnicity,
and community district, where available and statistically reliable.
(L.L. 2017/054, 3/21/2017, eff. 3/21/2017)
§ 17-199.2.1 Report on medical services relating to reproductive health care.
   a.   Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Abortion. The term "abortion" has the meaning given to the term "induced
termination of pregnancy" as such term is defined in subdivision c of section
203.01 of the health code.
      Reproductive health care. The term "reproductive health care" means any
medical service provided to a person relating to the reproductive system and
its processes, functions and organs. Reproductive health care includes, but is
not limited to, services related to contraception, sterilization, preconception
care, maternity care, abortion care and counseling regarding reproductive
health care.
   b.   No later than January 30, 2023, and on January 30 annually thereafter,
the department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council and
post online a report, based upon the data included in the most recently
published annual summary of vital statistics, on data regarding the provision
of medical services in the city related to reproductive health care, to the
extent such data is available to the department, disaggregated by borough and,
to the extent possible without revealing personally identifiable information,
further disaggregated by age, ethnicity, and race. Such report shall include,
but need not be limited to, data on the following reproductive health care
provided in the city based upon the data included in the most recently
published annual summary of vital statistics:
      1.   The number of births and the number of abortions provided;
      2.   The number of births and the number of abortions provided to
individuals who were residents of New York city at the time of such birth or
abortion;
      3.   The number of births and the number of abortions provided to
individuals who were not residents of New York city at the time of such birth
or abortion;
   c.   The report required pursuant to this section shall include an
assessment of the ability of licensed medical providers in the city to
accommodate individuals seeking medical services related to reproductive health
care, including, but not limited to, assessing potential issues such providers
or individuals might face in providing or receiving such services, and
recommendations for increasing the capacity of medical services provided in the
city.
   d.   Information required to be reported pursuant to this section shall be
reported in a manner that does not violate any applicable provision of federal,
state or local law relating to the privacy of personally identifiable
information.
(L.L. 2022/073, 8/12/2022, eff. 9/11/2022)
§ 17-199.3 Maternal mortality and morbidity annual report.
a.   For purposes of this section, the following terms have the following
meanings:
      Maternal health. The term "maternal health" means the health of a person
before, during, and after a pregnancy.
      Maternal mortality. The term "maternal mortality" means the death of a
person that occurs during a pregnancy, or within one year from the end of
pregnancy, regardless of the duration of such pregnancy.
      Pregnancy-Associated Death. The term "pregnancy-associated death" means
the death of a person from any cause during pregnancy or within one year from
the end of pregnancy.
      Pregnancy-Related Death. The term "pregnancy-related death" means the
death of a person during pregnancy or within one year from the end of pregnancy
that is due to a pregnancy complication, a chain of events initiated by
pregnancy, or the aggravation of an unrelated condition by the physiologic
effects of pregnancy.
      Severe maternal morbidity. The term "severe maternal morbidity" means a
life-threatening complication affecting a person before, during, or after a
pregnancy.
   b.   No later than September 30, 2022, and no later than September 30
annually thereafter, the department shall post on its website, submit to the
speaker of the council and publish in a machine-readable format the most recent
calendar year data available regarding maternal mortality in the city, to the
extent such data is made available to the department. Data submitted shall not
jeopardize the confidentiality of the pregnant person or mother and shall
include, but not be limited to:
      1.   The total number of live births; and the total number of maternal
mortalities, disaggregated by information about the pregnant person or mother
where such disaggregated data is available. Such data shall be disaggregated
by, but not limited to, the following:
         (a)   race or ethnicity;
         (b)   borough of residence;
         (c)   most frequent causes of maternal mortality; and
         (d)   whether the death was pregnancy-associated or pregnancy-related;
      2.   The total number of severe maternal morbidities, disaggregated by
information about the pregnant person or mother, where such disaggregated data
is available and statistically reliable. Such data shall include, but not be
limited to:
         (a)   race or ethnicity;
         (b)   education;
         (c)   borough of residence;
         (d)   whether such person was born domestically or abroad;
         (e)   age;
         (f)   insurance status;
         (g)   trimester of prenatal care entry;
         (h)   preexisting health conditions;
         (i)   whether such person worked during pregnancy;
         (j)   whether such person had any previous miscarriages or still
births; and
         (k)   whether the pregnancy resulted in the first live birth for such
person;
      3.   The maternal mortality ratio, disaggregated by race or ethnicity and
borough of residence where available and statistically reliable;
      4.   Recommendations regarding actions the department, the mayor, and the
council can take to improve maternal health, particularly in disproportionately
impacted communities; reduce maternal mortality; and enhance cooperation among
city agencies to improve maternal health, particularly those agencies that have
a mandate related to maternal health, including but not limited to the
commission on gender equity. In developing recommendations, the department may
consider the following factors, to the extent such information is available:
         (a)   the impact of factors such as prenatal care, doulas, economic,
civic and social well-being, and race on pregnant persons and mothers, as they
relate to maternal mortality and morbidity;
         (b)   the use and effect of hospital and institutional practices,
policies, and administrative tools, such as checklists related to pregnancy and
parenting;
         (c)   any previous traumatic events the mother or pregnant person
experienced, where this information is provided and available, and whether the
stress or trauma from that event might have affected the outcomes of the mother
or pregnant person's experience during pregnancy, childbirth, and the
postpartum period; and
         (d)   ways to analyze complications experienced by expectant parents
and mothers and ways to develop equitable strategies to respond to them;
      5.   An update on the implementation of the recommendations made in
previous reports made pursuant to this section regarding actions that the
department or mayor can take to improve maternal health and reduce maternal
mortality, if any; and
      6.   A list of data sources used in the development of reports made
pursuant to this section.
   c.   No later than September 30, 2019, and by September 30 of every fifth
year thereafter, the department shall submit to the speaker and publish in a
machine-readable format additional data regarding maternal mortality in the
city, for the most recent five-year period for which data is available. Data
submitted shall not jeopardize the confidentiality of the pregnant person or
mother and shall include, but not be limited to:
      1.   age;
      2.   education;
      3.   whether such person was born domestically or abroad;
      4.   whether the maternal mortality occurred in a hospital or inpatient
setting, emergency room or outpatient setting, at home, or in another location;
      5.   trimester of prenatal care entry;
      6.   interval between end of pregnancy and maternal mortality, where
available;
      7.   preexisting health conditions;
      8.   insurance status;
      9.   whether such person had any previous miscarriages or still births;
      10.   whether the pregnancy resulted in the first live birth for such
person; and
      11.   whether such person worked during pregnancy.
   d.   In the development of reports made pursuant to this section, the
department shall consult any review or assessment produced by the committee
established pursuant to section
17-199.3.1.
(L.L. 2017/055, 3/21/2017, eff. 3/21/2017; Am. L.L. 2018/188, 11/17/2018, eff.
11/17/2018; Am. L.L. 2022/084, 9/6/2022, eff. 9/6/2022)
§ 17-199.3.1 Maternal mortality and morbidity review committee (M3RC).
   a.   The department shall establish a committee to examine maternal
mortality, as such term is defined in subdivision a of section
17-199.3; severe maternal morbidity, as such term is defined in subdivision a
of section
17-199.3; and analyze clinical factors and social determinants of health.
Factors that such committee may consider include, but need not be limited to:
      1.   the cause of each maternal mortality; and
      2.   whether such mortality was pregnancy-related or not.
   b.   Members of the committee shall represent a multi-disciplinary panel of
representatives, including but not limited to representatives from various
healthcare facilities and organizations, city agencies, community based
organizations with relevant experience, the doula community, researchers with
relevant experience, and first responders.
   c.   No later than 45 days after the effective date of the local law that
amended this subdivision, and annually thereafter, the department shall post
and update as necessary on its website a list of the disciplines represented on
the committee established pursuant to this section, the names and titles of the
individuals who serve on such committee, and a summary of such committee’s
activities over the preceding year.
(L.L. 2018/188, 11/17/2018, eff. 11/17/2018; Am. L.L. 2024/108, 11/9/2024, eff.
11/9/2024)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2024/108.
§ 17-199.3.2 Education on polycystic ovary syndrome and endometriosis.
   a.   The department shall provide education on polycystic ovary syndrome and
endometriosis by posting information on its website, which may include, but
need not be limited to, the following:
      1.   The definitions and potential symptoms of polycystic ovary syndrome
and endometriosis;
      2.   Information on how to seek diagnosis or treatment, including how to
procure the care of a primary care physician; and
      3.   Data regarding the number of individuals who are diagnosed with
polycystic ovary syndrome or endometriosis in the city, disaggregated by age,
race, ethnicity, and zip code, to the extent such data is available to the
department.
   b.   No later than March 1, 2023, and every year thereafter, the department
shall submit a report to the mayor and the speaker of the council regarding
education efforts on polycystic ovary syndrome and endometriosis conducted by
the department.
(L.L. 2022/087, 9/6/2022, eff. 10/6/2022)
§ 17-199.3.3 Report and recommendations on cesarean sections.
No later than December 30, 2024, the department shall report on the number of
total births in the city for the previous calendar year, disaggregated, to the
extent available, by the number of vaginal births, the number of vaginal births
after prior cesarean section, the number of first-time cesarean sections, and
the number of repeat cesarean sections. This data shall be further
disaggregated, to the extent available, by whether or not the pregnancy was
considered low risk because the pregnancy was primiparous, full-term,
singleton, and vertex/cephalic (head-first). Such report shall include
recommendations by the department to reduce maternal mortality and severe
maternal morbidity, as such terms are defined in section
17-199.3, including efforts to: (i) reduce the risks associated with unplanned
cesarean sections; and (ii) efforts to address inequities across patient
demographics.
(L.L. 2022/089, 9/6/2022, eff. 11/10/2022; Am. L.L. 2023/151, 11/17/2023, eff.
11/17/2023)
§ 17-199.4 HPV vaccination reporting.
No later than September 30, 2017, and annually no later than September 30 of
each year, the department shall submit to the speaker and post on its website,
or shall include in the mayor's management report prepared pursuant to section
12 of the charter, the most recent fiscal year data available on vaccination
rates for New York city residents for the human papillomavirus, disaggregated
by the gender of the recipient, and by age group, series initiation, and series
completion. Such data shall include, but need not be limited to, anonymized
information that has been reported to the department for inclusion in the
citywide immunization registry.
(L.L. 2017/053, 3/21/2017, eff. 3/21/2017)
§ 17-199.5 Encouragement of physician referrals for indoor allergen hazards.
   a.   The department shall report to the council no later than 18 months from
the effective date on activities it has undertaken to educate physicians and
other health care providers who treat persons with asthma about the role of
indoor allergens in asthma exacerbation and the availability of inspections for
asthma triggers in their patients' primary residence by the department and the
department of housing preservation and development, and on any mechanism they
have to refer to the department or the department of housing preservation and
development, with consent, the contact information for patients who report
these conditions in their primary residence. The report shall describe what was
done following such referrals, and what the outcomes were of any that were made
and received during this period.
(L.L. 2018/055, 1/19/2018, eff. 1/19/2019)
§ 17-199.6 Investigations of indoor allergen hazards in dwellings of persons
with medically diagnosed moderate persistent or severe persistent asthma.
   a.   The department shall establish procedures to permit doctors, nurses, or
other health professionals, upon the consent of their patients, to request a
department investigation of possible indoor allergen hazards in dwellings where
persons reside who have been medically diagnosed with moderate persistent or
severe persistent asthma. Such procedures shall provide for the referral to the
department of housing preservation and development of such requests that would
be subject to section
27-2017.6. The procedures shall also provide for an investigation to be made
when the department is notified that a person who has been medically diagnosed
with moderate persistent or severe persistent asthma is residing in a dwelling
with possible indoor allergen hazards not otherwise subject to enforcement by
the department of housing preservation and development under section
27-2017.6. Such indoor allergen hazards may include, but are not limited to,
mold that is not readily observable to the eye, including mold that is hidden
within wall cavities, construction dust or such other conditions as the
department shall from time-to-time determine by rule are indoor allergen
hazards.
   b.   In the event that the department determines that an indoor allergen
hazard exists, the department shall order the owner to correct the condition
and the underlying causes of such a condition within twenty-one days, in a
manner and under such safety conditions as it may specify, including the
integrated pest management practices in section
27-2017.8 and the work practices established pursuant to section
27-2017.9.
   c.   In the event that the department determines that the owner or other
person having the duty or liability to comply with an order issued pursuant to
this section fails to substantially comply therewith within twenty-one days
after service thereof, the department shall, in accordance with section
27-2017.10, refer such order to the department of housing preservation and
development. The department of housing preservation and development may take
such enforcement action as is necessary, including performing or arranging for
the performance of the work to correct the certified condition.
   d.   The department shall report to the council and mayor no later than 24
months from the effective date on activities it has undertaken under this
section as they relate to adults with asthma diagnoses, including but not
limited to the number adult asthma referrals by type to the department for
inspection, the number and types of orders issued to property owners by the
department as a result of adult asthma referrals, and the number of apartments
that have completed remediation for indoor asthma allergens as a result of
adult asthma referrals. Upon submission of such report the agency may submit a
recommendation to the council containing a proposed redefinition of "persons
with medically diagnosed moderate persistent or severe persistent asthma" for
the purposes of the provision of this article.
(L.L. 2018/055, 1/19/2018, eff. 1/19/2019; Am. L.L. 2019/051, 3/16/2019, retro.
eff. 1/19/2019)
§ 17-199.7 Education about indoor allergen hazards.
The department shall develop a pamphlet which shall be in English and in the
covered languages set forth in section 8-1002*, explaining the hazards
associated with indoor allergens and describing tenant rights and owner
responsibilities under this law, including safe work practices and mechanisms
through which the public may report indoor allergen hazards in the home. Such
pamphlet shall be made available in accordance with section
27-2017.6. Such pamphlet shall also be made available to any member of the
public upon request. The department shall also develop a training curriculum
for educating owners and building maintenance personnel on the appropriate work
methods for controlling and removing indoor allergen hazards in rental housing,
including integrated pest management. Such training curriculum shall also be
made available to any member of the public upon request.
(L.L. 2018/055, 1/19/2018, eff. 1/19/2019)
* Editor's note: Repealed. For current provisions, see
Title 21, Chapter 1, Subchapter 1.
§ 17-199.8 Inspection by the department of unsafe work practices for indoor
allergen remediation.
The department shall respond to complaints of unsafe work practices related to
the correction of indoor mold hazard violations that result in chemical vapors,
dust, or other environmental hazards, and promptly refer complaints of unsafe
pest control to the New York state department of environmental conservation.
(L.L. 2018/055, 1/19/2018, eff. 1/19/2019)
§ 17-199.9 Educational materials on drugs and opiates awareness and prevention.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have
the following meanings:
      DOE. The term "DOE" means the department of education.
      DYCD. The term "DYCD" means the department of youth and community
development.
   b.   The department shall develop age appropriate educational materials
regarding drugs and opiates awareness and prevention.
   c.   Such materials shall be made available by the department to DYCD and
DOE at the beginning of each calendar year.
   d.   The department shall make available such educational materials on the
department's website in English and in each of the designated citywide
languages as defined in section
23-1101.
(L.L. 2018/125, 6/26/2018, eff. 9/24/2018)
§ 17-199.10 Doulas.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have
the following meanings:
      Birth equity. The term “birth equity” means the concept that conditions
to support optimal births should be available for all individuals regardless of
social inequities.
      Citywide doula program. The term “citywide doula program” means a program
to provide doula services at no cost to certain city residents, to train
individuals to become doulas, and to foster doula-friendly hospital
environments.
      Doula. The term “doula” means a trained person who provides continuous
physical, emotional, and informational support to a pregnant person and the
family before, during or shortly after childbirth, for the purpose of assisting
a pregnant person through the birth experience; or a trained person who
supports the family of a newborn during the first days, weeks, or months after
childbirth, providing evidence-based information, practical help, and advice to
the family on newborn care, self-care, and nurturing of the new family unit.
      Priority neighborhood. The term “priority neighborhood” means a
neighborhood determined by the department to experience significant health and
socioeconomic disparities.
      Trauma-informed care. The term “trauma-informed care” has the same
meaning as set forth in section
17-180.2.
   b.   Plan. No later than June 30, 2019, the department shall submit to the
speaker of the council and post on its website a plan to increase access to
doulas for pregnant people in the city, including relevant timelines and
strategies. In developing such plan, the department shall assess data regarding
the needs of pregnant people and may consider the following factors:
      1.   The demand for doulas in the city;
      2.   The number of doulas in the city and any appropriate qualifications;
      3.   Existing city and community-based programs that provide doula
services, including whether such programs offer training for doulas;
      4.   The availability of doula services that are low-cost, affordable, or
free to the mother or pregnant person;
      5.   Areas or populations within the city in which residents experience
disproportionately low access to doulas;
      6.   Areas or populations within the city in which residents experience
disproportionately high rates of maternal mortality, cesarean birth, infant
mortality, and other poor birth outcomes;
      7.   The average cost of doula services, and whether such services may be
covered by an existing health plan or benefit; and
      8.   Any other information on the use of doulas and benefits associated
with the use of doulas.
   Such plan shall additionally list the factors considered in development of
the plan.
   c.   Program. The commissioner shall establish a citywide doula program.
      1.   Doula training. The citywide doula program shall offer training to
individuals to become doulas and offer professional development to all doulas
in such program. Such training shall include the following subjects: birth
equity, trauma-informed care, perinatal mood and anxiety disorders, navigating
the hospital environment, and support services available to low-income birthing
people and their families.
      2.   Doula services. The citywide doula program shall offer doula care to
residents in priority neighborhoods at no cost to recipients of doula services.
Doulas providing services through such program shall have experience in the
following subjects: birth equity, trauma-informed care, perinatal mood and
anxiety disorders, navigating the hospital environment and support services
available to low-income birthing people and their families. Such program shall
allow doulas and recipients of doula services to provide feedback on their
experience in the program.
      3.   Doula-friendly hospitals. The citywide doula program shall offer
certain maternity hospitals in the city, as identified by the department to
promote birth equity, technical assistance to foster healthcare environments
that are friendly and welcoming to doulas and the families they support.
Technical assistance may include assessments, action planning sessions, staff
education, developing and implementing doula-friendly policies and practices,
and establishing and sustaining referral pathways to the citywide doula
program.
   d.   Report. On or before June 30 every year, the department shall submit to
the speaker of the council and post on its website a report on the following
information:
      1.   Known city and community-based programs that provide doula services,
including whether such programs offer training for doulas;
      2.   Areas or populations within the city in which residents experience
disproportionately high rates of maternal mortality, infant mortality, and
other poor birth outcomes;
      3.   Any updated information regarding implementation of the plan
required by subdivision b of this section since the prior annual report; and
      4.   To the extent such information is available to the department,
anonymized information regarding the citywide doula program required by
subdivision c of this section including, but not limited to:
         (a)   The number of doulas trained through the citywide doula program,
disaggregated by race and ethnicity and disaggregated by borough;
         (b)   The number of doulas who have provided or are providing services
through the program, disaggregated by race and ethnicity and disaggregated by
borough;
         (c)   The number of inquiries from pregnant people about the citywide
doula program made to the department;
         (d)   The number of inquiries from pregnant people about the citywide
doula program made to local organizations providing doula services, as reported
to the department by such organizations;
         (e)   The number of pregnant people who were eligible for services
provided through the citywide doula program but were not served due to
inadequate resources, disaggregated by borough;
         (f)   The number of pregnant people who obtained doula services
through the citywide doula program, disaggregated by race and ethnicity and
disaggregated by borough;
         (g)   The number of maternity hospitals the citywide doula program
supported with technical assistance pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision c of
this section;
         (h)   An overview of subjects covered in the citywide doula program
training;
         (i)   The number of doulas serving in the citywide doula program who
are enrolled as providers in the plan for medical assistance established by
section 363-A of the social services law;
         (j)   The rate of pay for doulas in the citywide doula program and
efforts made to match the rate to average rates of pay for doulas in the city;
and
         (k)   An analysis of the use and outcomes of the citywide doula
program.
(L.L. 2018/187, 11/17/2018, eff. 11/17/2018; Am. L.L. 2025/170, 11/28/2025,
eff. 11/28/2025)
§ 17-199.11 Food service establishment beverage options for children's meals.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have
the following meanings:
      Children's meal. The term "children's meal" means a food or combination
of food items listed on a menu or menu board and intended for consumption by
children to which the presumption described in subdivision e attaches.
      Food. The term "food" has the same meaning as in article 71 of the New
York city health code.
      Food service establishment. The term "food service establishment" means
any establishment inspected pursuant to the restaurant grading program
established pursuant to subdivision a of section 81.51 of the New York city
health code.
      Menu or menu board. The term "menu or menu board" has the same meaning as
in section 81.49 of the New York city health code.
   b.   The selection of beverages listed as part of the children's meal shall
be limited to the following:
      1.   Water, sparkling water or flavored water, with no added natural or
artificial sweeteners;
      2.   Flavored or unflavored nonfat or one percent fat dairy milk, or
flavored or unflavored non-dairy beverage that is nutritionally equivalent to
fluid milk, in a serving size of eight ounces or less; or
      3.   One hundred percent fruit or vegetable juice, or any combination
thereof, with no added natural or artificial sweeteners, in a serving size of
eight ounces or less. Such juice may contain water or carbonated water.
   c.   Nothing in this section prohibits a food service establishment from
providing upon request by a customer a substitute beverage other than the
beverage required under subdivision b of this section.
   d.   Any food service establishment that violates any of the provisions of
this section or any rule promulgated thereunder by the department shall be
liable for a civil penalty of $50. Where a person is found to have violated
this section or any rule promulgated thereunder by the department, the
department shall commence a proceeding to recover any civil penalty authorized
by this section by the service of a summons returnable to the office of
administrative trials and hearings.
   e.   It shall be a rebuttable presumption that a food item or combination of
food items on a menu or menu board is intended for consumption by children if
the item or items are shown on the menu or menu board in any one of the
following ways:
      1.   Alongside any of the following words: "child," "children," "kids,"
"junior," "little," "kiddie," "kiddo," "tyke," any synonym or abbreviation of
such words, or any word the department determines would similarly identify a
children's meal;
      2.   Alongside a cartoon illustration, puzzle or game;
      3.   Accompanied or being offered with a toy or kid's game; or
      4.   With a limitation on the maximum age of a person who can select the
item or items.
   f.   Any food service establishment that violates this section or any rules
promulgated thereunder shall not be subject to a civil penalty for a first-time
violation if such person proves to the satisfaction of the department, within
seven days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the
commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been
cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as
proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of
liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation
has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the
department to a person who has received, for the first time, a notice of
violation of this section or any rules promulgated pursuant thereto. The
department shall permit such proof to be submitted electronically or in person.
A person may seek review, in the office of administrative trials and hearings,
of the determination that the person has not submitted proof of a cure within
15 days of receiving written notification of such determination.
(L.L. 2019/075, 4/28/2019, eff. 4/28/2020; Am. L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff.
1/14/2022; Am. L.L. 2023/151, 11/17/2023, eff. 11/17/2023)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2021/080.
§ 17-199.12 Report of early intervention services.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:
      Early intervention services. The term "early intervention services" has
the same meaning as set forth in section 69-4.1 of title 10 of the New York
codes, rules and regulations.
      Evaluation. The term "evaluation" has the same meaning as set forth in
section 69-4.1 of title 10 of the New York codes, rules and regulations.
      Individualized family service plan. The term "individualized family
service plan" or "IFSP" has the same meaning as set forth in section 69-4.1 of
title 10 of the New York codes, rules and regulations.
      IFSP meeting. The term "IFSP meeting" means a meeting for the purpose of
developing a written plan for providing early intervention services to a child
determined to be eligible for the early intervention program pursuant to
section 69-4.11 of title 10 of the New York codes, rules and regulations.
      Initial evaluation. The term "initial evaluation" means an evaluation to
determine a child's initial eligibility for the early intervention program.
      Referral. The term "referral" means referral of child less than three
years of age who is suspected of having a disability, which includes a
developmental delay or a diagnosed physical or mental condition that has a high
probability of resulting in developmental delay, pursuant to section 69-4.3 of
title 10 of the New York codes, rules and regulations.
      Reporting period. The term "reporting period" means the period beginning
July 1 of the current calendar year until and including June 30 of the
following subsequent calendar year.
      Student in temporary housing. The term "student in temporary housing" has
the same meaning as that of the term "homeless child" as such term is defined
in section 100.2 of title 8 of the New York codes, rules and regulations.
   b.   Report. No later than November 1 of each year, the department shall
submit to the speaker of the council and post on the department's website an
annual report regarding children receiving early intervention services from the
department. To the extent such information is available to the department, such
report shall include, but shall not be limited to the following information,
disaggregated by zip code, race/ethnicity, child's dominant language, status as
a student in temporary housing and gender:
      1.   The number of referrals for initial evaluations in total and
disaggregated by referral source, including, but not limited to, referrals from
parents, health professionals, child care providers, homeless shelters or
nonprofits;
      2.   The number of initial evaluations conducted, including the number of
such evaluations that resulted in a determination that the child was eligible
for the early intervention program;
      3.   The number of IFSP meetings convened less than or equal to 45
calendar days from the date of referral;
      4.   The number of IFSP meetings that were convened more than 45 calendar
days from the date of referral;
      5.   The total number of children who have an active IFSP (i) during the
reporting period and (ii) as of June 30 of the reporting period;
      6.   The average number of calendar days between the date of the initial
IFSP meeting and the date children begin receiving early intervention services;
      7.   The number and percentage of children with IFSPs who, (i) during the
reporting period and (ii) as of June 30 of the reporting period, have IFSPs
that recommend the following enumerated services as such services are defined
in section 69-4.1 of title 10 of the New York codes, rules and regulations:
         (a)   Assistive technology services;
         (b)   Applied behavior analysis;
         (c)   Audiology;
         (d)   Family training, counseling, home visits or parent support
groups;
         (e)   Medical services;
         (f)   Nursing services;
         (g)   Nutrition services;
         (h)   Occupational therapy;
         (i)   Physical therapy;
         (j)   Psychological services;
         (k)   Service coordination;
         (l)   Sign language or cued language services;
         (m)   Social work services;
         (n)   Special instruction;
         (o)   Speech-language pathology;
         (p)   Vision services;
         (q)   Health services; and
         (r)   Transportation services; and
      8.   The number and percentage of children with IFSPs who were, during
the reporting period, receiving in full the early intervention services
enumerated in subparagraphs (a) through (r) of paragraph 7 of this section as
recommended in their IFSPs within 30 days of the meeting pursuant to section
69-4.11 of title 10 of the New York codes, rules and regulations; the number
and percentage of children with IFSPs who were receiving in part such services
within 30 days of such meeting and the number and percentage of children with
IFSPs who were awaiting the provision of such services after 30 days of such
meeting.
   c.   No information that is required to be reported pursuant to this section
shall be reported in a manner that would violate any applicable provision of
federal, state or local law relating to the privacy of information. If a
category contains between one and five children, or allows another category to
be narrowed to between one and five children, the number shall be replaced with
a symbol. A category that contains zero children shall be reported as zero,
unless such reporting would violate any applicable provision of federal, state
or local law relating to personally identifiable information.
(L.L. 2020/021, 1/19/2020, eff. 1/19/2020)
§ 17-199.12.1 Report of autism spectrum disorder services.
   a.   No later than April 1 of each year, the department shall submit to the
mayor and the speaker of the city council and post on its website, the number
of individuals receiving services for autism spectrum disorders from the
department or programs administered by the department, disaggregated by zip
code.
   b.   Information required to be reported pursuant to this section shall be
reported in a manner that does not violate any applicable provision of federal,
state or local law relating to the privacy of information. Any category
required to be reported that contains between 1 and 9 individuals, or allows
another category to be narrowed to between 1 and 9 individuals, shall be
reported with a symbol.
(L.L. 2017/182, 10/8/2017, eff. 10/8/2017; Am. L.L. 2023/151, 11/17/2023, eff.
11/17/2023)
§ 17-199.13 Farm-to-city projects.
   a.   Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      CSA. The term "CSA" means community supported agriculture partnerships,
usually formed between farms and consumers, which allow communities or
community members to invest in farms in exchange for regular receipt of such
farms' produce.
      Farm-to-city project. The term "farm-to-city project" refers to
neighborhood- or community-based local fresh food projects, which include CSAs,
farmers' markets, food boxes and food pantries.
      Farmers' market. The term "farmers' market" means an open-air market held
for the sale of products grown, raised, caught or baked by regional farmers,
producers and fishers to the general public and that does not have a
fundraising component. A farmers' market may be run by a large, centrally-
managed network, or by a single community organization, garden group, or other
neighborhood or community entity.
      Food box. The term "food box" means a program that aggregates fresh
produce from participating providers and enables consumers to purchase or
acquire fresh, regionally-grown produce at a set price that is typically below
retail value.
      Food pantry. The term "food pantry" means a food pantry, food bank, or
other emergency food program operating in the city for which the location is
published by the human resources administration or otherwise identified by the
department.
   b.   Farm-to-city project awareness campaign. The department shall develop
materials for neighborhood-specific farm-to-city project awareness in each of
the designated citywide languages as defined in section
23-1101, regarding farm-to-city projects available in each neighborhood
throughout all five boroughs. The department shall also post this information
on its website.
(L.L. 2020/047, 3/29/2020, eff. 12/24/2020)
§ 17-199.14 Report on heat vulnerability and heat-related deaths.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:
      Heat exacerbated death. The term "heat exacerbated death" means a natural
cause death estimated by the department to have resulted from an existing
health condition exacerbated by extreme, or near extreme, heat. Such estimation
should be determined by the use of one or more statistical models by the
department. Beginning with the report due pursuant to subdivision b no later
than June 15, 2022, and continuing thereafter, at least one such model shall
utilize sensitive statistical methods that assess daily temperature as a
continuous variable in relation to daily mortality to estimate heat-exacerbated
death, without the use of a qualifying temperature threshold.
      Heat stress death. The term "heat stress death" means a death directly
attributed to heat on a death certificate, or with an underlying or
contributing cause of i) excessive natural heat or ii) effects of heat and
light, as such conditions are described in the International Classification of
Diseases Version 10 coding system.
      Heat vulnerability. The term "heat vulnerability" means the estimated
risk of heat stress deaths and heat exacerbated deaths occurring in a
geographical area based on social and environmental factors identified by the
department.
   b.   No later than June 15 of each year beginning in 2021, the commissioner
shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and shall post
conspicuously on the department's website, an annual report of the most recent
available data on the total number of heat stress deaths and heat exacerbated
deaths in the city.
   c.   The annual report required by subdivision b of this section shall
include:
      1.   the number of heat stress deaths in the most recent year available;
      2.   the estimation of past heat exacerbated deaths based on the most
recent available years of data and the smallest interval of time that yields a
reliable estimate;
      3.   a description of the relative heat vulnerability of each
neighborhood tabulation area;
      4.   a description of reported data;
      5.   a description of social and environmental factors assessed by the
department to determine heat vulnerability;
      6.   a description of methods used to derive heat vulnerability and
estimate heat exacerbated deaths; and
      7.   aggregate demographic information of heat stress deaths, including,
but not limited to, the age, gender, neighborhood tabulation area and the race
or ethnicity of the decedents.
   d.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no report required by
subdivision b of this section shall contain personal identifying information.
   e.   The commissioner may promulgate such rules as may be necessary to
implement the provisions of this section.
   f.   No later than April 15 of 2022, the department shall report to the
mayor and the speaker of the council on its findings or progress regarding the
development or adoption for use of any models for estimating the number of heat
exacerbated deaths pursuant to the definition of such term in subdivision a.
(L.L. 2020/084, 8/28/2020, eff. 8/28/2020)
§ 17-199.15 Gender and racial equity advisory board.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have
the following meanings:
      Covered health care services. The term "covered health care services"
means professional medical services by primary care practitioners, including
preventive, primary, diagnostic and specialty services; diagnostic and
laboratory services, including therapeutic radiological services; prescription
drugs, excluding drugs for uncovered services; and any other services
determined by the department.
      Direct care worker. The term "direct care worker" means any employee of a
hospital that is responsible for patient handling or patient assessment as a
regular or incident part of their employment, including any licensed or
unlicensed health care worker.
      Doctor. The term "doctor" means a practitioner of medicine licensed to
practice medicine pursuant to article 131 of the education law.
      Hospital. The term "hospital" means an institution or facility operating
in New York city possessing a valid operating certificate issued pursuant to
article 28 of the public health law.
      Nurse. The term "nurse" means a practitioner of nursing licensed to
practice nursing pursuant to article 139 of the education law.
      Physician assistant. The term "physician assistant" means a person
licensed as a physician assistant pursuant to article 131-b of the New York
state education law.
   b.   There shall be a gender and racial equity advisory board to advise the
mayor and the council on issues relating to gender and racial equity in the
provision of covered health care services and healthcare services in hospitals.
Factors that such advisory board may consider include, but need not be limited
to:
      1.   Factors that contribute to gender and racial inequity in hospitals
and other covered health care services, especially in relation to employment
decisions and patient care, including but not limited to factors that result in
observed disparate patient treatment and outcomes;
      2.   Existing protocols hospitals and other covered health care services
use to address such inequity, including, but not limited to, actions taken by
hospital and health care leadership to promote gender and racial equity for
hospital and health care staff;
      3.   Recommended measures to address gender and racial inequity in
hospitals and other covered health care services; and
      4.   Methods for raising awareness about gender and racial inequity in
hospitals and other covered health care services and ways to address it at the
local, state and national levels, including but not limited to strategies to
support legislation addressing such inequity.
   c.   The advisory board shall consist of 13 members, as follows:
      1.   The speaker of the council or their designee;
      2.   The commissioner of the department or their designee;
      3.   The executive director of the commission on gender equity or their
designee;
      4.   The chair of the New York city commission on human rights or their
designee;
      5.   Executive Director of NYC Unity Project or their designee;
      6.   Eight public members, seven of whom shall be appointed by the mayor
and one of whom shall be appointed by the speaker of the council. Public
members shall represent a diverse range of individuals, of whom:
         (a)   at least two members shall represent advocates who specialize in
gender equity;
         (b)   at least two members shall represent advocates who specialize in
racial equity;
         (c)   at least two members shall be representatives from labor unions
representing nurses, doctors, physician assistants or direct care workers
employed by a hospital;
         (d)   at least one member shall be a representative from a labor union
representing interns and residents; and
         (e)   at least one member shall be a representative from a trade
association representing hospitals.
   d.   The advisory board shall hold its first meeting no later than 60 days
from the appointment of all its public members and at such meeting shall elect
a chairperson.
   e.   The advisory board shall meet quarterly and keep a record of its
proceedings, and determine the rules of its own proceedings with special
meetings to be called by the chairperson upon his or her own initiative or upon
receipt of a written request signed by at least four members of the board.
Written notice of the time and place of such special meetings shall be given to
each member at least two weeks before the date fixed by the notice for such
special meeting.
   f.   No later than December 1, 2021, and annually on December 1 thereafter,
the advisory board shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council;
post on the department's website; and share with a trade association
representing hospitals, for distribution to its members operating in New York
city, a report including the results of its review and recommendations pursuant
to this section.
(L.L. 2021/030, 3/14/2021, eff. 3/14/2021)
§ 17-199.16 Public information and outreach campaign on medically unnecessary
treatments on individuals born with intersex traits or variations in sex
characteristics.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this local law, the following terms
have the following meanings:
      Intersex traits or variations in sex characteristics. The term "intersex
traits or variations in sex characteristics" means the umbrella term for
differences in reproductive or sex anatomy that may appear in an individual's
chromosomes, genitals, secondary sex characteristics, or internal organs such
as testes or ovaries, and may be identified at birth, or may not be discovered
until puberty or later in life.
      Medically unnecessary. The term "medically unnecessary" means a treatment
or intervention on the sex characteristics of an individual born with intersex
traits or variations in sex characteristics that may be safely deferred until
that individual can provide informed consent. For purposes of this section,
psychological factors do not constitute medical necessity for a treatment or
intervention on the sex characteristics of an individual born with intersex
traits or variations in sex characteristics until and unless the individual has
themselves identified psychological factors as relevant to decision-making.
   b.   The department shall conduct a public information and outreach campaign
designed to address the provision of medically unnecessary treatments and
interventions performed on individuals born with intersex traits or variations
in sex characteristics. Such outreach shall at a minimum include (i) creating
educational materials for parents and guardians of individuals born with
intersex traits or variations in sex characteristics; (ii) creating resources
for medical practitioners; (iii) identifying community outreach partners,
stakeholders and opportunities; and (iv) distributing materials and resources.
The department shall consult with individuals and organizations with expertise
in intersex traits or variations in sex characteristics, including individuals
who are intersex or have variations in sex characteristics, in the development
of such public information and outreach campaign. The department shall begin
implementation of such public information and outreach campaign within one year
of the effective date of this section.
(L.L. 2021/060, 5/23/2021, eff. 5/23/2021)
§ 17-199.17 Information on midwives.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, "midwife" means an
individual who is licensed or certified to practice midwifery in New York
state.
   b.   The department shall make available information on the services offered
by midwives and information on how to find a midwife on the department's
website, in English and in each of the designated citywide languages as defined
in section
23-1101.
(L.L. 2021/076, 6/27/2021, eff. 7/27/2021)
§ 17-199.18 Added sugar notifications.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have
the following meanings:
      Added sugars. The term "added sugars" has the same meaning as used in
title 21, section 101.9(c)(6)(iii) of the code of federal regulations, or any
successor regulations.
      Covered establishment. The term "covered establishment" means any food
service establishment inspected pursuant to the restaurant grading program
established pursuant to subdivision a of section 81.51 of the New York city
health code that is part of a chain with 15 or more locations doing business
under the same name and offering for sale substantially the same food items.
      Daily value. The term "daily value" means the daily reference value
established in title 21, section 101.9(c)(9) of the code of federal
regulations, or any successor regulations.
      Food item on display. The term "food item on display" means a prepackaged
food item or non-packaged food item that is visible to the customer before the
customer makes a selection.
      Food service establishment. The term "food service establishment" has the
same meaning as in section 81.03 of the New York city health code.
      Icon. The term "icon" means a graphic or illustrated image, with or
without accompanying text.
      Identical to prepackaged food item. The term “identical to prepackaged
food item” means a non-packaged food item offered by a food service
establishment that has the same product name as a prepackaged food item and is
promoted, advertised, or presented as substantially the same as that
prepackaged food item as determined by the department, such as a fountain soda,
coffee beverage, salad dressing, or dessert product that is sold under the same
brand name in other retail locations.
      Menu or menu board. The term "menu or menu board" has the same meaning as
in section 81.49 of the New York city health code.
      Menu item. The term “menu item” means any food item listed on a menu or
menu board, as well as any seasonal, temporary, or variable menu item as
defined by the department.
      Non-packaged food item. The term “non-packaged food item” means a food
item on display that does not have a nutrition facts label attached to it by
the manufacturer pursuant to title 21, part 101 of the code of federal
regulations, or any successor regulations.
      Prepackaged food item. The term "prepackaged food item" means a food item
that is packaged by the manufacturer and required to have a nutrition facts
label pursuant to title 21, part 101 of the code of federal regulations, or any
successor regulations.
   b.   Icon and warning statement rule. 
      1.   The department shall issue a rule designating an icon to be
displayed in a clear and conspicuous manner (i) on menus or menu boards
adjacent to the menu items and (ii) on or near food items on display, that
exceed a specified level of added sugars, including 100 percent or more of the
daily value for added sugars, as determined by the federal food and drug
administration, or another amount as specified in rules of the department.
      2.   For the purposes of this subdivision, a food item that is identical
to a prepackaged food item will be presumed to have the same density of added
sugars as is displayed on the nutrition facts panel of the corresponding
prepackaged food item, as set forth in department rules, unless the food
service establishment demonstrates otherwise to the satisfaction of the
department.
      3.   Such rule shall also provide a factual warning statement about high
added sugars intake.
   c.   Icon and warning statement required. No later than 1 year after the
department issues the rule required pursuant to subdivision b of this section,
a covered establishment that offers 1 or more menu items or food items on
display that qualify for an icon pursuant to subdivision b of this section
shall, in accordance with rules promulgated by the department:
      1.   Post a clearly visible icon on or near any prepackaged food item or
food item identical to a prepackaged food item on display that qualifies for
such icon pursuant to subdivision b of this section;
      2.   Post a clearly visible icon on the menu or menu board next to any
prepackaged food item or food item identical to a prepackaged food item that
qualifies for such icon pursuant to subdivision b of this section;
      3.   Post the factual warning statement required pursuant to subdivision
b of this section prominently and conspicuously at the point of purchase, on
the menu or menu board, and at any location where a food item requiring an icon
pursuant to this subdivision is sold as a self-service item dispensed directly
to the consumer; and
      4.   No later than 1 year after the effective date of federal regulations
that require a covered establishment to include added sugars in the nutritional
information of non-packaged food items available to customers, post a clearly
visible icon on or near any non-packaged food item on display or on a menu or
menu board that qualifies for such icon pursuant to subdivision b of this
section.
   d.   Any covered establishment that violates any of the provisions of this
section shall be liable for a civil penalty of $200 for a violation thereof.
   e.   No later than 3 months after the department issues the rule required by
subdivision b of this section, the department shall conduct public outreach to
educate covered establishments about the requirements of this local law.
   f.   The department shall promulgate rules for the facilitation and
enforcement of this section. Nothing in this local law prohibits the department
from requiring an icon or warning statement regarding additional foods,
ingredients, or nutrients of concern.
(L.L. 2022/033, 1/15/2022, eff. 6/19/2024; Am. L.L. 2023/150, 11/17/2023, eff.
12/1/2024)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2023/150.
§ 17-199.19 Provision of sexual and reproductive health services.
   a.   The department shall provide sexual and reproductive health services
and conduct research on sexual and reproductive health disparities within the
city. In providing such services, the department shall have the power and duty
to:
      1.   Provide outreach, education, and support to individuals, especially
low-income individuals and those without health insurance, regarding issues
related to sexual and reproductive health, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Contraception, including a broad range of methods such as long-
acting reversible contraception;
         (b)   Preconception health services;
         (c)   Abortion services;
         (d)   Family planning services;
         (e)   Testing, prevention, and treatment for HIV;
         (f)   Testing and treatment for sexually transmitted infections;
         (g)   Routine screening for breast and cervical cancer; and
         (h)   Health education, in community settings, to promote reproductive
health, prevent unintended pregnancy, and promote access to reproductive and
preventive health services.
      2.   Make referrals, when determined appropriate by the department, to
affordable and accessible services related to contraception; abortion; family
planning; breast and cervical cancer screenings; and counseling, testing, and
treatment for HIV and sexually transmitted infections.
(L.L. 2022/088, 9/6/2022, eff. 9/6/2023)
§ 17-199.20 Citywide diabetes reduction plan.
   a.   No later than April 1, 2024, the department shall develop a plan to
reduce the incidence and impact of diabetes in the city. Such plan shall, at a
minimum:
      1.   Identify a goal percentage by which and a goal timeline in which
each of the following will be reduced:
         (a)   new annual diagnoses of diabetes;
         (b)   the number of individuals with uncontrolled diabetes;
         (c)   the number of individuals on dialysis due in whole or in part to
diabetes; and
         (d)   the number of amputations performed due in whole or in part to
diabetes;
      2.   Identify a goal percentage by which and a goal timeline in which the
number of individuals with diabetes that are successfully self-managing their
diabetes is increased;
      3.   Include a description of strategies the department will utilize to
realize such goals;
      4.   Include strategies to increase access to low- and no-cost obesity
and diabetes care that may or may not include medications and treatments;
      5.   Be culturally appropriate and focus on social determinants of
health; and
      6.   Be posted in plain language on the department's website and
available in the designated citywide languages as defined in section
23-1101.
   b.   Report. No later than April 1, 2025, and every April 1 thereafter, the
department shall submit to the mayor, the speaker of the council, and the chair
of the New York city council committee on health, and post on its website a
report on the implementation of the plan.
      1.   Such report shall include, for the prior year, disaggregated by the
type of diabetes, geographic area, and demographic characteristics, where such
data is available, provided that information included in the report shall
maintain the confidentiality of any individual included in such data:
         (a)   The number of adults with diabetes, and the proportion of such
number of the general population;
         (b)   The change in the incidence of diabetes, when such data is
available;
         (c)   The change in the incidence and prevalence of uncontrolled
diabetes;
         (d)   The change in the number of individuals on dialysis due in whole
or in part to diabetes; and
         (e)   The number of amputations performed due in whole or in part to
diabetes;
      2.   A description of the strategies used by the department during the
prior year to achieve the goals identified by the plan;
      3.   A detailed description of the strategies used by the department
during the prior year to promote the self-management of diabetes and increase
access to devices and information that facilitate such self-management;
      4.   A detailed description of the strategies employed by the department
to increase access to low- and no-cost obesity and diabetes care that may or
may not include medications and treatments; and
      5.   Any new goals the department may identify to reduce the incidence of
diabetes based on the content of the report.
(L.L. 2023/052, 4/16/2023, eff. 4/16/2023, repealed eff. 12/21/2034)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2023/052.
§ 17-199.21 Vision testing and eyeglasses.*
* Editor's note: there are two sections designated as § 17-199.21.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have
the following meanings:
      Income-eligible individual. The term “income-eligible individual” means a
resident of the city of New York aged 18 or older whose annual gross household
income is not in excess of 250 percent of the federal poverty guidelines as
updated periodically in the federal register by the United States department of
health and human services pursuant to subsection (2) of section 9902 of title
42 of the United States code.
      Vision testing. The term “vision testing” means an eye examination to
determine any need for vision correction or for such other procedures as
determined by the department.
   b.   Subject to appropriation, the department or another agency designated
by the mayor that has appropriate subject matter expertise shall establish a
program to make available to all income-eligible individuals:
      1.   Vision testing; and
      2.   If such vision testing indicates a need, eyeglasses, including
lenses and frames.
   c.   The department or designated agency:
      1.   Shall determine the frequency with which such vision testing and
eyeglasses are made available to income-eligible individuals, provided such
vision testing and eyeglasses are made available to such individuals at least
once every four years;
      2.   Shall determine the manner by which such testing and eyeglasses are
made available, including, without limitation, provision by third parties paid
by a voucher issued by the department or otherwise reimbursed by the
department; and
      3.   May establish a maximum allowable expenditure for the vision testing
and eyeglasses made available to each income-eligible individual pursuant to
this section, provided that the determination of such maximum allowable
expenditure shall be made in consideration of the costs of such vision testing
or eyeglasses to individuals outside of the program established pursuant to
this section.
   d.   The department or designated agency may enter into contracts or
agreements with third parties to implement the provisions of this section.
(L.L. 2023/084, 7/9/2023, eff. 1/5/2024)
§ 17-199.21 Mental health and behavioral health services outreach and
education.*
* Editor's note: there are two sections designated as § 17-199.21.
The department shall establish and implement an outreach and education campaign
to raise public awareness about programs that provide low-cost and no-cost
mental health services to New Yorkers who do not qualify for or cannot afford
health insurance based on federal guidelines. Such outreach and education shall
include, as applicable, an explanation of how individuals may access such
services, including, but not limited to, through referrals from primary care
providers. The materials for such outreach and education campaign shall be made
available in English and the designated citywide languages, as defined in
section
23-1101.
(L.L. 2023/108, 7/23/2023, eff. 7/23/2023)
§ 17-199.22 Information regarding emergency rooms and pediatric trauma centers.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Child care program. The term “child care program” means a child care
program as defined in section 47.01 of the New York city health code.
      Student. The term “student” means any child who is enrolled in pre-
kindergarten through grade 8 in a school of the city school district, any child
who is enrolled in an early education center with which the department of
education contracts to provide pre-kindergarten, and any child who is enrolled
in a full-day early education program for 3-year-old children offered by the
department of education.
   b.   The department shall make available on its website and to the 311
customer service center a list of hospitals located in the city that have
emergency departments and pediatric trauma centers as designated by the state
department of health. Such list shall be organized by location, as reported by
the state department of health, and shall include information about medical
services offered at each such location. In addition, the department shall:
      1.   Provide such list to pediatricians practicing in the city with
materials indicating the importance of educating parents and guardians
regarding available options for pediatric emergency care;
      2.   Within 3 months after the receipt of the report of any birth,
provide such list to the address designated for receipt of the child’s
certificate of registration of birth pursuant to section
17-168;
      3.   Provide such list to the department of education and each child care
program to be distributed at least once a year to the parents and guardians of
every student and every child enrolled in a child care program; and
      4.   Provide a link to such list on the Child Care Connect website
maintained by the department.
(L.L. 2023/090, 7/9/2023, eff. 10/7/2023)
§ 17-199.23 Report on drownings.
   a.   Report. No later than January 1, 2025, and annually thereafter, the
department, in consultation with other relevant agencies as appropriate, shall
submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council and post on its website a
report on drownings that occurred in the city. Each report shall include the
number of drownings in the year for which data on such drownings is most
recently available, disaggregated, to the extent available, by:
      1.   The manner in which the drowning death occurred;
      2.   The age group of the decedent;
      3.   The gender identity of the decedent;
      4.   The race and ethnicity of the decedent;
      5.   Whether the decedent had any physical, medical, mental, or
psychological impairment, or a history or record of such impairment, such as a
seizure disorder;
      6.   Whether alcohol, drugs, or prescription medication was a
contributing factor regarding the drowning death;
      7.   The type of location or facility at which the drowning death
occurred, including, but not limited to, a beach, public outdoor pool, public
indoor pool, private outdoor pool, or private indoor pool, and whether such
location or facility has lifeguard supervision;
      8.   The council district in which the drowning death occurred; and
      9.   The community district in which the drowning death occurred.
   b.   Personally identifiable information. The report required pursuant to
subdivision a of this section shall not disclose any identifying information,
as defined in section
23-1201, about any individual or any decedent.
   c.   Information reported. No information that is required to be reported
pursuant to this section shall be reported in a manner that would violate any
applicable provision of federal, state, or local law relating to the privacy of
any individual or any decedent, or that would interfere with law enforcement
investigations or otherwise conflict with the interests of any law enforcement
agency.
(L.L. 2023/159, 11/19/2023, eff. 1/1/2024)
§ 17-199.24 Sickle cell trait and disease.
   a.   Professional guidance. 
      1.   In consultation with the New York city health and hospitals
corporation, the commissioner shall create guidance on the following topics to
educate medical professionals who work within the city:
         (a)   The detection of sickle cell trait through pre- and post-
conception genetic screening; and
         (b)   The management and treatment of sickle cell disease.
      2.   The guidance created pursuant to this subdivision shall include the
benefits of recommending screenings to individuals prior to pregnancy and
education on non-discriminatory approaches to assess patient pain, including
instruction on the effects of implicit racial bias in the provision of pain
management and methods to remediate such effects and ensure patients receive
effective pain management care, as well as education about the history of
medical discrimination, race-based medical experimentation, and the effects of
such discrimination on patients and their medical decision making.
      3.   The guidance created pursuant to this subdivision shall be posted on
the department’s website, distributed to medical providers and practices in the
city, and publicized to at-risk populations through public awareness campaigns.
   b.   Genetic screening. The commissioner, in consultation with the New York
city health and hospitals corporation, shall ensure that sickle cell trait pre-
and post-conception genetic screening shall be offered to individuals who fall
into an at-risk population, as determined by current medical research, or for
whom such genetic screening is otherwise medically appropriate or recommended.
   c.   Report. No later than June 1, 2025, and annually thereafter, the
department shall submit to the speaker of the council a report summarizing the
available data regarding the presence of sickle cell trait and sickle cell
disease in the city, to the extent such data can be released in accordance with
applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Such report shall also include a
summary of the department’s efforts to educate practitioners and at-risk
populations about the availability of pre- and post-conception genetic
screening.
   d.   Online publication of materials. The commissioner shall provide
information related to sickle cell trait and disease on the department’s
website, including information regarding the importance of genetic screening
for the sickle cell trait for at-risk populations, and the locations of medical
providers, practices, and facilities where such individuals can receive such
screenings, in English and in the designated citywide languages as defined in
section
23-1101.
(L.L. 2023/163, 12/3/2023, eff. 12/3/2024)
§ 17-199.25 Citywide population health agenda.
   a.   The department shall develop a citywide population health agenda for
the purpose of improving public health outcomes, addressing health disparities,
and improving quality of and access to health care for New Yorkers to increase
life expectancy and improve health. In developing such agenda, the department
shall consult or seek input from relevant stakeholders, public health experts,
and any other persons the commissioner deems relevant. At minimum, the
department shall identify in such agenda its population health goals for the
next 5 years and strategies for achieving such goals. No later than September
30, 2028, and every 5 years thereafter, the commissioner shall submit such
agenda to the mayor and the speaker of the council and post such agenda on the
department’s website.
   b.   No later than September 30, 2029, and annually thereafter no later than
September 30 of any year in which a citywide population health agenda is not
required to be submitted pursuant to subdivision a of this section, the
commissioner shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and post
on the department’s website, a comprehensive report that describes the
department’s progress toward achieving the goals identified in the most
recently submitted agenda.
(L.L. 2024/046, 3/9/2024, eff. 3/9/2024)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2024/046.
§ 17-199.26.1 Mental health materials for individuals who have experienced
pregnancy loss.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Designated citywide languages. The term “designated citywide languages”
has the same meaning as set forth in subdivision a of section
23-1101.
      Pregnancy loss. The term “pregnancy loss” means the loss of a fetus by
miscarriage, stillbirth, or termination.
   b.   The commissioner shall create materials that contain information about
the effects of pregnancy loss on mental health and that identify mental health
resources available to individuals who have experienced pregnancy loss. The
department shall make such materials available in the designated citywide
languages and shall review and update such materials as appropriate.
   c.   The commissioner shall distribute physical copies of the materials
created pursuant to subdivision b of this section to all facilities operated by
the department in which reproductive healthcare is provided and post electronic
copies of such materials on the department’s website. The commissioner shall,
to the extent practicable, inform the following entities about the availability
of such materials and make physical copies of such materials available to such
entities upon request:
      1.   Family planning clinics within the city, for distribution to
patients that may benefit from such materials at the discretion of each clinic;
and
      2.   Hospital departments where the primary purpose is the provision of
reproductive healthcare, for distribution to patients that may benefit from
such materials at the discretion of each hospital.
(L.L. 2024/100, 10/26/2024, eff. 4/24/2025)
§ 17-199.27 Student wellness club toolkit.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Middle and high school. The term "middle and high school" means any
school of the city school district that contains any combination of grades from
grade 6 through grade 12.
      Student. The term "student" means any pupil under the age of 21 as of
September 1 of the relevant academic year who does not have a high school
diploma and who is enrolled in grade 6 or higher.
      Student wellness club. The term “student wellness club” means an
extracurricular student-led group that holds meetings for students to focus on
student well-being and the factors influencing student well-being, including
mental health.
      Student wellness club toolkit. The term “student wellness club toolkit”
means materials and resources regarding student mental health and wellbeing
that are designed to educate students on mental health and guide students on
creating student wellness clubs.
   b.   No later than 1 year after the effective date of the local law that
added this section, the department, in consultation with relevant agencies and
subject matter experts, shall create a student wellness club toolkit.
   c.   The student wellness club toolkit required by this section shall
include:
      1.   Educational materials on mental health and factors that affect
overall student well-being;
      2.   Best practices for facilitating group discussions on mental health,
such as using active listening skills and creating an inclusive environment;
      3.   Guidance for mental-health promoting activities, including but not
limited to, mindfulness or stress reduction activities, educational workshops,
and any other guidance the department deems relevant;
      4.   Guidance for consulting with school-based mental health support
staff or services; and
      5.   A clear and conspicuous link to the department of education website
that describes the process for starting a student club or other extracurricular
student-led group, as required by section
21-1008.
   d.   The department shall make electronic copies of such toolkits available
to the department of education at the beginning of each academic year in
English and in each of the designated citywide languages as defined in section
23-1101.
(L.L. 2025/016, 2/22/2025, eff. 2/22/2025)
§ 17-199.28 Peer-based mental health literacy trainings.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Age-appropriate. The term “age-appropriate” means topics, messages and
teaching methods suitable to particular ages or age groups of students, based
on developing cognitive, emotional and behavioral capacity typical for the age
or age group.
      Middle and high school. The term “middle and high school” means any
school of the city school district that contains any combination of grades from
grade 6 through grade 12.
      Student. The term “student” means any pupil under the age of 21 as of
September 1 of the relevant academic year who does not have a high school
diploma and who is enrolled in grade 6 or higher.
   b.   No later than 1 year after the effective date of the local law that
added this section, the commissioner shall facilitate the offering of an
evidence-based and age-appropriate peer-based mental health literacy training
for students in middle and high schools. Such training shall involve:
      1.   The instruction of middle and high school students on how to
identify common signs and symptoms of mental health and substance use
challenges;
      2.   The instruction of middle and high school students on how to
interact with a peer experiencing mental health distress; and
      3.   Information on available mental health resources and instruction on
accessing such resources.
   c.   1.   No later than 2 years after the effective date of the local law
that added this section the commissioner, in coordination with the chancellor
of the city school district, shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the
council, and post on the department’s website, a report on the peer-based
mental health literacy training required under subdivision b of this section.
Such report shall include, but need not be limited to, the following
information:
         (a)   An overview of such training, including the scope of topics
covered;
         (b)   The total number of middle and high school students who
participated in such training in the previous year;
         (c)   The total number of schools that offered such training;
         (d)   The total number of schools that participated in such training;
         (e)   A narrative description of any feedback received from student
participants after completing such training; and
         (f)   A description of any challenges encountered during the
facilitation of such training.
      2.   No information that is required to be reported pursuant to this
subdivision shall be reported in a manner that would violate any applicable
provision of federal, state, or local law relating to the privacy of student
information or that would interfere with law enforcement investigations or
otherwise conflict with the interests of law enforcement. If a category
contains between 1 and 5 students, or contains an amount that would allow
another category that contains between 1 and 5 students to be deduced, the
number shall be replaced with a symbol. A category that contains zero shall be
reported as zero, unless such reporting would violate any applicable provision
of federal, state, or local law relating to the privacy of student information.
(L.L. 2025/017, 2/22/2025, eff. 2/22/2025)
§ 17-199.29 Health plan for TGNCNB and intersex individuals.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Cisgender. The term “cisgender” means a person whose gender identity
conforms to the sex assigned at birth.
      Gender identity. The term “gender identity” means a person’s sense of
their own gender, which may be the same as or different from the sex assigned
at birth.
      Gender nonconforming. The term “gender nonconforming” means a person
whose gender expression differs from gender stereotypes, norms, and
expectations in a given culture or historical period.
      Intersex. The term “intersex” means a person whose sex characteristics,
including, but not limited to chromosomes, hormones, gonads, and genitalia, do
not conform with a binary construction of sex as either male or female. This
term may not be the same as a person’s gender identity and is not the same as a
person’s sexual orientation.
      Non-binary. The term “non-binary” means a person whose gender identity is
not exclusively male or female.
      TGNCNB. The term “TGNCNB” means transgender, gender nonconforming, and
non-binary.
      Transgender. The term “transgender” means a person whose gender identity
does not conform to the sex assigned at birth.
   b.   Assessment. The commissioner, in collaboration with the chair of the
commission on gender equity, shall conduct an assessment regarding health
inequities affecting TGNCNB individuals when compared to cisgender individuals,
and health inequities affecting intersex individuals. In developing such
assessment, the commissioner shall consult with advocates in the TGNCNB
community, advocates for intersex youth and adults, public health experts, and
any other individuals or organizations the commissioner deems relevant. Such
assessment shall include information on health outcomes for TGNCNB individuals
and intersex individuals, health inequities affecting TGNCNB individuals when
compared to cisgender individuals, and the availability of health services for
TGNCNB individuals and intersex individuals. In developing such assessment, the
commissioner shall consider health concerns for TGNCNB individuals and intersex
individuals whose health outcomes may also be affected by other social
determinants of health, including, but not limited to race, ethnicity, and
other factors the commissioner deems relevant.
   c.   Health agenda. The commissioner, in collaboration with the chair of the
commission on gender equity, shall develop a health agenda for TGNCNB
individuals and intersex individuals that includes strategies to address health
inequities identified by the assessment required pursuant to subdivision b of
this section.
   d.   Submission timeline. No later than September 30, 2027, the commissioner
shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and post on the
department’s website, the results of the assessment required pursuant to
subdivision b of this section. No later than September 30, 2028, and every 5
years thereafter, the commissioner shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of
the council, and post on the department’s website, the health agenda required
pursuant to subdivision c of this section.
   e.   Additional assessments. The results of the assessment required to be
submitted by September 30, 2027, pursuant to subdivisions b and d of this
section, shall include a determination by the commissioner as to whether any
further such assessments are necessary.
(L.L. 2025/074, 5/24/2025, eff. 5/24/2025)
§ 17-199.30 Education campaign on opioid use disorder and opioid agonist
therapies during and after pregnancy.*
* Editor's note: there are two sections designated as § 17-199.30.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Doula. The term “doula” has the same meaning as set forth in section
17-199.10.
      Healthcare provider. The term “healthcare provider” means an individual
duly licensed or otherwise authorized to practice a health profession pursuant
to applicable law, such as a physician, registered professional nurse, nurse
practitioner, and physician assistant.
      Midwife. The term “midwife” has the same meaning as set forth in section
17-199.17.
      Opioid. The term “opioid” means an opiate as defined in section 3302 of
the public health law.
      Opioid agonist therapy. The term “opioid agonist therapy” means treatment
overseen by a licensed healthcare provider to address opioid use disorder
through the use of medications such as methadone or buprenorphine.
      Opioid antagonist. The term “opioid antagonist” has the same meaning as
set forth in subdivision a of section
17-180.1.
      Opioid use disorder. The term “opioid use disorder” means a chronic
substance use disorder, opioid abuse or dependence, or opioid addiction
characterized by a pattern of opioid use that causes significant impairment or
distress within a 12-month period.
      Neighborhood health action center. The term “neighborhood health action
center” means the department’s neighborhood-specific service centers, or any
similar or successor programs, that aim to reduce health inequities and improve
health outcomes in the city through partnerships with community-based
organizations.
      Professional organizations. The term “professional organization” means a
professional organization for healthcare providers, including, but not limited
to, the American college of obstetricians and gynecologists and the American
board of obstetrics and gynecology.
   b.   Education campaign. The department shall develop and implement a
campaign to educate health professionals providing prenatal and post-partum
care and supports, such as healthcare providers, doulas, and midwives, about
the use and benefits of opioid agonist therapy in pregnancy, including the
risks of withdrawal for birthing people, fetuses, and newborns. Such campaign
shall include, but not be limited to, recommendations provided by professional
organizations and the New York state department of health, guidance on
providing culturally and linguistically appropriate communication regarding
such therapy, and guidance on how to access opioid antagonists at no cost.
   c.   Distribution of opioid antagonists. The department shall make opioid
antagonists available to the public at no cost and upon request, following
completion of a department training course, at each neighborhood health action
center. Such training shall include information on the proper use of opioid
antagonists, as well as information on the risks associated with opioid use,
including opioid use during and after pregnancy. Such distribution shall be
operated in compliance with existing federal, state, and local laws relating to
the distribution of opioid antagonists. The department, in coordination with
the New York city department of information technology and telecommunications,
shall publish information on how to obtain such opioid antagonists, and any
other information the department deems necessary, on the 311 citizen center
website as well as the online database as provided in section
3-191.
   d.   Report. No later than 12 months after the effective date of this local
law, and every 3 years thereafter, the department shall submit to the mayor and
speaker of the council, and post on the department’s website, a report
describing the methods of targeted outreach used to comply with subdivision b
of this section. Such report shall also include the total number of opioid
antagonists provided to neighborhood health action centers as required by
subdivision c of this section, the location of such neighborhood health action
centers, as well as the total number of opioid antagonists distributed to the
public from such centers within the last reporting period.
(L.L. 2025/169, 11/28/2025, eff. 5/27/2026)
§ 17-199.30 Healthy living and managing chronic diseases during and after
pregnancy.*
* Editor's note: there are two sections designated as § 17-199.30.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Chronic disease. The term “chronic disease” means a condition that lasts
1 year or more and requires ongoing medical attention or limits activities of
daily living, or both, including, but not limited to, asthma, diabetes,
hypertension, heart disease, kidney disease, autoimmune disorders, epilepsy,
and mental health and substance use disorders.
      Designated citywide languages. The term “designated citywide languages”
has the same meaning as set forth in section
23-1101.
      Healthcare provider. The term “healthcare provider” means an individual
duly licensed or otherwise authorized to practice a health profession pursuant
to applicable law, such as a physician, registered professional nurse, nurse
practitioner, and physician assistant.
      Neighborhood health action center. The term “neighborhood health action
center” means the department’s neighborhood-specific action centers, or any
similar or successor program, that aim to reduce health inequities and improve
health outcomes in the city through partnerships with community-based
organizations.
      Non-obstetric healthcare provider. The term “non-obstetric healthcare
provider” means a healthcare provider who does not specialize in pregnancy or
childbirth care.
      Professional organization. The term “professional organization” means a
professional organization for healthcare providers, including, but not limited
to, the American college of obstetricians and gynecologists and the American
board of obstetrics and gynecology.
   b.   The department, in partnership with professional organizations, shall
develop and implement a campaign to educate the public and non-obstetric
healthcare providers about healthy living and managing chronic diseases during
and after pregnancy. Such campaign shall include, but need not be limited to,
the following:
      1.   Information on healthy living during and after pregnancy, including
food education and where to access healthy food options in the city; the
importance of physical activity; resources on how to access affordable or free
physical activities; breastfeeding and formula; where the public can access
additional guidance on such topics; and any other topics the department
considers relevant;
      2.   Information on how chronic diseases may impact individuals during
and after pregnancy, including information and resources on how to mitigate the
effects of chronic diseases and best practices for a healthcare provider on
treating and caring for patients with chronic diseases;
      3.   The risks and benefits associated with common treatments and
medications for patients with chronic diseases during and after pregnancy; and
      4.   Guidance on how to improve communication between healthcare
providers and patients.
   c.   The department shall make available the campaign materials created
pursuant to subdivision b to non-obstetric providers in the city and at
neighborhood health service centers, sexual health clinics, and any other
locations the department deems relevant. The department shall make such
materials available upon request to relevant community-based organizations and
shall make the materials available on the department’s website. The department
shall make such materials available in all designated citywide languages. The
department shall review and update such materials as appropriate.
(L.L. 2025/172, 11/28/2025, eff. 11/28/2026)
§ 17-199.31 Report on deaths by suicide and suicide-related behavior among
youth.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Gender identity. The term “gender identity” means a person’s internal
sense of their own gender, which may be different from their sex assigned at
birth, and may include identities such as male, female, transgender, nonbinary,
or other self-identified genders.
      Sex. The term “sex” means the classification of a person as male, female,
or intersex based on biological characteristics, including anatomy,
chromosomes, or hormones, as recorded at birth or as legally recognized.
      Sexual orientation. The term “sexual orientation” means a person’s
enduring physical, romantic, or emotional attraction to others, including but
not limited to identities such as heterosexual, homosexual, bisexual,
pansexual, or asexual.
   b.   Report on deaths by suicide. No later than 6 months after the effective
date of the local law that added this section, and annually thereafter, the
commissioner, in consultation with other relevant agencies as appropriate,
shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and post on the
department’s website, a report on suicides that occurred in the city in the
calendar year for which the most recent data is available. Such report shall
set forth the number of deaths by suicide in total and disaggregated, to the
extent available by the following information about each decedent:
      1.   Age group;
      2.   Occupational category;
      3.   Race and ethnicity;
      4.   Borough of residence;
      5.   Sex;
      6.   Veteran status;
      7.   Method of suicide; and
      8.   Any other subset the commissioner deems appropriate.
   c    Report on youth suicide-related behavior. No later than 6 months after
the effective date of the local law that added this section, and every 2 years
thereafter, the commissioner, in consultation with other relevant agencies as
appropriate, shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and post
on the department’s website, a report on suicide-related behaviors among youth,
including, but not limited to, information related to sexual orientation and
gender identity, to the extent such data is available to the department.
   d.   Data limitations and transparency. The reports required pursuant to
subdivisions b and c of this section shall include a description of data
limitations, if any.
   e.   Privacy of information. No information that is required to be reported
pursuant to this section shall be reported in a manner that would violate any
applicable provision of federal, state, local law, or rules or regulations
relating to the privacy of any individual or any decedent, or that would
interfere with law enforcement investigations or otherwise conflict with the
interests of any law enforcement agency.
(L.L. 2026/075, 3/27/2026, eff. 3/27/2026)
§ 17-200 Prohibited acts with respect to wild birds.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Take. The term "take" means to harry, bait, net, snare, trap, capture,
hunt, shoot, injure or kill.
      Wild bird. The term "wild bird" means any bird, including a pigeon, that
lives in the wild or in an undomesticated state.
   b.   Prohibited acts. No person other than an exempt person may take or
attempt to take, or possess or attempt to possess, any wild bird. Provided,
however, that this subdivision shall not apply to the persons and entities
specified in subdivision d of this section.
   c.   Penalty. 
      1.   Any person convicted of any prohibited act set forth in subdivision
b of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of no more
than $1,000, or imprisonment for no more than one year, or both, for each
violation.
      2.   The penalties provided in this section shall not preclude the
imposition of any other penalty provided for by law.
   d.   Exempt persons. The penalties provided for in this section shall not
apply:
      1.   To an employee of a law enforcement agency or of the department of
parks and recreation when such employee is acting within the scope of their
duties; or
      2.   To any person authorized by law, or by permit, license, or privilege
issued or granted by the department of environmental conservation or by the
department; or
      3.   To any other agency or person authorized to take, possess, receive,
transport, buy or sell any wild bird, provided that such agency or person has
not violated the terms of the provision of law or permit, license, or privilege
which authorized such person to take, possess, receive, transport, buy or sell
such wild bird; or
      4.   To any person attempting to rescue a wild bird that appears to be
injured or endangered with the intention of transporting it to a place where it
can be treated, provided that such attempt is not otherwise prohibited by law.
(L.L. 2019/201, 11/25/2019, eff. 1/24/2020)
Chapter 2: Medical Examiner
§ 17-201 Report of deaths; removal of body.
It shall be the duty of any citizen who becomes aware of the death of any
person, occurring under the circumstances described in paragraph one of
subdivision (f) of section five hundred fifty-seven of the charter, to report
such death forthwith to the office of the chief medical examiner, and to a
police officer who shall forthwith notify the officer in charge of the station-
house in the police precinct in which such person died. Any person who shall
wilfully neglect or refuse to report such death or who without written order
from a medical examiner shall wilfully touch, remove or disturb the body of any
such person, or wilfully touch, remove or disturb the clothing or any article
upon or near such body, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 17-202 Procedure in deaths reportable to the office of chief medical
examiner.
   a.   Upon any such death, the officer in charge of the station-house in the
police precinct in which such person died shall immediately notify the office
of chief medical examiner of the known facts concerning the time, place, manner
and circumstances of such death. Immediately upon receipt of such notification
the chief medical examiner, or a deputy chief medical examiner, or a medical
examiner, or a medical investigator, or a lay medical investigator shall go to
and take charge of the dead body. Such medical examiner, medical investigator
or lay medical investigator shall fully investigate the essential facts
concerning the circumstances of the death, taking the names and addresses of as
many witnesses thereto as it may be practicable to obtain, and shall record all
such facts and file the same in the office of chief medical examiner. Such
medical examiner, medical investigator or lay medical investigator shall take
possession of any portable objects which, in his or her opinion, may be useful
in establishing the cause of death, and except as provided in subdivision c
hereof, shall deliver them to the police department.
   b.   The police officer detailed in such cases shall, in the absence of next
of kin of the deceased person, take possession of all property of value found
on such person, make an exact inventory thereof on his or her report, and
deliver such property to the police department, which shall surrender the same
to the person entitled to its custody or possession.
   c.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivisions a and b of this section,
any suicide note or other written evidence of suicide found on such deceased
person shall be delivered to the chief medical examiner and shall be retained
by said medical examiner.
   d.   Nothing in this section contained shall affect the powers and duties of
a public administrator.
§ 17-203 Autopsies; findings.
If it may be concluded with reasonable certainty that death occurred from
natural causes or obvious traumatic injury, and there are no other
circumstances which would appear to require an autopsy, the chief medical
examiner, deputy chief medical examiner or medical examiner or medical
investigator in charge shall certify the cause of death and file a report of
his or her findings in the office of chief medical examiner. If, however, in
the opinion of a medical examiner, an autopsy is necessary, the same shall be
performed by a medical examiner. Where indicated, the autopsy shall include
toxicologic, histologic, microbiologic and serologic examinations. A detailed
description of the findings of all autopsies shall be written or dictated. The
findings of the investigation at the scene of death, the autopsy and any
toxicologic, histologic, serologic and microbiologic examinations, and the
conclusions drawn therefrom shall be filed in the office of chief medical
examiner. Such findings and conclusions shall be signed by the medical examiner
performing the autopsy.
§ 17-204 Cremation.
Whenever an application is made pursuant to law for a permit to cremate the
body of any person, the department, board or office in which such application
is filed shall forward such application to the chief medical examiner who shall
thereupon cause an investigation and report to be made thereon. In the event
that the chief medical examiner, or a deputy chief medical examiner, or a
medical examiner shall, in the course of such investigation, determine that
reasonable grounds exist therefor, an autopsy shall be performed upon such body
by a medical examiner. Where indicated, the autopsy shall include toxicologic,
histologic, microbiologic and serologic examinations. A detailed description of
the findings of all autopsies shall be written or dictated. The findings of the
investigation, the autopsy and any toxicologic, histologic, serologic and
microbiologic examinations, and the conclusions drawn therefrom shall be filed
in the office of chief medical examiner. Such findings and conclusions shall be
signed by the medical examiners performing the autopsy.
§ 17-205 Records.
Records shall be kept in the office of the chief medical examiner, properly
indexed, stating the name, if known, of every person dying under the
circumstances described in paragraph one of subdivision (f) of section five
hundred fifty-seven of the charter, the place where the body was found and the
date of death. To the record of each case shall be attached the original report
of the medical examiner and the detailed findings of the autopsy, if any. The
appropriate district attorney and the police commissioner of the city may
require from the chief medical examiner such further records, and such daily
information, as they may deem necessary.
§ 17-206 Fees for copies of records.
   a.   Whenever the chief medical examiner shall furnish to any private
individual a copy or transcript of any record or any photograph or photostat of
such record, such chief medical examiner shall and is hereby authorized to
charge as follows:
 
1. For each copy or photostat of medical examiner's     five dollars per page
report on cause of death
2. For each copy or photostat of hospital report        five dollars per page
3. For each copy or photostat of autopsy report         five dollars per page
4. For each copy or photostat of toxicological chemical five dollars per page
laboratory report
5. For each copy or photostat of identification form    five dollars per page
6. For each copy or photostat of serological and/or     five dollars per page
bacteriological report
7. For each copy or photostat of notice of death slip   five dollars per page
 
It is provided that the charge for any single request for documents of a single
case shall not exceed fifty dollars.
   b.   The chief medical examiner shall waive such fee or any portion thereof
when furnishing such copies to indigent next of kin.
   c.   The chief medical examiner, in his or her discretion, shall have the
power to waive such fee or any portion thereof when furnishing such copies to
those engaged in scientific or other research.
§ 17-207 Root cause analysis, office of chief medical examiner.
   a.   For purposes of this subdivision, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
      1.   "Designated root cause analysis officer" shall mean an employee of
the office of chief medical examiner who is responsible for determining whether
a significant event has occurred within the office of chief medical examiner
and, if such significant event has occurred, for convening the root cause
analysis committee.
      2.   "Root cause analysis" shall mean a process for investigating the
causal factors of a significant event that shall focus primarily on systems and
processes, not on individual performance or human error, and shall identify
appropriate corrective action, including strategies to prevent the reoccurrence
of a significant event or potential improvements in systems or processes that
will decrease the likelihood of a significant event occurring in the future.
      3.   "Root cause analysis committee" shall mean a committee composed of
representatives of certain divisions of the office of chief medical examiner
appointed by the designated root cause analysis officer and assembled in
response to a significant event in order to conduct a root cause analysis and
to produce a root cause analysis committee report pursuant to this section.
      4.   "Root cause analysis committee report" shall mean a final report
issued by the root cause analysis committee that shall include the findings of
the root cause analysis committee, including, but not limited to, the
identification of the root cause or causes of the significant event and a
corrective action plan.
      5.   "Significant event" shall mean an occurrence in the office of chief
medical examiner involving a significant likelihood of an act, error or
omission that affects the accuracy, reliability or integrity of the reported
results of evidence examination or reported results of analysis. Such act,
error or omission shall include, but not be limited to, any (i) act or acts by
an employee of the office of chief medical examiner involving intentional
fabrication of work product, evidence examination, analysis or test results;
(ii) significant error or errors by an employee of the office of chief medical
examiner, or deficiency in a system or procedure used by such office, that may
have affected the accuracy of reported results of evidence examination or the
accuracy of the reported results of analysis in one or more cases; (iii)
failure by an employee of the office of chief medical examiner to follow such
office's protocol that may have affected the accuracy of reported results of
evidence examination or the accuracy of the reported results of analysis in one
or more cases; or (iv) statement in the course of testimony by an employee of
the office of chief medical examiner that significantly misrepresents or
misstates her or his education, experience, training or qualifications, or the
reported results of any evidence examination or analysis.
   b.   The office of chief medical examiner shall appoint an employee of the
office of chief medical examiner who shall serve as the designated root cause
analysis officer.
   c.   The office of chief medical examiner shall develop and post on its
website root cause analysis guidelines to assist in the implementation of this
section. Such guidelines shall provide guidance for:
      1.   determining whether a significant event has occurred, consistent
with this section;
      2.   reporting a significant event;
      3.   creating a root cause analysis committee upon a determination of the
root cause analysis officer that a significant event has occurred;
      4.   selecting individuals who shall serve as members of a root cause
analysis committee;
      5.   determining the roles and responsibilities of members of a root
cause analysis committee;
      6.   determining when and how frequently a root cause analysis committee
shall meet once a committee has been assembled in response to a significant
event;
      7.   producing a root cause analysis committee report in a timely manner;
      8.   identifying causal factors of a significant event;
      9.   identifying corrective action to be taken as a result of the root
cause analysis; and
      10.   (i)   recusing the designated root cause analysis officer in the
event that the occurrence at issue is likely to involve acts or omissions by
such officer, either acting in the capacity of the designated root cause
analysis officer or any other capacity within the office of chief medical
examiner, or in any other appropriate instance as specified in the guidelines;
         (ii)   appointing an employee of the office of chief medical examiner
to serve as the acting designated root cause analysis officer in the event of
such recusal to fulfill the duties of the designated root cause analysis
officer pursuant to subdivisions d, e and f of this section, provided that the
occurrence at issue is not likely to involve acts or omissions by such
individual appointed to serve as acting designated root cause analysis officer;
and
         (iii)   requiring a decision not to recuse the designated root cause
analysis officer to be reviewed by the executive management of the office of
chief medical examiner, such as a director or deputy commissioner.
   d.   Within ten days of the discovery of an occurrence in the office of
chief medical examiner involving the substantial likelihood of an act, error or
omission that affects the accuracy, reliability and integrity of the reported
results of evidence examination or reported results of analysis, or receipt of
a report that a significant event has occurred in the office of chief medical
examiner, the designated root cause analysis officer shall make a formal
determination whether a significant event has occurred. In the event that the
designated root cause analysis officer makes a determination that a significant
event has not occurred, such officer shall provide written explanation to the
chief medical examiner explaining why such occurrence does not constitute a
significant event.
   e.   Within five business days of a formal determination by the designated
root cause analysis officer that a significant event has occurred within the
office of chief medical examiner as provided in subdivision d of this section,
such officer shall appoint a root cause analysis committee for the purpose of
conducting a root cause analysis and producing a root cause analysis committee
report. Such committee shall include at least six members, provided that:
      (1)   one member is the designated root cause analysis officer;
      (2)   at least one member is knowledgeable in the subject area relating
to the significant event and is a lab worker or other employee who performs
scientific or technical services and works in a non-managerial capacity;
      (3)   one member serves in the executive management of the office of
chief medical examiner, such as a director or deputy commissioner;
      (4)   two members are from divisions, departments or laboratories of the
office of chief medical examiner that are not implicated by the significant
event, and at least one of the two members works in a non-managerial capacity;
and
      (5)   one member is an external expert who works in a medical or
scientific research field. Such member may serve without compensation. For the
purpose of executing paragraph 5 of this subdivision, the office of chief
medical examiner shall develop and maintain a list of external experts who may
serve as an external expert on a root cause analysis committee if called upon
to serve in such capacity.
   f.   1.   Within thirty days of a determination of the designated root cause
analysis officer that a significant event has occurred within the office of
chief medical examiner, the office of chief medical examiner shall report the
occurrence of such significant event to the mayor and the council of the city
of New York, and to any district attorney and defense counsel of record that
can be identified and who has a case or client that can reasonably be found to
be affected by the significant event. In the event that the defense counsel of
record works in the office of an institutional defender, notice shall also be
given to the head of such office. In the event that defense counsel of record
is assigned from the 18b panel of either the first or second department in the
city of New York, notice shall also be given to the administrator of the 18b
panel of the assigning department.
      2.   The root cause analysis committee shall submit a root cause analysis
committee report no later than ninety days following the appointment of such
committee, provided, however, that should it not be practicable to complete
such report within ninety days, the committee shall report in writing to the
mayor and council of the city of New York on the progress of the committee's
findings and set forth a statement why such report is not yet completed and
when completion is anticipated.
      3.   Within seven days of submission of a root cause analysis report to
the mayor and council of the city of New York, the office of chief medical
examiner shall send a copy of the root cause analysis report at a minimum to
(i) the New York state commission on forensic science and any entity
responsible for the accreditation of the department of forensic biology of the
office of chief medical examiner, provided that the significant event that is
the subject of such report is relevant to the department of forensic biology of
the office of chief medical examiner, and (ii) to district attorney and defense
counsel of record that can be identified and who has a case or client that can
reasonably be found to be affected by the significant event. In the event that
the defense counsel of record works in the office of an institutional defender,
notice shall also be given to the head of such office. In the event that
defense counsel of record is assigned from the 18b panel of either the first or
second department in the city of New York, notice shall also be given to the
administrator of the 18b panel of the assigning department.
   g.   The root cause analysis report produced pursuant to subdivision f of
this section shall not include the names of, or otherwise identify:
      (1)   any employee of the office of chief medical examiner;
      (2)   any complainant, victim or decedent; or
      (3)   any other individual who is the subject of investigations
associated with forensic casework performed by the office of chief medical
examiner.
   h.   This section shall not be construed to create a private right of action
to enforce any of its provisions.
§ 17-208 Transparency, office of chief medical examiner.
   a.   For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
      1.   "Forensic DNA laboratory" shall have the same meaning as set forth
in subdivision two of section nine hundred ninety-five of article forty-nine-
b of the New York state executive law, or any successor provision thereto.
      2.   "Proficiency test" shall mean such testing as is required by the New
York state commission on forensic science and the New York state subcommittee
on forensic DNA laboratories and forensic DNA testing pursuant to paragraph b
of subdivision three of section nine hundred ninety-five-b of article forty-
nine-b of the New York state executive law, or any successor provision thereto.
      3.   "Proficiency testing report" shall mean an annual report produced by
the office of chief medical examiner which reports the number of employees
working in the department of forensic biology of the office of chief medical
examiner who have taken a proficiency test that year, and the percentage and
number of those employees who passed such proficiency test.
   b.   The office of chief medical examiner shall annually prepare a
proficiency testing report and shall include comparison data for each of the
previous five years as available. The proficiency testing report shall not
include the names of, or otherwise identify, any employee of the department of
forensic biology of the office of chief medical examiner.
   c.   To the extent the office of chief medical examiner is authorized to
publish such materials, the office of chief medical examiner shall post
prominently and maintain on its website the following concerning the department
of forensic biology of the office of chief medical examiner:
      1.   current copies, and copies used within the preceding two years, of
all manuals, guidelines, or other documents relating to scientific procedures
or protocols, quality assurance and quality control procedures or protocols,
materials used for the training of lab workers, and evidence and case
management procedures, including, but not limited to, accreditation standards
and accreditation audit reports;
      2.   the most recent annual proficiency testing report; and
      3.   current copies of all certificates of accreditation issued to the
department of forensic biology of the office of chief medical examiner, whether
by a governmental entity or a non-governmental entity responsible for the
accreditation of the department of forensic biology of the office of chief
medical examiner.
   d.   Historic copies of any manual, guidelines, or other document identified
in paragraph one of subdivision c of this section used on or after January
first, two thousand and not fully available on the website of the office of
chief medical examiner shall be made available to any person upon request, and
a notice describing such availability and how to make such a request shall be
posted on the office's website.
   e.   This section shall not be construed to create a private right of action
to enforce any of its provisions.
Chapter 3: Licenses and Permits
**** Subchapter 1: Administrative Provisions ****
§ 17-301 Language preference for inspections.
Every application for a license or a permit, or the renewal of an existing
license or an existing permit to be issued by the commissioner pursuant to this
chapter shall provide an opportunity for the applicant to indicate the language
in which such applicant would prefer that inspections in connection with such
license or permit be conducted or alternatively for which language
interpretation services be provided. Nothing in this subdivision nor any
failure to comply with such preference shall be construed so as to create a
cause of action or constitute a defense in any legal, administrative, or other
proceeding.
§ 17-302 Licensee disclosure of breach of security, notification requirements.
Every recipient of a license issued pursuant to this title who is required to
make a notification pursuant to subdivision 2 or 3 of section 899-aa of the
general business law shall promptly submit a copy of such notification to the
department. Such notice shall be made without delaying notice to any individual
whose private information was, or is reasonably believed to have been, acquired
by an unauthorized person.
(L.L. 2021/151, 12/11/2021, eff. 4/10/2022)
**** Subchapter 2: Food Vendors ****
§ 17-306 Definitions.
Whenever used in this subchapter the following terms shall mean:
   a.   "Commissary". A service room, catering establishment, restaurant or any
other place in which food, containers or supplies are processed, prepared,
handled, packed, transferred or stored and directly from which food is
distributed to a food vendor or from which any vehicle or pushcart offering
food to the public in any public space is supplied.
   b.   "Food". Any raw, cooked or processed edible substances, beverages,
ingredients, ice or water used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in
part for human consumption.
   c.   "Food vendor" or "vendor". A person who hawks, peddles, sells or offers
food for sale at retail in any public space.
   d.   "Food vending business". The business of selling or offering food for
sale at retail in a public space engaged in by a food vendor.
   e.   "Public space". All publicly owned property between the property lines
on a street as such property lines are shown on city records including, but not
limited to, a park, plaza, roadways, shoulder, tree space, sidewalk or parking
space between such property lines. It shall also include, but not be limited
to, publicly owned or leased land, buildings, piers, wharfs, stadiums and
terminals.
   f.   "Pushcart". Any wheeled vehicle or device used by a food vendor, other
than a motor vehicle or trailer, which may be moved with or without the
assistance of a motor and which does not require registration by the department
of motor vehicles. The term "pushcart" shall include any green cart, as that
term is defined by subdivision s of this section.
   g.   "Vehicle". A motor vehicle or trailer, as defined in the vehicle and
traffic law.
   h.   "Vend". To hawk, peddle, sell or offer to sell food at retail in a
public space, delivered immediately upon consummation of purchase.
   i.   "Person." A natural person, partnership, corporation or other
association.
   j.   "Veteran". Any person who was in active service in the armed forces of
the United States and was honorably discharged from such service.
   k.   "Disabled veteran". A veteran who is certified by the United States
department of veterans' affairs as having a disability rated at ten per centum
or more that was incurred by such person during active service in the armed
forces of the United States and which disability is in existence at the time of
application for a permit under this sub-chapter.
   l.   "Honorable discharge". Any type of discharge or release from the armed
forces of the United States other than a dishonorable discharge.
   m.   "Disabled person". Any person who has or had a physical or mental
impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities and has
a record of such an impairment. For the purposes of this subdivision, "physical
impairment" means a physiological disorder or condition, or anatomical loss
affecting one or more of the following body systems: neurological;
musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, including speech organs;
cardiovascular; genitourinary; hemic and lymphatic; or skin and endocrine. It
includes, but is not limited to, such diseases and conditions as orthopedic,
visual, speech and hearing impairments, cerebral palsy, muscular dystrophy, and
multiple sclerosis. For the purposes of this subdivision, "mental impairment"
means any mental or psychological disorder such as intellectual disability,
organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning
disabilities. For the purposes of this subdivision, "major life activities"
means functions such as walking, seeing, hearing and speaking. For the purposes
of this subdivision, a record of such an impairment shall be established by
submission to the commissioner of either:
      (a)   A letter or certificate describing the physical or mental
impairment of the applicant which must include the notarized signature of one
of the following:
         (i)   A licensed physician, ophthalmologist, optometrist or
psychologist; or
         (ii)   An authorized representative of a social agency that conducts
programs for the disabled in cooperation with an official agency of the state
and from which the applicant is receiving services such as, but not limited to,
the state office of vocational rehabilitation; or
      (b)   A previous certification not more than one year old establishing
the physical or mental impairment of the applicant such as, but not limited to,
verification of an income tax exemption or social security benefits on the
basis of physical or mental impairment.
   n.   "Unemancipated child". Any son, daughter, step-son or step-daughter who
is under the age of eighteen, unmarried and living in the same household.
   o.   "Exclusive distributor". A person who has a written agreement with a
manufacturer of a food product for the sale of that product by a food vendor
licensed pursuant to this subchapter from a vehicle or pushcart to the
exclusion of any similar food product manufactured by any other manufacturer.
   p.   "Manufacturer". A person who processes or fabricates food products from
raw materials for commercial purposes.
   q.   "Fresh fruits and vegetables". Unfrozen raw fruits and vegetables that
have not been combined with other ingredients.
   r.   "Fresh fruits and vegetables permit". A full-term permit for the
vending at retail solely of fresh fruits or vegetables, water, raw single
ingredient nuts and any other food designated by the commissioner as healthful
pursuant to section
17-324.1, from a pushcart or vehicle in a public place. Unless otherwise
specified, a fresh fruits and vegetables permit shall be a permit in accordance
with the provisions of this subchapter.
   s.   "Green cart". A pushcart or vehicle used exclusively by those issued
fresh fruits and vegetables full-term permits pursuant to section
17-307 of this subchapter.
   t.   "Letter grade". A letter grade indicating the sanitary inspection grade
issued by the department pursuant to section
17-325.3.
   u.   "Plate or permit plate". Certificate issued by the department
subsequent to inspection and approval of a vehicle or pushcart.
   v.   "Supervisory license". On or after July 1, 2022, a food vendor license
that authorizes the licensee to vend from a vehicle or pushcart for which a
permit is issued in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Am. L.L. 2017/108, 5/30/2017, eff. 2/24/2018; Am. L.L. 2021/018, 2/28/2021,
eff. 2/28/2021 and 5/29/2021; Am. L.L. 2022/014, 1/9/2022, eff. 1/9/2022)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1997/027,
L.L. 2008/009, and
L.L. 2021/018.
§ 17-307 Licenses, permits required; restrictions; term.
   a.   1.   It shall be unlawful for any individual to act as a food vendor
without having first obtained a license therefor from the commissioner in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
      2.   In addition to the conditions set forth in section
17-310 of this subchapter a license shall be renewable by the licensee provided
that the licensee meets all other requirements for renewal, the license has not
been revoked or suspended and the licensee has not committed a violation or
violations which could be a basis for license revocation or suspension.
   b.   1.   (a)   It shall be unlawful to vend food from any vehicle or
pushcart in a public space without having first obtained a permit for such
vehicle or pushcart from the commissioner in accordance with the provisions of
this subchapter. On or after July 1, 2032, it shall be unlawful to vend food
from any vehicle or pushcart in a public place without a supervisory licensee
physically present and vending at such vehicle or pushcart.
         (b)   The commissioner shall establish standards relating to the size
and design of such vehicles and pushcarts. No vendors shall vend from any
vehicle or pushcart which does not comply with the standards established by the
commissioner. No vendor shall vend from other than a vehicle or pushcart.
         (c)   No food vendor issued a fresh fruits and vegetables permit shall
vend from other than a vehicle or a green cart. No food vendor issued a fresh
fruits and vegetables permit shall vend any food other than fresh fruits and
vegetables, water, raw single ingredient nuts and other food designated by the
commissioner as healthful pursuant to section
17-324.1 from the green cart or vehicle for which the permit was issued.
      2.   (a)   No new full-term permits shall be issued until the number of
such permits which are in effect is less than 3,000. Thereafter, the maximum
number of such permits which may be in effect shall be 3,000 and no new permits
shall be issued in excess of such maximum number. Notwithstanding the
limitations on the issuance of new full-term permits, a permit issued prior to
July 30, 1983 which is in effect shall be renewable by the licensee to whom the
permit was issued subject to the provisions of subparagraph (f) of this
paragraph and provided that all other requirements for renewal under the
provisions of this subchapter and any rules promulgated pursuant thereto are
complied with, the license of the person to whom the permit was issued or the
permit has not been revoked or suspended and the licensee has not committed a
violation or violations which could be a basis for permit or license revocation
or suspension.
         (b)   (i)   On and after March fifteenth, nineteen hundred ninety-
five, without increasing the number of full-term permits which may be in effect
in accordance with subparagraph (a) of this paragraph, two hundred full-term
permits shall be designated for use exclusively in specified boroughs as
follows:
               (A)   fifty of such full-term permits shall authorize the
holders thereof to vend food from any vehicle or pushcart in any public place
in the borough of the Bronx where food vendors are not prohibited from vending;
               (B)   fifty of such full-term permits shall authorize the
holders thereof to vend food from any vehicle or pushcart in any public place
in the borough of Brooklyn where food vendors are not prohibited from vending;
               (C)   fifty of such full-term permits shall authorize the
holders thereof to vend food from any vehicle or pushcart in any public place
in the borough of Queens where food vendors are not prohibited from vending;
and
               (D)   fifty of such full-term permits shall authorize the
holders thereof to vend food from any vehicle or pushcart in any public place
in the borough of Staten Island where food vendors are not prohibited from
vending.
            (ii)   After the initial issuance of such permits, the commissioner
shall establish a separate waiting list for each of the relevant boroughs to be
administered in accordance with procedures to be established by rules of the
commissioner. The commissioner may by rule limit the number of places on each
such waiting list. On or after July 1, 2022 all new permits issued pursuant to
this subparagraph shall be designated for use exclusively in any borough
outside of Manhattan and shall be issued only to the holder of a supervisory
license. Such requirement shall not apply to a borough specific permit issued
before July 1, 2022 or renewal thereof until July 1, 2032. On or after July 1,
2032, permits issued pursuant to this subparagraph shall issue only to the
holder of a supervisory license. Supervisory licenses shall be made available
for application to individuals on the waiting lists for borough-specific
permits in the order of priority set out in subparagraph (d) of paragraph 5 of
this subdivision until such waiting lists are exhausted.
         (c)   Full-term permits issued under this subchapter shall be issued
only to persons who at the time of application have not had a full-term or
temporary permit or supervisory license revoked or suspended and who satisfy
the commissioner that they are fit and able to conduct, maintain or operate a
food vending business. Except as otherwise provided in item (B) of clause (ii)
of subparagraph (a) of paragraph three of subdivision f of this section, no
person shall be issued more than one permit under this subchapter, whether
full-term or temporary. Any full-term permit issued under this subchapter on or
after July 1, 2022 shall be issued only to the holder of a supervisory license,
applications for which shall be distributed in the order prescribed in
subparagraph (d) of paragraph 5 of this subdivision.
         (d)   The issuance or renewal of a full-term permit pursuant to this
subchapter shall be subject to the permittee within three months after the
certification of a complete application therefor presenting a pushcart or
vehicle for inspection by the department and within six months after such
certification, passing such inspection, except that a supervisory licensee may
apply for a permit at any time between acquiring a supervisory license and the
expiration of such license.
         (e)   The commissioner shall establish a separate waiting list or
lists for the issuance of full-term permits pursuant to this subchapter to be
administered in accordance with requirements to be established by rules of the
commissioner. The commissioner may by rule limit the number of places on such
waiting list or lists.
         (f)   Except as otherwise provided in item (B) of clause (ii) of
subparagraph (a) of paragraph three of subdivision f of this section, on and
after January first, nineteen hundred ninety-six, and on every renewal date
thereafter, a permit holder may not renew more than one permit, whether full-
term or temporary. Such permit shall be renewed provided that all other
requirements for renewal under the provisions of this subchapter and any rules
promulgated pursuant thereto are complied with, the license of the person to
whom the permit was issued or the permit has not been revoked or suspended and
such person has not committed a violation or violations which could be a basis
for permit or license suspension or revocation.
         (g)   Other than subparagraphs (c), (d) and (f), this paragraph shall
not apply to the issuance of fresh fruits and vegetable permits.
      3.   (a)   (i)   Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph two of this
subdivision limiting the number of full-term permits that are authorized to be
issued, the commissioner may issue up to a maximum of 100 additional full-term
permits authorizing the holders thereof to vend food from any vehicle or
pushcart in any public place in the city of New York where food vendors are not
prohibited from vending. Such permits shall be issued only to natural persons.
            (ii)   TThe department shall make available for application at
least 200 supervisory licenses per twelve-month period for five consecutive
years beginning on July 1, 2026. Where the number of supervisory licenses
issued in such twelve-month period is less than 200, the department may make
additional supervisory licenses available for application such that the total
number of supervisory licenses issued per twelve-month period beginning on July
1, 2026 is up to 200 and the cumulative total number of supervisory licenses
issued pursuant to this paragraph by July 1, 2031 is up to 1,180. In addition
to the 100 permits authorized to be issued by clause (i) of this subparagraph,
and notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph two of this subdivision
limiting the number of full-term permits authorized to be issued, the
department shall make available for application to applicants who comply with
the requirements for such supervisory licenses an additional 200 permits per
twelve-month period for five consecutive years beginning on July 1, 2026 and
issue a permit to each applicant who complies with the requirements for such
permit.
            (iii)   Supervisory licenses available pursuant to this paragraph
shall be made available for application in accordance with the preferences
specified in subparagraph (b) of this paragraph and the procedures established
by the commissioner.
            (iv)   The commissioner shall establish a waiting list to be
administered in accordance with procedures to be established by rules of the
commissioner.
         (b)   Preferences shall be given in the issuance of permits pursuant
to this paragraph and in the placement on such waiting list to the following
categories of persons in the following order:
            (i)   Veterans who on August second, nineteen hundred ninety-one
held a valid general vendor's license issued by the department of consumer and
worker protection pursuant to subchapter twenty-seven of chapter two of title
twenty of the code by virtue of having claimed a disability.
            (ii)   Disabled veterans.
            (iii)   Disabled persons.
            (iv)   Veterans.
         (c)   This paragraph shall not apply to fresh fruits and vegetables
permits.
      4.   (a)   Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph two of this
subdivision limiting the total number of full-term permits that are authorized
to be issued, the commissioner may issue up to a maximum of one thousand fresh
fruits and vegetable permits, as that term is defined in subdivision r of
section
17-306 of this chapter. Each of the one thousand fruits and vegetables permits
to be issued pursuant to this paragraph shall be designated for use exclusively
in a specified borough as follows:
            (i)   three hundred fifty of such fruits and vegetables permits
shall authorize the holders thereof to vend fresh fruits and vegetables, water,
raw single ingredient nuts and any other food designated by the commissioner as
healthful pursuant to section
17-324.1 from any green cart in the borough of the Bronx in the areas
designated in clause (i) of subparagraph (b) of this paragraph.
            (ii)   three hundred fifty of such fruits and vegetables permits
shall authorize the holders thereof to vend fresh fruits and vegetables, water,
raw single ingredient nuts and any other food designated by the commissioner as
healthful pursuant to section
17-324.1 from any green cart in the borough of Brooklyn in the areas designated
in clause (ii) of subparagraph (b) of this paragraph.
            (iii)   one hundred fifty of such fresh fruits and vegetables
permits shall authorize the holders thereof to vend fresh fruits and
vegetables, water, raw single ingredient nuts and any other food designated by
the commissioner as healthful pursuant to section
17-324.1 from any green cart in the borough of Manhattan in the areas
designated in clause (iii) of subparagraph (b) of this paragraph.
            (iv)   one hundred of such fresh fruits and vegetables permits
shall authorize the holders thereof to vend fresh fruits and vegetables, water,
raw single ingredient nuts and any other food designated by the commissioner as
healthful pursuant to section
17-324.1 from any green cart in the borough of Queens in the areas designated
in clause (iv) of subparagraph (b) of this paragraph.
            (v)   fifty of such fresh fruits and vegetables permits shall
authorize the holders thereof to vend fresh fruits and vegetables, water, raw
single ingredient nuts and any other food designated by the commissioner as
healthful pursuant to section
17-324.1 from any green cart in the borough of Staten Island in the areas
designated in clause (v) of subparagraph (b) of this paragraph.
         (b)   The issuance or renewal of a full-term permit issued pursuant to
this paragraph shall be subject to the permittee within three months after the
certification of a complete application therefore presenting a green cart or
vehicle for inspection by the department and, within six months after such
certification, passing such inspection. No person shall be issued more than one
permit. Fresh fruits and vegetables permits, in addition to being designated
for use exclusively in a borough as specified in subparagraph (a) of this
paragraph, shall be designated for use exclusively within the police precincts
specified below or pursuant to subparagraph (c) of this paragraph, and shall be
subject to the same time and place restrictions for vending in such areas as
other food vendors:
            (i)   Bronx: Police Precincts 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48,
49, 52;
            (ii)   Brooklyn: Police Precincts 67, 70, 71, 72, 73, 75, 77, 79,
81, 83;
            (iii)   Manhattan: Police Precincts 23, 25, 26, 28, 30, 32, 33, 34;
            (iv)   Queens: Police Precincts 100, 101, 103, 113; and
            (v)   Staten Island: Police Precinct 120.
         (c)   In addition to the police precincts listed in subparagraph (b)
of this paragraph, a fresh fruits and vegetable permits that is designated for
use exclusively in a borough as specified in subparagraph (a) of this paragraph
may also be designated for use in any other police precinct in such borough
that the commissioner has specified in rules of the department, after
determining that the rate of consumption of fresh fruits and vegetables in such
precinct is substantially lower than the citywide average and that the precinct
has an elevated rate of nutrition-related health problems compared to the rest
of the city.
         (d)   Fresh fruits and vegetables permits shall be issued in
accordance with the preferences specified in subparagraph (e) of this paragraph
and the procedures established by the commissioner. The commissioner shall
establish a separate waiting list for each borough, to be administered in
accordance with procedures to be established by rules of the commissioner. The
commissioner may by rule limit the number of places on each such waiting list.
         (e)   Preferences shall be given in the issuance of fresh fruits and
vegetables permits pursuant to this paragraph and in the placement on any
waiting list for such permits to the following categories of persons in the
following order:
            (i)   Persons who, on the effective date of the local law which
added this provision, are on any of the existing waiting lists established by
the commissioner for the issuance of mobile food unit permits for pushcarts and
vehicles. From among those persons within this preference category, additional
preference in both the issuance of fresh fruits and vegetables permits and
placement on any waiting list for such permits shall be given to those persons
who fall within the following groups of persons in the following order:
disabled veterans; disabled persons; veterans.
            (ii)   Disabled veterans.
            (iii)   Disabled persons.
            (iv)   Veterans.
         (f)   A person who has been issued a permit pursuant to this paragraph
shall not be eligible to obtain a full-term permit authorized by paragraphs two
or three of this subdivision if at the time of application for a full-term
permit authorized by such paragraphs such person is a holder of a full-term
permit issued pursuant to this paragraph or such person has had a full-term
permit issued pursuant to this paragraph revoked or suspended.
      5.   (a)   On or after July 1, 2022 all new permits issued under this
subchapter, except fresh fruits and vegetables permits, shall be designated for
use only when any holder of a supervisory license is physically present and
vending. Such requirement shall not apply to a permit issued before July 1,
2022 or a renewal thereof until July 1, 2031. On or after July 1, 2031, all
permits issued under this subchapter, except fresh fruits and vegetables
permits, shall be designated for use only when any holder of a supervisory
license is physically present and vending.
         (b)   The commissioner shall make available for application at least
2,000 supervisory licenses per twelve-month period for five consecutive years
beginning on July 1, 2026. Where the number of supervisory licenses issued in
such twelve-month period is less than 2,000, the department may make additional
supervisory licenses available for application such that the total number of
licenses issued per twelve-month period beginning on July 1, 2026 is up to
2,000 and the total cumulative number of licenses issued pursuant to this
paragraph by July 1, 2031 is up to 11,200. Notwithstanding the provisions of
this subdivision limiting the total number of full-term permits that are
authorized to be issued, the commissioner shall make available a permit
application to each license applicant who complies with the requirements for
such supervisory license and issue a permit to each permit applicant who
complies with the requirements for such permit. On or before July 1, 2031, the
commissioner shall make available for application supervisory licenses to any
person seeking to renew a permit that was issued under this subchapter before
July 1, 2022.
         (c)   In accordance with procedures to be established by rules of the
commissioner, in each twelve-month period, up to 500 of the supervisory
licenses that may be issued under this paragraph shall be designated for use in
any borough, and up to 1,500 such supervisory licenses that may be issued under
this paragraph shall be designated for use in boroughs outside of Manhattan.
         (d)   Preferences shall be given in the availability of applications
for supervisory licenses pursuant to this paragraph and in the placement on a
waiting list therefor to the following categories of persons in the following
order:
            (i)   Persons who have held a food vendor license continuously
since on or before March 1, 2017 and have been on a waiting list for a full-
term permit pursuant to subparagraph (e) of paragraph 2 of this subdivision and
remain on such list as of the date an application is made available.
Applications shall be made available to such persons by order of numerical rank
on the waiting list.
            (ii)   Persons who have been on a waiting list for a full-term
permit pursuant to this subchapter and remain on such list as of the date an
application is made available but have not held a food vendor license
continuously since on or before March 1, 2017. Applications shall be made
available to such persons by order of numerical rank on the waiting list.
            (iii)   Persons who have held a food vendor license continuously
since on or before March 1, 2017 but are were not on a waiting list for a full-
term permit pursuant to this subchapter as of the effective date of the local
law that added this paragraph.
            (iv)   Persons who have not held a food vendor license continuously
since on or before March 1, 2017 and were not on a waiting list for a full-term
permit pursuant to this subchapter as of the effective date of the local law
that added this paragraph.
         (e)   The commissioner may by rule limit the number of places on such
waiting list, but shall ensure that such waiting list is operative prior to
supervisory licenses becoming available to new individuals.
         (f)   No later than July 1, 2031, the commissioner shall replenish the
waiting list in accordance with the preferences set forth in this paragraph.
   c.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a commissary, or place
of food distribution, or a place wherein five or more pushcarts, or more than
one vehicle are stored, without first obtaining a permit.
   d.   A food vendor's license shall not entitle the holder thereof to vend
any food other than foods which the commissioner or board may authorize or
otherwise approve. A food vendor vending from a green cart or vehicle with a
fresh fruits and vegetables permit shall not be authorized to vend any food
other than fresh fruit and vegetables, water, raw single ingredient nuts and
any other food that has been designated by the commissioner as healthful
pursuant to section
17-324.1.
   e.   All licenses and permits issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be
valid for two years unless sooner suspended or revoked. The commissioner may
issue such licenses and permits to expire at various times during a year. To
achieve such staggered expiration dates, initial licenses or permits may be
issued for a period up to three years.
   f.   1.   The commissioner may issue temporary licenses and permits upon the
furnishing of information and an application in such form and detail as such
commissioner may prescribe and the payment of a fee pro-rated in accordance
with the schedule of fees set forth in section
17-308 of this subchapter, but in no event shall the fee for such temporary
license be less than ten dollars or the fee for such temporary permit be less
than fifteen dollars.
      2.   In addition to the conditions set forth in section
17-310 of this subchapter a temporary license shall be renewable by the
licensee within one year of its expiration date provided that the licensee
meets all other requirements for renewal, the license has not been revoked or
suspended and the licensee has not committed a violation or violations which
could be a basis for license revocation or suspension.
      3.   (a)   (i)   On and after July thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-
three, no new temporary permits shall be issued until the number of such
permits which are in effect is less than one thousand. Thereafter, the maximum
number of such permits which may be in effect shall be one thousand and no new
permits shall be issued in excess of such maximum number. Notwithstanding the
limitations on the issuance of new temporary permits, a temporary permit issued
prior to July thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-three shall be renewable by
the licensee to whom the permit was issued within one year of its expiration
date subject to the provisions of clause (ii) of this subparagraph and provided
that all other requirements for renewal under the provisions of this subchapter
and any rules promulgated pursuant thereto are complied with, the license of
the person to whom the permit was issued or the permit has not been revoked or
suspended and the licensee has not committed a violation or violations which
could be a basis for license or permit revocation or suspension.
            (ii)   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in item (B) of this
clause, on and after January first, nineteen hundred ninety-six, and on every
renewal date thereafter, a permit holder may not renew more than one permit,
whether full-term or temporary. Such permit shall be renewed provided that all
other requirements for renewal under the provisions of this subchapter and any
rules promulgated pursuant thereto are complied with, the license of the person
to whom the permit was issued or the permit has not been revoked or suspended
and such person has not committed a violation or violations which could be a
basis for permit or license suspension or revocation.
               (B)   (I)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the
contrary, on and after the effective date of the local law which added this
subitem, any person who is an exclusive distributor or a manufacturer of a food
product and who on February third, nineteen hundred ninety-five was an
exclusive distributor or a manufacturer of such food product who held more than
one temporary permit issued pursuant to this subchapter, may be issued the
number of additional temporary permits such person held on February third,
nineteen hundred ninety-five and, in addition, may continue to hold one full-
term permit issued pursuant to this subchapter if such exclusive distributor or
manufacturer held one full-term permit issued pursuant to this subchapter on
the effective date of the local law which added this subitem. A written
agreement evidencing an exclusive distributorship shall be proof satisfactory
that an applicant for multiple temporary permits was an exclusive distributor
of a food product on February third, nineteen hundred ninety-five and is an
exclusive distributor of such food product at the time of such application. Any
written agreement evidencing an applicant's status as an exclusive distributor
on February third, nineteen hundred ninety-five shall have been in effect on
such date.
                  (II)   Any person who is eligible for the issuance of
additional temporary permits pursuant to subitem (I) of this item shall be
issued a maximum of sixty temporary permits.
                  (III)   Additional temporary permits shall be issued pursuant
to subitem (I) of this item only to persons who are eligible therefor who have
not at the time of application for such additional temporary permits had a
permit issued pursuant to this subchapter revoked or suspended and who satisfy
the commissioner that they are fit and able to conduct, maintain and operate a
food vending business. Such permits shall be renewed provided that all other
requirements for renewal under the provisions of this subchapter and any rules
promulgated pursuant thereto are complied with, the license of the person to
whom the permits were issued or the permits have not been revoked or suspended
and such person has not committed a violation or violations which would be a
basis for permit or license suspension or revocation.
                  (IV)   Nothing contained in subitem (I) of this item shall be
construed as authorizing the issuance of full-term or temporary permits in
excess of the numbers of such permits that are authorized to be issued pursuant
to paragraph two of subdivision b of this section or clause (i) of this
subparagraph.
         (b)   On and after January first, nineteen hundred ninety-five,
temporary permits shall be issued only to persons who have not had a temporary
permit revoked or suspended and who satisfy the commissioner that they are fit
and able to conduct, maintain or operate a food vending business.
         (c)   The issuance or renewal of a temporary permit pursuant to this
subchapter shall be subject to the permittee within three months after the
certification of a complete application therefor presenting a pushcart or
vehicle for inspection by the department and within six months after such
certification, passing such inspection.
         (d)   The commissioner shall establish a separate waiting list for the
issuance of temporary permits pursuant to this subchapter to be administered in
accordance with procedures to be established by rules of the commissioner. The
commissioner may by rule limit the number of places on such waiting list.
         (e)   Temporary permits and temporary licenses issued pursuant to this
subchapter shall be valid only during the period of time beginning on April
first and ending on October thirty-first of each calendar year.
   g.   For purposes of determining the number of full-term or temporary
permits held by a permittee pursuant to subdivisions b and f of this section,
the following provisions shall apply:
      1.   A natural person shall be deemed to hold the full-term or temporary
permits issued in the name of such natural person's unemancipated child, a
partnership in which such natural person is a partner, a corporation in which
such natural person is an officer, director or shareholder, or a limited
liability company in which such natural person is a member, manager or officer.
      2.   A corporation shall be deemed to hold the full-term or temporary
permits issued in the name of:
         (a)   an officer, director or shareholder of such corporation;
         (b)   another corporation where such corporation and such other
corporation share a common officer, director or shareholder, or such
corporation or any of its officers, directors or shareholders has any direct or
indirect interest in such other corporation;
         (c)   a limited liability company where such corporation or any of its
officers, directors or shareholders is a member, manager or officer of such
limited liability company, or such corporation or any of its officers,
directors or shareholders has any direct or indirect interest in such limited
liability company; or
         (d)   a partnership where such corporation or any of its officers,
directors or shareholders is a partner in such partnership, or such corporation
or any of its officers, directors or shareholders has any direct or indirect
interest in such partnership.
      3.   A limited liability company shall be deemed to hold the full-term or
temporary permits issued in the name of:
         (a)   a member, manager or officer of such limited liability company;
         (b)   another limited liability company where such limited liability
company and such other limited liability company share a common member, manager
or officer, or such limited liability company or any of its members, managers
or officers has any direct or indirect interest in such other limited liability
company; (c) a corporation where such limited liability company or any of its
members, managers or officers is an officer, director or shareholder in such
corporation, or such limited liability company or any of its members, managers
or officers has any direct or indirect interest in such corporation; or
         (d)   a partnership where such limited liability company or any of its
members, managers or officers is a partner in such partnership, or such limited
liability company or any of its members, managers or officers has any direct or
indirect interest in such partnership.
      4.   A partnership shall be deemed to hold the full-term or temporary
permits issued in the name of:
         (a)   a partner of such partnership;
         (b)   another partnership where such partnership is a partner in such
other partnership, such partnership and such other partnership share a common
partner, or such partnership or any if its partners has any direct or indirect
interest in such other partnership;
         (c)   a corporation where such partnership or any of its partners is
an officer, director or shareholder in such corporation, or such partnership or
any of its partners has any direct or indirect interest in such corporation; or
         (d)   a limited liability company where such partnership or any of its
partners is a member, manager or officer in such limited liability company, or
such partnership or any of its partners has any direct or indirect interest in
such limited liability company.
   h.   No permit or license, including a supervisory license, shall be issued
to a person required to have a permit or license pursuant to this subchapter
unless such person obtains a certificate issued by the department subsequent to
successful completion of a training developed or approved by the department on
the vending restrictions contained in this section and any other information
the department deems necessary to the safe operation of such vending unit, and
passage of an examination administered by the department. Such training shall
include information related to any vending restriction applicable to the
prospective license holder and shall include education related to vending
restrictions applicable to the prospective license holder. The department shall
require renewal of such certificate every four years. Renewal shall be
contingent on passing an examination regarding the vending restrictions
contained in this section and any other information the department deems
necessary to the safe operation of such vending unit pursuant to rules
promulgated by the department. Any examinations, or educational materials
designed for such training program shall be made available in English and in
the ten most common languages spoken by limited English proficient individuals
in the city according to the department of city planning. Such educational
materials shall be available on the department's website.
(Am. L.L. 2020/080, 8/28/2020, eff. 8/28/2020; Am. L.L. 2021/018, 2/28/2021,
eff. 2/28/2021, 5/29/2021 and 8/27/2021; Am. L.L. 2026/054, 1/29/2026, eff. 1/
29/2026; Am. L.L. 2026/059, 1/29/2026, eff. 1/29/2026)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1997/027,
L.L. 2005/128,
L.L. 2008/009,
L.L. 2020/080, and
L.L. 2021/018.
§ 17-307.1 Supervisory licenses
   a.   License restrictions. In addition to laws applicable to food vendors,
the following additional requirements apply to supervisory licensees:
      1.   A permittee issued a supervisory license shall not allow the
operation of such permittee's vehicle or pushcart unless such permittee or
another holder of a supervisory licensee is physically present and vending at
such vehicle or pushcart, subject to any exceptions provided in rules of the
commissioner.
      2.   A person issued a supervisory license may not vend food from any
vehicle or pushcart located outside of the geographical restrictions on such
person's supervisory license unless a licensee authorized to vend alone from
such vehicle or pushcart is also physically present and vending or the permit
for such vehicle or pushcart does not require the presence of a supervisory
licensee.
   b.   Eligibility for supervisory license. 
      1.   The department shall issue a supervisory license only to a natural
person.
      2.   The department shall not issue a supervisory license to any person
who at the time of application had a full-term or temporary permit or
supervisory license revoked or suspended or who is not fit and able to conduct,
maintain or operate a food vending business.
      3.   The department shall not issue a supervisory license to any person
who is a minor.
      4.   No person shall be issued more than one supervisory license.
(L.L. 2021/018, 2/28/2021, eff. 2/28/2021)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2021/018.
§ 17-308 Fees.
Editor's note: this section has been amended by L.L._2025/183,_12/12/2025,_eff.
9/8/2026.
   a.   The annual fees for licenses and permits set forth in subdivisions b
and c of this section shall be payable at the time of application for a license
or permit or renewal thereof, except as otherwise provided in subdivision e of
section
17-307 of this subchapter.
   b.   The annual fee for a license or renewal thereof shall be twenty-five
dollars, except that the annual fee for a supervisory license shall be five
hundred dollars; provided, however, that for an initial license issued for more
than two years the applicable license fee shall be increased proportionally to
the nearest quarter year.
   c.   The annual fee for a permit or renewal thereof shall be:
      1.   For a pushcart or vehicle selling prepackaged food or for a fresh
fruits and vegetables permit: fifty dollars for the first year and twenty-five
dollars for each year thereafter.
      2.   For a vehicle selling foods prepared or processed therein: as
specified by rules of the commissioner.
   d.   The fee for issuing a duplicate license, permit or plate when the
original has been lost, destroyed or mutilated shall be: ten dollars.
   e.   A person holding a license pursuant to the provisions of article four
of the general business law shall be exempt from the payment of fees set forth
in this section.
   f.   The fees provided for herein shall be in addition to any fees required
pursuant to the New York city health code or the New York state sanitary code.
(Am. L.L. 2021/018, 2/28/2021, eff. 2/28/2021 and 8/27/2021)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2008/009,
L.L. 2021/018, and
L.L. 2025/183.
§ 17-308.1 Domestic Partners.
For purposes of this subchapter, the rights and benefits bestowed upon the
surviving spouse of an honorably discharged member of the armed forces of the
United States pursuant to article four of the general business law shall also
be bestowed upon the surviving domestic partner of such veteran.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1998/027.
§ 17-309 Applications; hearings.
   a.   All applications for a license or permit shall be accompanied by
payment of the fee and shall be in such form and detail as the commissioner may
prescribe.
   b.   In addition to any other information required, the commissioner shall
require the following information:
      1.   The name, home and business address of the applicant. If the
applicant is applying for a permit to vend food from a vehicle or pushcart in a
public place, the name, home address and license number of every food vendor
who will be authorized to operate such applicant's vehicle or pushcart and the
legal relationship between such applicant and such food vendor.
      2.   A description of the food to be offered for sale and a description
of the vehicle or pushcart to be used and a statement whether or not the
application is for a fresh fruits and vegetables permit.
      3.   Three prints of a full-face photograph of the applicant taken not
more than thirty days prior to the date of the application.
      4.   Where the application is for a permit, proof that the applicant has
obtained a certificate of authority to collect sales taxes pursuant to section
eleven hundred thirty-four of the tax law from the New York state department of
taxation and finance.
      5.   Whether such applicant is an individual, partnership or other
association, or a corporation or limited liability company and if such
applicant is an individual applying for a permit to vend food from a vehicle or
pushcart in a public place, whether any of such applicant's unemancipated
children hold such permits; if a partnership, limited liability company or
other association, the name and address of each partner, member, officer or
manager of such entity; if a corporation, the names and addresses of the
officers, directors and shareholders.
      6.   An applicant who is a non-resident of the city shall provide the
name and address of a registered agent within the city or designate the
commissioner as his or her agent upon whom process or other notification may be
served.
      7.   No City officer or employee shall inquire about an applicant's
immigration or citizenship status as part of an application made pursuant to
this section. Information about an applicant's immigration or citizenship
status shall not affect the consideration of the application for a food
vendor's license or renewal thereof.
      8.   Proof that the applicant has obtained the appropriate seal of
approval from a weights and measures official for his or her weighing or
measuring device or system as required under section one hundred eighty-three
of the agriculture and markets law.
   c.   Only a licensed food vendor may be issued a vehicle or pushcart permit.
The application for such permit shall set forth the information required in
paragraphs one, two, four, five, six and seven of subdivision b of this section
and such other information as the commissioner may prescribe.
   d.   Upon approval of an application the commissioner shall issue a license
to the applicant for a license and a permit and plate to the applicant for a
vehicle or pushcart permit. Such license shall contain the name and address of
the licensee, his or her license number and a non-removable photograph of such
licensee. The plate shall indicate whether or not the permit is a fresh fruits
and vegetable permit.
(Am. L.L. 2024/052, 3/29/2024, eff. 3/29/2024)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/066 and
L.L. 2008/009.
§ 17-310 Renewal of license or permit. [Repealed]
(Repealed L.L. 2024/052, 3/29/2024, eff. 3/29/2024)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1987/033.
§ 17-311 Display of license or plate and letter grade.
   a.   Each food vendor shall carry his or her license upon his or her person
and it shall be exhibited upon demand to any police officer, public health
sanitarian or other authorized officer or employee of the city.
   b.   The food vendor's license, including a supervisory license, shall be
worn conspicuously by him or her at all times while he or she is operating as a
food vendor.
   c.   The permit plate and letter grade shall be firmly affixed to the
vending vehicle or pushcart in a conspicuous place as required by rules of the
department.
   d.   Vendors issued fresh fruits and vegetables permits pursuant to
paragraph four of subdivision b of section
17-307 of the administrative code of the city of New York shall carry upon
their person a laminated or similarly durable and easily readable map, prepared
and issued to them by the commissioner, designating those areas of the city in
which they are authorized to vend. Those persons issued a fresh fruits and
vegetables permit found to be vending from green carts and vehicles in
precincts other than those designated on their borough-specific permits shall
be deemed to be operating such vehicle or pushcart without a permit.
   e.   A permit plate on a vehicle or pushcart issued to a supervisory
licensee shall indicate, either by color or other designation of the
department's choosing, that such vehicle or pushcart may only be operated when
a supervisory licensee is physically present and vending at such vehicle or
pushcart.
(Am. L.L. 2017/108, 5/30/2017, eff. 2/24/2018; Am. L.L. 2021/018, 2/28/2021,
eff. 2/28/2021)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2008/009 and
L.L. 2021/018.
§ 17-312 Notification of change.
The commissioner shall be notified of any change in the information provided on
an application for a license or a permit within ten days of such change.
§ 17-313 Bookkeeping requirements. [Repealed]
(Repealed L.L. 2024/051, 3/29/2024, eff. 3/29/2024)
§ 17-314 Duties of licensees and permittees.
Each person issued a food vendor license or a permit to vend food from a
vehicle or pushcart in a public place shall:
   a.   Permit regular inspections by the department of any vehicle or pushcart
used in the operation of his or her business, any premises under his or her
control in which food intended to be sold or offered for sale by him or her as
a food vendor is prepared, processed or stored and present such vehicle or
pushcart for inspection at such place and time as may be designated by the
department;
   b.   Provide to the commissioner or any other authorized officer or employee
of the city, the addresses and names of the owners of such service rooms,
commissaries or distributors from whom such licensee receives his or her food
and also the address at which such vendor stores his or her food and vehicle or
pushcart;
   c.   Not use or permit anyone else to use a food vending vehicle or pushcart
for vending any foods other than those authorized for sale by the commissioner
or board unless prior written approval has been obtained from the commissioner
or board; provided, however, that an exclusive distributor who has been issued
more than one temporary permit pursuant to subitem (I) of item (B) of clause
(ii) of subparagraph (a) of paragraph three of subdivision f of section
17-307 of this subchapter must primarily vend or permit anyone else using a
pushcart or vehicle for which such exclusive distributor has a temporary permit
to primarily vend, the food product that was the subject of the exclusive
distribution agreement that such exclusive distributor had with a manufacturer
on February third, nineteen hundred ninety-five, and, provided further, that a
manufacturer who has been issued more than one temporary permit pursuant to
subitem (I) of item (B) of clause (ii) of subparagraph (a) of paragraph three
of subdivision f of section
17-307 of this subchapter must primarily vend or permit anyone else using a
pushcart or vehicle for which such manufacturer has a temporary permit to
primarily vend, the product that such manufacturer sold from a pushcart or
vehicle on February third, nineteen hundred ninety-five;
   d.   Surrender his or her license, permit and plate promptly to the
commissioner upon revocation, suspension, termination or expiration of his or
her license or permit.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1997/027.
§ 17-314.1 Transferability.
   a.   No license, permit or plate issued under this subchapter shall be
assignable or transferable.
   b.   No vehicle or pushcart used to vend food in a public place shall be
assignable or transferable with a license, permit or plate that has been issued
under this subchapter attached thereto.
   c.   A transfer in violation of this section shall be deemed to have
occurred where, if a corporation is the permittee, there has been a change in
fifty percent or more of the ownership interest in such corporation from the
ownership interest existing on the date the permit was issued, or where the
permittee is a limited liability company, where there has been the addition of
any member, and where the permittee is a partnership, where there has been the
addition of any partner. Furthermore, any such transfer in an exclusive
distributor or a manufacturer who has been issued more than one temporary
permit pursuant to item (B) of clause (ii) of subparagraph (a) of paragraph
three of subdivision f of section
17-307 of this subchapter shall result in the automatic revocation of all such
additional temporary permits issued to such persons pursuant to such provision.
   d.   Notwithstanding the provisions in subdivisions a, b and c of this
section:
      1.   the commissioner may, in his or her discretion, transfer a permit to
a dependent husband, wife, domestic partner or child of an incapacitated or
deceased person to whom the permit was issued under this subchapter;
      2.   an exclusive distributor or a manufacturer who has been issued more
than one temporary permit pursuant to item (B) of clause (ii) of subparagraph
(a) of paragraph three of subdivision f of section
17-307 of this subchapter may lease a vehicle or pushcart owned by such
exclusive distributor or manufacturer with such exclusive distributor's or
manufacturer's temporary permit attached thereto to a person licensed as a food
vendor pursuant to this subchapter if (a) such exclusive distributor or
manufacturer files with the department the bill of sale or other proof of
ownership for such vehicle or pushcart with a duly issued sales tax receipt
attached thereto; (b) such lease agreement sets forth the food product which
may be primarily sold using such vehicle or pushcart; and (c) such lease
agreement is approved by the department, provided, however, that if such lease
agreement is not approved or disapproved within thirty calendar days after such
lease agreement is filed with the department, such lease agreement shall be
deemed to be approved by the department. The commissioner shall promulgate
rules establishing the standards by which the department shall evaluate such
lease agreements and such standards shall include, but not be limited to,
requirements that such lease agreements contain fair and reasonable terms based
upon such factors as the cost of purchasing and maintaining such pushcart or
vehicle and that the terms of such lease agreement are the result of an arm's
length negotiation between the parties thereto. Subleasing of any such vehicle
or pushcart owned by such exclusive distributor or manufacturer with such
exclusive distributor's or manufacturer's temporary permit attached thereto is
strictly prohibited. Authorized officers and employees of the department of
small business services and the department of investigation may assist the
commissioner and the department in effectuating the provisions of this
paragraph. Any violation or violations of the provisions of this paragraph or
any rules promulgated hereunder by an exclusive distributor or a manufacturer
who has been issued more than one temporary permit pursuant to item (B) of
clause (ii) of subparagraph (a) of paragraph three of subdivision f of section
17-307 of this subchapter may be the basis for suspension or revocation of all
of the permits issued to such exclusive distributor or manufacturer pursuant to
this subchapter.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1997/027 and
L.L. 1998/027.
§ 17-315 Restrictions on the placement of vehicles and pushcarts; vending in
certain areas restricted or prohibited.
   a.   No pushcart shall be placed upon any sidewalk unless said sidewalk has
at least a twelve foot clear pedestrian path to be measured from the boundary
of any private property to any obstruction in or on the sidewalk, or if there
are no obstructions, to the curb. In no event shall any pushcart be placed on
any part of a sidewalk other than that which abuts the curb.
   b.   No vending vehicle or pushcart or any other item related to the
operation of a food vendor's business shall touch, lean against or be affixed
permanently or temporarily in any building or structure including, but not
limited to, lamp posts, parking meters, mail boxes, traffic signal stanchions,
fire hydrants, tree boxes, benches, bus shelters, taxi stands, refuse baskets
or traffic barriers.
   c.   All items relating to the operation of a food vending business shall be
kept in, on, or under the vending vehicle or pushcart. No items relating to the
operation of a food vending business other than an adjoining acceptable waste
container shall be placed upon any public space adjacent to the vending vehicle
or pushcart, and no food shall be sold except from an authorized vehicle or
pushcart.
   d.   No vending pushcart shall be located against display windows of fixed
location businesses, nor shall they be within twenty feet of any licensed stoop
line stand, licensed sidewalk cafe, or any entranceway to any building, store,
theatre, movie house, sports arena or other place of public assembly, or within
twenty feet from exits, including service exits, to buildings that are
exclusively residential at the street level.
   e.   No food vendor shall vend within any bus stop, taxi stand, within the
portion of the sidewalk abutting any no standing zone adjacent to a hospital as
defined in subdivision one of section 2801 of the New York state public health
law, within ten feet of any driveway, any subway entrance or exit, or any
crosswalk at any intersection.
   f.   Each food vendor who vends from a pushcart or vehicle in the roadway
shall obey all traffic and parking laws, rules and regulations as now exist or
as may be promulgated, but in no case shall a food vendor vend so as to
restrict the continued maintenance of a clear passageway for vehicles.
   g.   No vending vehicle or pushcart or any other item related to the
operation of a food vending business shall be placed within a bicycle lane. For
purposes of this section, the term “bicycle lane” means a portion of the
roadway that has been marked off or separated for the preferential or exclusive
use of bicycles.
   h.   No food vendor shall vend on the median strip of a divided roadway
unless such strip is intended for use as a pedestrian mall or plaza.
   i.   No vendor shall vend within areas under the jurisdiction of the
department of parks and recreation unless written authorization therefor has
been obtained from the commissioner of such department, but nothing therein
contained shall exempt any vendor from obtaining a license and permit in
accordance with this subchapter.
   j.   Where exigent circumstances exist and a police officer or other
authorized officer or employee of the city gives notice to a food vendor to
temporarily move from a location such vendor shall not vend from such location.
For the purpose of this subdivision, exigent circumstances shall include but
not be limited to, unusually heavy pedestrian or vehicular traffic, existence
of any obstructions in the public space at or near such location, an accident,
fire or other emergency situation at or near such location, or a parade,
demonstration, or other such event or occurrence at or near such location.
   k.   No food vendor shall vend on any street at any time where and when the
operation of any food vending business is prohibited pursuant to either local
law or section
20-465.1 of the code and any rules promulgated pursuant thereto.
      1.   No food vendor shall vend in the area including and bounded on the
east by the easterly side of Broadway, on the south by the southerly side of
Liberty Street, on the west by the westerly side of West Street and on the
north by the southerly side of Barclay Street. In addition:
         (a)   No food vendor shall vend on the easterly or westerly side of
Greenwich Street between Liberty Street and Thames Street;
         (b)   No food vendor shall vend on the easterly side of West Broadway
between Barclay Street and Park Place;
         (c)   No food vendor shall vend on the northerly or southerly side of
Liberty Street between Trinity Place to West Street;
         (d)   No food vendor shall vend on the easterly side of West Street
between Liberty Street and Cedar Street;
         (e)   No food vendor shall vend on the westerly side of Trinity Place
between Liberty Street and Thames Street; and
         (f)   Notwithstanding the restriction described in paragraph 1 of
subdivision k, food vending shall be permitted on the following streets
provided that food vendors comply with all applicable laws and rules:
            (1)   The easterly and westerly side of Broadway between Barclay
Street and Vesey Street;
            (2)   The easterly side of West Street between Barclay Street and
Vesey Street; and
            (3)   The southerly side of Barclay Street between Church Street
and Broadway.
      2.   Food vendors shall be prohibited from vending on the following
streets at the following days and times:
BOROUGH OF MANHATTAN
Third Avenue: East 40th to East 57th Street, Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 6
p.m.; East 58th to East 60th Street, Monday through Saturday, 8 a.m. to 9 p.m.;
Lexington Avenue: East 40th to East 57th Street, Monday through Saturday, 8
a.m. to 7 p.m.; East 58th to East 60th Street, Monday through Saturday, 8 a.m.
to 9 p.m.; East 61st to East 69th Street, Monday through Saturday, 8 a.m. to 6
p.m.; Park Avenue: East 34th to East 42nd Street, Monday through Friday, 8 a.m.
to 7 p.m.; East 55th to East 59th Street, Monday through Friday, 10 a.m. to 7
p.m.; Vanderbilt Avenue: East 42nd to East 45th Street, Monday through Friday,
8 a.m. to 7 p.m.; Madison Avenue: East 34th to East 45th Street, Monday through
Friday, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m.; East 46th to East 59th Street, Monday through
Saturday, 10 a.m. to 7 p.m.; Fifth Avenue: 32nd to 59th Street, Monday through
Saturday, 8 a.m. to 7 p.m.; Avenue of the Americas: West 32nd to West 59th
Street, Monday through Saturday, 8 a.m. to 7 p.m.; Broadway: West 32nd to West
52nd Street, Everyday, 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.; Seventh Avenue: West 33rd to West 34th
Street, Monday through Saturday, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m.; West 35th to West 45th
Street, Monday through Saturday, 8 a.m. to midnight; West 46th to West 52nd
Street, Monday through Saturday, 2 p.m. to 7 p.m.; Fourteenth Street: Broadway
to Seventh Avenue, Monday through Saturday, noon to 8 p.m.; West Thirty-fourth
Street: Fifth Avenue to Seventh Avenue, Monday through Saturday, 8 a.m. to 7
p.m.; Forty-second Street: Third Avenue to Eighth Avenue, Monday through
Saturday, 8 a.m. to 7 p.m.; West Forty-third Street: Broadway to Eighth Avenue,
Wednesday and Saturday, noon to 11 p.m.; Sunday, noon to 6 p.m.; Other days, 7
p.m. to 11 p.m.; West Forty-fourth Street: Broadway to Eighth Avenue, Wednesday
and Saturday, noon to 11 p.m.; Sunday, noon to 6 p.m.; Other days, 7 p.m. to 11
p.m.; West Forty-fifth Street: Broadway to Eighth Avenue, Wednesday and
Saturday, noon to 11 p.m.; Sunday, noon to 6 p.m.; Other days, 7 p.m. to 11
p.m.; West Forty-sixth Street: Seventh to Eighth Avenues, Wednesday and
Saturday, noon to 11 p.m.; Sunday, noon to 6 p.m.; Other days, 7 p.m. to 11
p.m.; West Forty-seventh Street: Fifth to Eighth Avenues, Wednesday and
Saturday, noon to 11 p.m.; Sunday, noon to 6 p.m.; Other days, 7 p.m. to 11
p.m.; West Forty-eighth Street: Broadway to Eighth Avenues, Wednesday and
Saturday, noon to 11 p.m.; Sunday, noon to 6 p.m.; Other days, 7 p.m. to 11
p.m.; West Forty-ninth Street: Broadway to Eighth Avenues, Wednesday and
Saturday, noon to 11 p.m.; Sunday, noon to 6 p.m.; Other days, 7 p.m. to 11
p.m.; West Fiftieth Street: Broadway to Eighth Avenues, Wednesday and Saturday,
noon to 11 p.m.; Sunday, noon to 6 p.m.; Other days, 7 p.m. to 11 p.m.; West
Fifty-first Street: Broadway to Eighth Avenues, Wednesday and Saturday, noon to
11 p.m.; Sunday, noon to 6 p.m.; Other days, 7 p.m. to 11 p.m.; West Fifty-
second Street: Broadway to Eighth Avenues, Wednesday and Saturday, noon to 11
p.m.; Sunday, noon to 6 p.m.; Other days, 7 p.m. to 11 p.m.; West Fifty-third
Street: Broadway to Eighth Avenues, Wednesday and Saturday, noon to 11 p.m.;
Sunday, noon to 6 p.m.; Other days, 7 p.m. to 11 p.m.
BOROUGH OF QUEENS
Main Street: Northern Boulevard to Sanford Avenue, every day, noon to midnight;
38th Avenue: Prince Street to 138th Street, every day, noon to midnight; Prince
Street: 38th Avenue to 39th Avenue, every day, noon to midnight; 39th Avenue:
College Point Boulevard to Union Street, every day, noon to midnight; Lippman
Plaza: 39th Avenue to Roosevelt Avenue, every day, noon to midnight; Roosevelt
Avenue: College Point Boulevard to Union Street, every day, noon to midnight;
41st Avenue: College Point Boulevard to Union Street, every day, noon to
midnight; Kissena Boulevard: 41st Avenue to Barclay Avenue, every day, noon to
midnight; Sanford Avenue: Frame Place to Main Street, every day, noon to
midnight.
      3.   No food vendor shall vend beginning on Thanksgiving until New Year's
Day of the following year in the area including and bounded on the west by the
westerly side of 10th avenue, on the south by the southerly side of 86th
street, on the east by the easterly side of 13th avenue and on the north by the
northerly side of 81st street, between the hours of midnight to 6:00 a.m. and
between the hours of 2:00 p.m. to midnight, in the borough of Brooklyn.
   l.   [Reserved.]
   m.   The department, or such other agency designated by the mayor, shall
provide a website that shows a map of block faces where food vending is
prohibited by law, based on the day and hour entered by the user.
(Am. L.L. 2018/180, 10/27/2018, eff. 12/26/2018; Am. L.L. 2018/181, 10/27/2018,
eff. 4/25/2019; Am. L.L. 2019/191, 11/17/2019, eff. 11/17/2019; Am. L.L. 2021/
018, 2/28/2021, eff. 8/27/2021 and 2/28/2022; Am. L.L. 2024/051, 3/29/2024,
eff. 3/29/2024; Am. L.L. 2024/053, 3/29/2024, eff. 4/28/2024)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1995/014,
L.L. 2006/039, and
L.L. 2021/018.
§ 17-315.1 Cleanliness and waste removal requirements.
   a.   A vendor shall keep the area within a 2-foot radius surrounding such
vendor’s vending vehicle or pushcart free from obstruction and keep such area
free from garbage, refuse, rubbish, litter or debris.
   b.   A vendor shall, upon the request of a person authorized to enforce this
section, provide proof of the proper waste disposal at a commissary required by
subdivision e of section 89.27 of the New York city health code, in accordance
with rules of the department of sanitation, as allowed by law.
(L.L. 2026/054, 1/29/2026, eff. 1/29/2026)
§ 17-316 Prohibitions.
No person shall sell, give or otherwise transfer any food to an unlicensed food
vendor for resale.
§ 17-317 Issuance, renewal, suspension and revocation of licenses and permits.
   a.   The commissioner may refuse to issue a food vendor license or a permit
to vend food from a vehicle or pushcart in a public place, and may, after due
notice and an opportunity to be heard, in addition to any other penalties
provided herein, refuse to renew, suspend or revoke a food vendor license or a
permit to vend food from a vehicle or pushcart in a public place, upon the
occurrence of any one or more of the following conditions:
      1.   The applicant, licensee, permittee, its officers, directors,
shareholders, members, managers or employees have made a material false
statement or concealed a material fact in connection with:
         (a)   an application for a food vendor license or a permit to vend
food from a vehicle or pushcart in a public place; or
         (b)   the sale of any item of food.
      2.   The applicant, licensee, permittee, its officers, directors,
shareholders, members, managers or employees have been found to have committed
four or more violations of this subchapter or any rules promulgated pursuant
thereto within a two-year period or have been found guilty of a violation of
the provisions of part fourteen of the state sanitary code or of the New York
city health code, or the applicant, licensee, permittee, its officers,
directors, shareholders, members, managers or employees have pending any
unanswered summonses for violation of this subchapter or any rules promulgated
pursuant thereto.
      3.   The applicant, licensee, permittee, its officers, directors,
shareholders, members, managers or employees have been convicted of any offense
which, in the judgment of the commissioner, has a direct relationship to such
person's fitness or ability to perform any of the activities for which a
license or permit is required under this subchapter or has been convicted of
any other offense which, in accordance with article twenty-three-a of the
correction law, would provide a justification for the commissioner to refuse to
issue or renew, or to suspend or revoke, such license or permit.
      4.   Reserved.
      5.   A licensee issued a "fresh fruits and vegetables" permit, pursuant
to paragraph 4 of subdivision b of section
17-307 of this subchapter, is found to be vending food such licensee is not
permitted to sell or is found to be vending in a police precinct other than one
in which the licensee is authorized to vend in accordance with such licensee's
borough-specific permit.
      6.   A vehicle or pushcart for which the department issued a permit to a
supervisory licensee is found to be operating without the presence of a person
who has been issued a supervisory license or outside of the geographical
restrictions permitted by the supervisory license.
   b.   The commissioner shall not issue or renew a food vendor license or a
permit to vend food from a vehicle or pushcart in a public place if the
applicant, licensee, permittee, its officers, directors, shareholders, members,
managers or employees have failed to pay any fine, penalty or judgment duly
imposed pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter or any rules promulgated
thereunder.
   c.   The commissioner, for good cause, may, prior to giving notice and an
opportunity to be heard, suspend a license or permit issued pursuant to this
subchapter for a period of up to ten days. Notice of such suspension shall be
served on the licensee or permittee. The commissioner shall provide the
licensee or permittee with the opportunity for a hearing within ten days after
the notification of suspension, after which the commissioner shall forthwith
make a determination as to whether such suspension should continue and the
length of such suspension, and in addition may impose any penalty or sanction
authorized by this subchapter or any rules promulgated pursuant thereto.
   d.   Unless otherwise provided in section
17-314.1 of this subchapter, the commissioner shall not renew a permit to vend
food from a vehicle or pushcart in a public place where the permittee has died
if the permittee is a natural person, or if the permittee is a corporation,
where there has been a change in fifty percent or more of the ownership
interest in such corporation from the ownership interest existing on the date
the permit was issued; where the permittee is a limited liability company,
where there has been the addition of any member or where such limited liability
company has been dissolved, and where the permittee is a partnership, where
there has been the addition of any partner or where such partnership has been
dissolved.
   e.   Each applicant, licensee and permittee shall notify the department in
writing by registered mail, return receipt requested, within three business
days of receipt of a notice of service of a summons for a violation relating to
conducting, maintaining or operating a food vending business and a conviction
of such applicant, licensee, permittee, its officers, directors, shareholders,
members, managers or employees for any offense occurring after the filing date
of the application for a license or permit or a renewal thereof or occurring
during the term of the license or permit.
   f.   Any person issued a food vendor license pursuant to this subchapter who
commits three or more violations of the provisions of this subchapter and any
rules promulgated thereunder within a two year period shall have his or her
food vendor license revoked.
   g.   1.   The department may suspend or revoke a supervisory license or
supervisory permit or other permit or license issued pursuant to this
subchapter, after notice and an opportunity to be heard, for three violations
of subdivisions b, c, e, g or h of section
17-315 committed within a 1-year period, as determined by the department. Such
license or permit shall be suspended for 30 days upon the first such
determination, 60 days upon the second such determination, and revoked upon the
third such determination.
      2.   Prior to the reinstatement of a license, permit, supervisory
license, or supervisory license permit suspended pursuant to paragraph 1 of
this subdivision, such licensee or permittee shall complete the food protection
course offered by the department, pursuant to section 81.15 the New York city
health code or successor rules or regulations regarding food protection
certificates required for all such licensees.
(Am. L.L. 2021/018, 2/28/2021, eff. 2/28/2021 and 5/29/2021; Am. L.L. 2024/052,
3/29/2024, eff. 3/29/2024; Am. L.L. 2025/122, 9/10/2025, eff. 3/9/2026; Am.
L.L. 2026/054, 1/29/2026, eff. 1/29/2026)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1997/027,
L.L. 2008/009,
L.L. 2021/018, and
L.L. 2025/122.
§ 17-318 Notice; hearings.
Unless otherwise specifically provided, notice and hearing upon denial of an
application or suspension or revocation of a license shall be in accordance
with applicable provisions of the New York city health code.
§ 17-320 Exemptions.
   a.   The commissioner or board may promulgate rules exempting any non-profit
association, including but not limited to a government agency, charitable,
educational, religious or other such organization, from compliance with any of
the provisions of this subchapter.
   b.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, a person may be
issued more than one full-term or temporary food vendor permit to vend in any
area under the jurisdiction of the department of parks and recreation pursuant
to an agreement entered into in accordance with chapter fourteen of the
charter. Such person shall be exempt from any provisions of this subchapter
restricting the number of full-term or temporary food vendor permits that may
be issued to any one person and the full-term or temporary food vendor permits
issued to such persons also shall be exempt from any provisions of this
subchapter restricting the total number of full-term and temporary food vendor
permits that may be issued. Such permits shall be subject to all other
provisions, limitations and conditions imposed by this code or the health code,
and all rules promulgated thereunder.
§ 17-321 Enforcement.
   a.   Public health sanitarians or other authorized officers or employees of
the department and police officers shall have the power to enforce all laws,
rules and regulations relating to food vendors. This provision shall in no way
restrict any other power granted by law to any officer or employee of the city.
   b.   If a food vendor does not move his or her vehicle or pushcart when
directed to do so by a police officer or other authorized officer or employee
of the city in compliance with the provisions of subdivision k of section
17-315 of this subchapter, such officer or employee may provide for the removal
of such vehicle or pushcart to any garage, automobile pound or other place of
safety, and the owner or other person lawfully entitled to the possession of
such vehicle or pushcart may be charged with reasonable costs for such removal
and storage, payable prior to the release of such vehicle or pushcart.
   c.   An officer or employee designated in subdivision a of this section may
seize any vehicle or pushcart which (i) does not have a permit or (ii) is being
used to vend on property owned by the city and under the jurisdiction of a city
agency including, but not limited to, the department of parks and recreation or
the department of small business services, without the written authorization of
the commissioner of such department, or (iii) is being used by an unlicensed
vendor, or (iv) is being used to vend in the area including and bounded on the
east by the easterly side of Broadway, on the south by the southerly side of
Liberty Street, on the west by the westerly side of West Street and on the
north by the northerly side of Vesey Street, or (v) is selling food not
authorized by the permit, and may seize any food sold or offered for sale from
such vehicle or pushcart. Such vehicle, pushcart or food shall be subject to
forfeiture as provided in section
17-322 of this subchapter. If a forfeiture proceeding is not commenced, the
vendor may be charged with the reasonable costs for removal and storage payable
prior to the release of such food, vehicle or pushcart unless the charge of
vending without a permit or vending without a license or vending without the
authorization of such commissioner is dismissed.
   d.   If a food vendor operates any food vending business on any street at
any time where and when the operation of any food vending business is
prohibited pursuant to the provisions of section
20-465.1 of the code and any rules promulgated pursuant thereto, or if a food
vendor operates a food vending business in the area including and bounded on
the east by the easterly side of Broadway, on the south by the southerly side
of Liberty Street, on the west by the westerly side of West Street and on the
north by the northerly side of Vesey Street, any authorized officer or employee
of the city or member of the New York city police department is authorized to
provide for the removal of such food vendor's food, vehicle or pushcart to any
garage, automobile pound or other place of safety, and the owner or other
person lawfully entitled to the possession of such vehicle or pushcart or food
may be charged with reasonable costs for removal and storage.
   e.   Any notice of violation issued to a food vendor by an officer or
employee described in subdivision a of this section that is returnable to a
tribunal established within the office of administrative trials and hearings or
within any agency of the city of New York designated to conduct such
proceedings, or to any court of competent jurisdiction, shall state the permit
number of the vehicle or pushcart associated with such notice of violation. Any
penalty duly imposed by such tribunal, and any fine or penalty imposed by such
court, shall be considered to have been issued against the permittee associated
with such permit number for the purposes of the non-issuance or renewal of a
food vendor permit pursuant to subdivision b of section
17-317.
(Am. L.L. 2021/018, 2/28/2021, eff. 2/28/2021)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1995/014,
L.L. 2008/009, and
L.L. 2021/018.
§ 17-322 Forfeitures.
   a.   In addition to any penalties imposed pursuant to subdivision a of
section
17-325 of this subchapter upon any person found guilty of violating subdivision
a, b or c of section
17-307 of this subchapter, all property seized pursuant to this subchapter
shall be subject to forfeiture upon notice and judicial determination. Notice
of the institution of the forfeiture proceeding shall be in accordance with the
provisions of the civil practice law and rules.
   b.   The police department having custody of the seized property, after
judicial determination of forfeiture shall, upon a public notice of at least
five days, sell such forfeited property at public sale. The net proceeds of
such sale, after deduction of the lawful expenses incurred, shall be paid into
the general fund of the city of New York.
§ 17-323 Seizure of perishable food.
In the event that a seizure made pursuant to this subchapter shall include any
perishable item of food which cannot be retained in custody without such item
becoming unwholesome, putrid, decomposed or unfit in any way, the commissioner
may order such item destroyed or otherwise disposed of provided, however, that
written notice of such destruction or other disposition setting forth an
itemized description of the property, the reason for its destruction or other
disposition, and the date when it was destroyed or otherwise disposed of be
mailed to the food vendor from whom it was seized within twenty-four hours
after such disposition. A copy of such notice shall be kept on file by the
department for a period of one year.
§ 17-323.1 Notification concerning seizure of food.
In the event that an agency seizes food when an employee or agent of the
department of health and mental hygiene is present and determines that such
food meets the sanitary requirements in the New York city health code, such
agency shall, before disposing of such food, notify at least one food rescue
organization that such organization may retrieve all or part of such food at
such organization's expense. For the purposes of this section, the term "food
rescue organization" means an organization that (i) retrieves, stores or
distributes food that would otherwise be discarded, donated food or donated
grocery products and (ii) donates such food or such grocery products to
individuals, distributes such food or such grocery products to other food
rescue organizations or otherwise distributes such food or such grocery
products in connection with a food emergency program, food donation program or
similar program.
(L.L. 2017/171, 9/8/2017, eff. 9/8/2017)
§ 17-324 Rules.
The commissioner or board shall make such rules as deemed necessary for the
proper implementation and enforcement of this subchapter.
§ 17-324.1 Other foods.
The commissioner may designate by rule a list of healthful foods in addition to
fresh fruits and vegetables, water, and raw single ingredient nuts, provided
that any food designated as healthful is in alignment with evidence-based
dietary recommendations.
(L.L. 2021/018, 2/28/2021, eff. 5/29/2021)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2021/018.
§ 17-325 Penalties.
   a.   Any person who violates the provisions of subdivision a, b, or c of
section
17-307 of this subchapter shall be guilty of a violation, punishable by a fine
of not less than $150 nor more than $250.
   b.   1.    In addition to the penalties prescribed by subdivision a of this
section, any person who violates, or any person aiding another to violate, the
provisions of subdivision a, b, or c of section
17-307 shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than $150 nor more than
$1,000 together with a penalty of $100 per day for every day during which the
unlicensed business operated; except that a person who violates, or any person
aiding another to violate, the provisions of subdivision a, b, or c of section
17-307 by engaging in continued unlicensed activity as defined by the
commissioner, considering factors including but not limited to the frequency
and duration of such unlicensed activity, shall be liable for a civil penalty
of $1,000 together with a penalty of $250 per day for every day during which
the unlicensed business operated. The commissioner may also consider additional
civil penalties of up to $1,000 if such person had an opportunity to obtain a
license or add themselves to the waitlist for such license.
      2.   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this subchapter,
other than subdivision a, b, or c of section
17-307 or subdivision k of section
17-315, or any of the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder shall be
liable for a civil penalty as follows:
         (a)   For the first violation, a penalty of $25.
         (b)   For the second violation issued for the same offense within a
period of 2 years of the date of a first violation, a penalty of $50.
         (c)   For the third violation issued for the same offense within a
period of 2 years of the date of a first violation, a penalty of $100, in
addition to the remedy provided for in subdivision f of section
17-317.
         (d)   For any subsequent violations issued for the same offense within
a period of 2 years of the date of a first violation, a penalty of $250.
      3.   Notwithstanding paragraph 2 of this subdivision, any person that
violates subdivision c of section
17-311 by failing to firmly affix a current letter grade or letter grade
pending card to a vending vehicle or pushcart in a conspicuous place as
required by rules of the department shall be liable for a civil penalty of
$500.
      4.   Any person that violates section
17-311 or subdivisions a or b of section
17-315, or any rules promulgated thereunder, shall not be subject to a civil
penalty for a first-time violation if such person proves to the satisfaction of
the department, within 7 days of the issuance of the notice of violation and
prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the
violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the
department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an
admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that
the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer
made by the department to a person who has received, for the first time, a
notice of violation of section
17-311 or subdivisions a or b of section
17-315, or any rules promulgated thereunder. The department shall permit such
proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in
the office of administrative trials and hearings, of the determination that the
person has not submitted proof of a cure within 15 days of receiving written
notification of such determination.
      5.   Any person who violates subdivision k of section
17-315, or any of the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, shall be
liable for a civil penalty as follows:
         (a)   For the first violation, a penalty of $50.
         (b)   For the second violation issued for the same offense within a
period of 2 years of the date of a first violation, a penalty of $100.
         (c)    For the third violation issued for the same offense within a
period of 2 years of the date of a first violation, a penalty of $200, in
addition to the remedy provided for in subdivision f of section
17-317.
         (d)   For any subsequent violations issued for the same offense within
a period of 2 years of the date of a first violation, a penalty of $400.
   c.   A proceeding to recover any civil penalty authorized pursuant to the
provisions of subdivision b of this section shall be commenced by the service
of a notice of violation which shall be returnable to the environmental control
board or a tribunal of the office of administrative trials and hearings. The
environmental control board or a tribunal of the office of administrative
trials and hearings shall have the power to impose the civil penalties
prescribed by subdivision b of this section.
(Am. L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 1/14/2022; Am. L.L. 2025/122, 9/10/2025,
eff. 3/9/2026; Am. L.L. 2026/054, 1/29/2026, eff. 1/29/2026)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1997/027,
L.L. 2021/080, and
L.L. 2025/122.
§ 17-325.1 Failure to display and produce license or permit; presumptive
evidence of unlicensed or unpermitted activity.
   a.   In any action or proceeding, failure by a food vendor who is required
to be licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to display and
exhibit upon demand a food vendor's license in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter to any police officer, public health sanitarian or other
authorized officer or employee of the department or other city agency shall be
presumptive evidence that such food vendor is not duly licensed.
   b.   In any action or proceeding, the failure of any vehicle or pushcart
which is required to be permitted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to
have a permit plate affixed thereto in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter shall be presumptive evidence that such vehicle or pushcart is not duly
permitted.
(Am. L.L. 2025/122, 9/10/2025, eff. 3/9/2026)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2025/122.
§ 17-325.2 Reports on vendor license and permit renewals, suspensions and
revocations.
Commencing on June 1, 2013, and every twelve months thereafter, the department
shall issue an annual report to the council with respect to food vendor
licenses and pushcart or vehicle permits. Each report shall include the
following information for the twelve-month period prior to the issuance of the
report: (i) the number of food vendor license renewals denied and the basis for
each such denial, including but not limited to outstanding or multiple
violations of the provisions of subchapter two of chapter three of title 17 of
the administrative code; (ii) the number of food vending pushcart or vehicle
permit renewals denied and the basis for each such denial, including but not
limited to outstanding or multiple violations of the provisions of subchapter
two of chapter three of title 17 of the administrative code; (iii) the number
of food vendor license suspensions pursuant to section
17-317 of the administrative code and the basis for each such suspension; (iv)
the number of food vending pushcart or vehicle permit suspensions pursuant to
section
17-317 of the administrative code and the basis for each such suspension; (v)
the number of food vendor license revocations pursuant to section
17-317 of the administrative code and the basis for each such revocation; and
(vi) the number of food vending pushcart or vehicle permit revocations pursuant
to 17-317 of the administrative code and the basis for each such revocation.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2008/009.
§ 17-325.3 Sanitary inspection grading.
The department shall establish and implement a system for grading and
classifying inspection results for each vending vehicle or pushcart using
letters to identify and represent a vending vehicle or pushcart's degree of
compliance with laws and rules that require such vending vehicle and pushcart
to operate in a sanitary manner to protect public health. Where practicable,
such system shall be implemented in a manner consistent with the implementation
of the letter grading program established by the department for food service
establishments pursuant to section 81.51 of the health code.
(L.L. 2017/108, 5/30/2017, eff. 2/24/2018)
**** Subchapter 3: Rental Horse Licensing and Protection Law ****
§ 17-326 Definitions.
Whenever used in this subchapter, the following terms have the following
meanings:
   ASPCA. The term "ASPCA" means the American Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals.
   Carriage horse. The term "carriage horse" means any horse which is used by
its owner or any other person to pull any vehicle, carriage, sled, sleigh or
other device in exchange for a fee. A horse rented or leased by its owner to
another for any of the foregoing purposes shall be deemed to be a carriage
horse for the purposes of this subchapter. A horse used for any other purpose
shall not be deemed to be a carriage horse for the purposes of this subchapter.
   Equine heat index. The term "equine heat index" means the sum of the air
temperature, in degrees Fahrenheit, and the relative humidity at a particular
point in time.
   Owner. The term "owner" means the owner of a horse which is required to be
licensed pursuant to this subchapter and the owner of a rental horse business
in which such horse is used.
   Person. The term "person" means an individual, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
   Relative humidity. The term "relative humidity" means the value, expressed
as a percentage, determined by a device designed to measure relative humidity
   Rental horse. The term "rental horse" means a horse which is used in a
rental horse business.
   Rental horse business. The term "rental horse business" means a business
enterprise which provides or offers the use of a horse to the public for a fee
for the purpose of riding or drawing a horse drawn vehicle or which operates a
horse drawn vehicle for hire such as a horse drawn cab.
   Riding horse. The term "riding horse" means a horse which is available to
the public for a fee for the purpose of riding.
   Stable. The term "stable" means any place, establishment or facility where
one or more rental horses are housed or maintained.
   Under tack. The term "under tack" means that a horse is equipped for riding
or driving.
   Veterinarian. The term "veterinarian" means a person licensed to practice
veterinary medicine in the state of New York.
   Work. A horse is considered to be at "work" when it is out of its stable and
presented to the public as being available for riding, pulling carriages,
vehicles or other devices, or when it is saddled or in harness or when it is
being ridden or is pulling a carriage, vehicle or device.
(Am. L.L. 2019/203, 11/25/2019, eff. 1/24/2020)
§ 17-327 License required.
   a.   On and after January first, nineteen hundred eighty-two no person shall
use or offer the use of a horse in a rental horse business unless such horse is
licensed pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter. For purposes of this
subchapter the use of a horse in a rental horse business means that a horse is
used or offered for use by the public for a fee for the purpose of riding or
drawing a horse drawn vehicle or is used in the operation of a horse drawn
vehicle for hire such as a horse drawn cab.
   b.   A license shall be issued for a term of one year from the date of
issuance thereof and shall be renewed prior to the expiration of such term.
   c.   The annual fee for a license or the renewal of a license shall be
twenty-five dollars.
   d.   Application for a license or the renewal of a license shall be made to
the department of health and mental hygiene. Such application shall contain the
name and address of the owner of the horse and of the owner of the rental horse
business in which such horse is to be used if such person is not the owner of
the horse, the age, sex, color, markings and any other identifying marks such
as brands or tattoos of the horse, the location of the stable where the horse
is to be kept and any other information which the commissioner of health and
mental hygiene may require. An application with respect to a horse which is
used in the operation of a "horse drawn cab" as defined in subchapter twenty-
one of chapter two of title twenty of this code shall include the
identification number required to be inscribed on such horses hoof pursuant to
the rules and regulations of the department of consumer and worker protection.
The application shall be accompanied by the license or renewal fee.
   e.   No license shall be transferable. Upon the transfer of ownership of any
horse to a new owner, the new owner shall obtain a license for such horse
within fifteen days after the date of the transfer of ownership.
(Am. L.L. 2020/080, 8/28/2020, eff. 8/28/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at L.L.
2020/080.
§ 17-328 Identification tag and certificate of license.
Editor's note: this section has been amended by L.L._2025/183,_12/12/2025,_eff.
9/8/2026.
   a.   Each horse licensed pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall
be assigned an official identification number by the department. Such
identification number shall be branded on the hoof of the horse in a manner to
be prescribed by the commissioner and shall also be inscribed on a metal tag
which shall be attached to the bridle of the horse in a conspicuous place to be
specified by the commissioner at all times when the horse is at work. Such tag
shall be issued to the owner with the certificate of license. The tag and
certificate of license shall be of such form and design and shall contain such
information as the commissioner shall prescribe. Duplicate tags and
certificates of license shall be issued only upon proof of loss of the original
and the payment of a fee of two dollars.
   b.   The certificate of license shall at all times remain at the stable
where the horse is kept and shall be available for inspection by any police
officer, agent of the department and the ASPCA, or to veterinarians employed or
retained by the department or the ASPCA or employees of the department of
consumer and worker protection or any persons designated by the commissioner to
enforce this subchapter.
(Am. L.L. 2020/080, 8/28/2020, eff. 8/28/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2020/080 and
L.L. 2025/183.
§ 17-329 Disposition of licensed horse.
The department shall be notified of the transfer of ownership or other
disposition of a licensed horse within ten days thereafter. Such notice shall
include the date of disposition and if sold in New York city, the name and
address of the buyer or other transferee and such other information as the
commissioner may prescribe. A horse shall not be sold or disposed of except in
a humane manner.
§ 17-330 Regulations.
   a.   The commissioner, with the advice of the advisory board as hereinafter
established, shall promulgate such regulations as are necessary to carry out
the provisions of this subchapter and to promote the health, safety and well
being of the horses which are required to be licensed hereunder and of members
of the public who hire such horses.
   b.   1.   Horses shall not be left untethered or unattended except when
confined in a stable or other enclosure. When tethered, all horses shall be
secured by the use of a rope attached to the halter, not to the bit or bridle.
      2.   Horse bridles and halters shall be used on carriage horses at all
times when operating a carriage.
   c.   Standing stalls for carriage horses shall be sixty square feet or
larger, with a minimum width of seven feet, and shall be configured to permit a
carriage horse to turn around and safely lay down within the stall. Horses
shall be un-tied when stabled. A halter shall be on the horse or hung outside
each stall at all times.
   d.   Horses shall be adequately quartered. Stables and stalls shall be clean
and dry and sufficient bedding of straw, shavings or other suitable materials
shall be furnished and changed as often as necessary to maintain them in a
clean and dry condition. Adequate heating and ventilation shall be maintained
in stables as prescribed by the commissioner.
   e.   Owners shall insure that appropriate and sufficient food and drinking
water are available for each horse and that while working each horse is
permitted to eat and drink at reasonable intervals.
   f.   Owners shall not allow a horse to be worked on a public highway, path
or street during adverse weather or other dangerous conditions which are a
threat to the health or safety of the horse. A horse being worked when such
conditions develop shall be immediately returned to the stable by the most
direct route.
   g.   1.   Carriage horses shall not be at work for more than nine hours in
any continuous twenty-four hour period. Riding horses shall not be at work for
more than eight hours in any continuous twenty-four hour period. Rest periods
for carriage horses and riding horses shall be of such duration and at such
intervals as the commissioner shall prescribe, but rest periods for carriage
horses shall in no event be for less than fifteen minutes after each two hour
working period, and the time of such rest period shall be included in
calculating the number of hours the horse has worked in any twenty-four hour
period. During such rest periods, the person in charge of such carriage horses
shall make fresh water available to the horse.
      2.   Carriage horses shall receive no less than five weeks of vacation or
furlough every twelve months at a horse stable facility which allows daily
access to paddock or pasture turnout. Proof of such vacation or furlough shall
be provided upon request to the department and/or the ASPCA.
   h.   Carriage horses shall not be driven at a pace faster than a trot.
Riding horses may be ridden at a canter but shall not be galloped.
   i.   Horses shall be suitably trimmed or shod, and saddles, bridles, bits,
road harnesses and any other equipment used on or with a horse at work shall be
maintained and properly fitted as prescribed by regulation of the commissioner.
   j.   Stables in which horses used in a rental horse business are kept shall
be open for inspection by authorized officers, veterinarians and employees of
the department, and any persons designated by the commissioner to enforce the
provisions of this subchapter, agents of the ASPCA, police officers, and
employees of the department of consumer and worker protection.
   k.   An owner shall be jointly liable with the person to whom a horse is
rented for any violation of this subchapter or of any regulations promulgated
hereunder committed by such person if the owner had knowledge or notice of the
act which gave rise to the violation at the time of or prior to its occurrence
or under the circumstances should have had knowledge or notice of such act and
did not attempt to prevent it from occurring.
   l.   An owner of a rental horse business shall keep such records as the
commissioner of health shall prescribe including but not limited to a
consecutive daily record of the movements of each licensed horse including the
driver's name and identification number, if applicable, rider's name, the
horse's identification number, vehicle license plate number, if applicable,
time of leaving stable and time of return to stable. An owner of a rental horse
business shall also keep written protocols for emergencies, including but not
limited to primary and secondary emergency contact information for each horse
owner and insurance company information, if applicable. Such records shall be
kept on the premises of the stable where the horses are kept and shall be
available for inspection. The commissioner may, in his or her discretion,
require a time clock, date stamp or time stamp where such commissioner believes
it is appropriate.
   m.   A horse required to be licensed pursuant to this subchapter which is
lame or suffers from a physical condition or illness making it unsuitable for
work may be ordered to be removed from work by the commissioner or his or her
designee or by an agent of the ASPCA or a veterinarian employed or retained by
such commissioner or ASPCA to inspect licensed horses. A horse for which such
an order has been issued shall not be returned to work until it has recovered
from the condition which caused the issuance of the order or until such
condition has improved sufficiently that its return to work will not aggravate
the condition or otherwise endanger the health of the horse. In any proceeding,
under this section it shall be presumed that a horse which is found at work
within forty-eight hours after the issuance of an order of removal and which is
disabled by the same condition which caused such order to be issued has been
returned to work in violation of this section. Such presumption may be rebutted
by offering a certificate of a veterinarian indicating suitability to return to
work prior to the expiration of the forty-eight hour period.
   n.   Every horse required to be licensed hereunder shall be examined by a
veterinarian prior to its use in a rental horse business, at time of each
license renewal, and thereafter at intervals of not less than four months and
not greater than eight months. The examination shall include the general
physical condition of the horse, its teeth, hoofs and shoes, its stamina and
physical ability to perform the work or duties required of it, and whether it
is current on vaccinations, including those for rabies, Eastern/Western equine
encephalitis, West Nile virus, Rhinopneumonitis virus, and tetanus, or any
other vaccinations the Commissioner may require by rule. The examination shall
also include a record of any injury, disease, or deficiency observed by the
veterinarian at the time, together with any prescription or humane correction
or disposition of the same. A signed health certificate by the examining
veterinarian shall be maintained at the stable premises at which such horse is
located and shall be displayed on the outside of the such horse's individual
stall. An original of said certificate shall be mailed by the examining
veterinarian to the department.
   o.   1.   Carriage horses shall not be worked whenever the air temperature
is 18 degrees Fahrenheit or below.
      2.   Carriage horses shall not be worked whenever (i) the air temperature
is 90 degrees Fahrenheit or above, or (ii) the air temperature is 80 degrees
Fahrenheit or above and the equine heat index is 150 or above.
      3.   For purposes of this subdivision, air temperatures shall be those
measured by a state-of-the-art thermometer, as determined by the commissioner.
Relative humidity shall be determined by a state-of-the-art hygrometer or any
other device having the same capability to measure relative humidity, as
determined by the commissioner. Air temperatures and relative humidity shall be
measured by the commissioner or the commissioner's designee at street level at
one of the stands designated pursuant to section
19-174.
      4.   If either of the limits set by paragraph 2 of this subdivision are
exceeded during the course of a particular ride, at the ride's conclusion, but
no later than one-half hour after either of these limits are exceeded, the
operator must immediately cease working, move the horse to an area of shelter,
where available, rest the horse and then walk it directly to its stable. All
horses so returned to their stable must be unbridled and unharnessed and remain
at the stable for at least one hour, and thereafter, until such time as the
weather conditions shall once again reach acceptable limits.
      5.   No violation of this subdivision shall occur unless a written
warning of violation is first issued by the authorized enforcement personnel to
the operator advising that either of the limits set in paragraph 2 of this
subdivision have been exceeded and directing that the operator cease working a
carriage horse in accordance with the provisions of this subdivision. A
violation of this subdivision may be issued if an operator fails to comply with
the direction contained in the written warning of violation. Failure to comply
with such direction shall not be construed as a separate violation.
   p.   Every carriage horse required to be licensed hereunder shall be
equipped with a manure catching device. Such devices shall be affixed or
attached to the carriage and shall at no time be affixed or attached to the
horse.
   q.   Carriage horses shall not be younger than five years at the time placed
into service in any rental horse business and licensed. No carriage horse older
than 26 years of age shall be licensed to work in a rental horse business.
Acceptable proof of age shall include a signed letter from a licensed
veterinarian stating the horse's age, a certificate from an officially
recognized national registry of horses stating the horse's age, or another
industry approved method of certifying age.
   r.   Owners shall insure that during the months of November through April
every carriage is equipped with a heavy winter horse blanket large enough to
cover the horse from crest of neck to top of rump. Such blankets shall be used
to cover carriage horses in cold weather. Waterproof horse blankets of a
lighter material shall be provided at all times to cover the horse from withers
to tail during periods of wet weather when the air temperature is 55 degrees or
below.
(Am. L.L. 2019/203, 11/25/2019, eff. 1/24/2020; Am. L.L. 2020/080, 8/28/2020,
eff. 8/28/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1989/089 and
L.L. 2020/080.
§ 17-331 Advisory board.
   a.   The commissioner shall appoint an advisory board consisting of five
members as follows:
      1.   Two members shall be appointed from among the owners of rental horse
businesses operating within the city, one of whom shall be representative of
the interests of owners of riding horses and one of whom shall be
representative of the interests of owners of carriage horses.
      2.   Two members shall be appointed from the public at large. However, in
no event shall more than one person so appointed to the board be a member of
the board of directors or an employee of any animal humane society or
association.
      3.   One member shall be a veterinarian.
   b.   The terms of office of the members of the board shall be three years
except that the terms of office of the members first appointed shall be as
follows:
      1.   Two of such members first appointed shall serve for a term ending on
the thirty-first day of December, nineteen hundred eighty-two.
      2.   Two of such members first appointed shall serve for a term ending on
the thirty-first day of December, nineteen hundred eighty-three.
      3.   One of such members first appointed shall serve for a term ending on
the thirty-first day of December, nineteen hundred eighty-four.
   c.   The members of the board shall serve without compensation.
   d.   The board shall make recommendations to the commissioner on regulations
necessary to carry out the provisions of this subchapter and to promote the
health, safety and well-being of horses which are required to be licensed
hereunder and of members of the public who hire such horses.
§ 17-332 Violations.
   a.   Any violation of this subchapter, or of any of the rules promulgated
hereunder, shall upon conviction thereof be punishable by a fine of not less
than one hundred dollars nor more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment
not exceeding fifteen days, or both.
   b.   In lieu of criminal prosecution, any violation of this subchapter or
any of the rules promulgated hereunder may be prosecuted as civil violations
subject to a civil penalty of not less than twenty-five dollars nor more than
five hundred dollars or by the suspension or revocation of a license and the
suspension from work of the horse with respect to which the act caused the
violation was committed or by both such civil penalty and suspension. Civil
violations, under this section, shall be adjudicated before the administrative
tribunal of the department.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1989/089.
§ 17-333 Lighting of horse drawn cabs. [Repealed]
§ 17-334 Construction.
   a.   The provisions of this subchapter shall not be construed to supersede
or affect any of the provisions of subchapter twenty-one of chapter two of
title twenty of the code relating to a "horse drawn cab" as defined therein or
any of the regulations of the commissioner of consumer and worker protection
promulgated thereunder.
   b.   The provisions of this subchapter shall not be construed to permit the
possession or use of a horse in any area where such possession or use is
prohibited by any other law, rule or regulation.
   c.   The provisions of this subchapter shall not be construed to prohibit
the ASPCA or the department from enforcing any provision of law, rule or
regulation relating to the humane treatment of animals with respect to any
horse regardless of whether such horse is required to be licensed pursuant to
the provisions of this subchapter.
(Am. L.L. 2020/080, 8/28/2020, eff. 8/28/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2020/080.
§ 17-334.1 Training program and examination.
   a.   The department shall offer a training program and a written examination
for all horse drawn cab drivers. The commissioner shall issue a certificate to
any person successfully completing the training program and achieving
satisfactory results on the written examination administered by the department.
Subjects which shall be included in such training program are: (1) proper horse
care and grooming, (2) proper preparation and cleaning of harnesses and
padding, (3) proper fitting of the bit, bridle and harness to the horse, (4)
proper hitching of the horse to the carriage, (5) traffic laws and rules of the
city of New York, (6) permissible hours and areas of operation of horse drawn
cabs in the city of New York, (7) all laws and rules of the city of New York
pertaining in any way to horse drawn cabs and (8) such other subjects as shall
be deemed appropriate and necessary by the commissioner.
   b.   The department may impose a fee for the training program and
examination, as provided in subdivision a herein, in order to defray expenses
incurred in the administration thereof.
   c.   The department shall offer the training program and examination, as
provided in subdivision a herein, on a regularly scheduled basis, no less
frequently than at least four times per year or more frequently as deemed
necessary by the commissioner.
   d.   The training program shall be available only to persons holding a
currently valid driver's license.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1989/089.
**** Subchapter 4: Inhalation Therapy ****
§ 17-335 Inhalation therapy.
   a.   Definitions. Whenever used in this section, the following terms shall
mean and include:
      1.   "Inhalation therapy." The therapeutic use of oxygen, helium, carbon
dioxide or other gas or gases for a human being.
      2.   "Inhalation therapy service." The furnishing of gas and complete
inhalation therapy equipment, with or without a technician to administer or
operate the same, or the furnishing, with one or more other persons, of such
gas and complete equipment, or the furnishing of a supervising technician or
technician to operate inhalation therapy equipment.
      3.   "Purveyor." A person who directly or indirectly engages in the
business of supplying inhalation therapy service or who holds himself or
herself out, directly or indirectly, or by a sign, stationery, business card,
billhead, advertisement or otherwise as being engaged in the business of
supplying inhalation therapy service. The term "purveyor" shall not include a
hospital or other institution subject to visitation or inspection by the state
department of social services, pursuant to section four hundred sixty-c of the
social services law, a hospital or other institution operated by the city, or a
manufacturer or distributor of gas or inhalation therapy equipment, unless such
manufacturer or distributor supplies inhalation therapy service consisting of
gas and complete inhalation equipment, with or without, a technician to operate
the same, or a technician to operate inhalation therapy equipment.
      4.   "Supervising technician." A person who is the technical supervisor
or director of the inhalation therapy service of a purveyor and who supervises
the technicians who operate the inhalation therapy equipment of such purveyor
or for such purveyor.
      5.   "Technician." A person who operates inhalation therapy equipment of
a purveyor or for a purveyor under the supervision of a supervising technician.
The terms "supervising technician" shall not include any person administering
any gas (a) for emergency first aid, (b) for emergency resuscitation, (c) in
conjunction with or during lawful administration of an anesthetic, (d) in a
hospital or other institution subject to visitation or inspection by the state
department of social services, pursuant to section four hundred sixty-c of the
social services law, or (e) in a hospital or other institution operated by the
city.
   b.   Purveyors' licenses, supervising technicians' and technicians'
certificates of competency.
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to be a purveyor without a
license therefor and it shall be unlawful for any person to be a supervising
technician or technician without a certificate of competency therefor.
      2.   The annual fee for a license to be a purveyor shall be fifty
dollars. The fee for a certificate to be a supervising technician shall be ten
dollars and the annual renewal fee shall be one dollar. The fee for a
certificate to be a technician shall be five dollars and the annual renewal fee
shall be one dollar.
      3.   Each purveyor shall cause his or her license to be conspicuously
displayed in his or her principal place of business. Each supervising
technician and each technician, during the performance of his or her duties as
such, shall carry his or her certificate or renewal certificate on his or her
person and shall display the same on demand.
      4.   The department shall issue licenses and certificates of competency
and renewals thereof pursuant to this section. Each such license, certificate
and renewal shall expire on the thirty-first day of December next succeeding
the date of issuance thereof.
      5.   All licenses, certificates of competency and renewals thereof issued
pursuant to this section shall be according to an established form and shall be
regularly numbered and duly registered.
      6.   Where the applicant is a non-profit organization or an employee of
such organization and the activity for which the license is required, is
operated or is to be operated on a non-profit basis, the commissioner may in
his or her discretion waive the payment of any of the fees prescribed by this
section for such licenses issued by him or her.
   c.   Commissions prohibited. For the better protection and preservation of
the public health, safety and welfare of the city and its inhabitants, it shall
be unlawful for any purveyor, supervising technician or technician, directly or
indirectly, to pay or give, permit or cause to be paid or given, or offer to
pay or give to any person, or for any person, directly or indirectly, to
request, receive or accept from any purveyor, supervising technician or
technician any sum of money, credit or other valuable consideration as a
commission, discount or gratuity for:
      1.   Recommending or procuring the inhalation therapy service of such
purveyor for any other person, or
      2.   Directing patronage or clientele to such purveyor, or
      3.   Influencing any person to refrain from using or utilizing the
inhalation therapy service or equipment of any other purveyor or person. The
provisions of this subdivision shall be inapplicable to:
         1.   Compensation paid by a purveyor to his or her bona fide employees
or for bona fide advertising.
         2.   Trade discounts granted by one purveyor to another purveyor.
   d.   Operation of equipment. It shall be unlawful for any purveyor to supply
inhalation therapy service or equipment, unless the use thereof is prescribed
and supervised by a licensed physician and the operation thereof is controlled
by a licensed physician, a supervising technician or a technician. A purveyor
shall be deemed to have complied with the requirement of this subdivision with
respect to a prescription for the use of inhalation therapy service or
equipment if:
      1.   He or she or his or her representative shall have ascertained from
the physician or from a person employed in the office of the physician having
knowledge thereof or from the registered nurse charged with the care of the
person requiring such inhalation therapy, that the physician has prescribed the
use of such inhalation therapy or equipment; and
      2.   He or she or his or her representative has made a note on the
records of such purveyor of the name and address of the physician, the name of
the registered nurse or the person in the office of the physician from whom
such information was received and the date on and the time at which such
information was received. The provisions of this subdivision shall be
inapplicable to the use of inhalation therapy in the administration of
emergency first aid, emergency resuscitation, in conjunction with or during
lawful administration of anesthetic, in a hospital or other institution subject
to visitation or inspection by the state department of social services pursuant
to section four hundred sixty-c of the social services law or in a hospital or
other institution operated by the city.
   e.   Powers of department. For the better protection of the health, safety
and welfare of the inhabitants of the city, the department shall have power to:
      1.   Promulgate rules and regulations governing inhalation service or
equipment and for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this section.
      2.   Conduct examinations for and issue certificates of competency to
supervising technicians and technicians.
      3.   Inspect or investigate the inhalation therapy equipment or service
of any purveyor.
      4.   Make and enforce orders with relation to the care, use, operation,
testing and repair of inhalation therapy service or equipment.
      5.   Deny, suspend or revoke a license, certificate of competency or any
renewal thereof for failure to comply with the provisions of this section or
with any rule, regulation, standard or order prescribed or made by the
department with relation to inhalation therapy service or equipment.
   f.   [Repealed.]
§ 17-336 Purveyors of certain services regulated.
   a.   Whenever used in this section, the following terms shall mean and
include:
      1.   "Purveyor." A person who directly or indirectly engages in the
business of supplying a service or services to another person or persons for
use or utilization by such other person or persons.
      2.   "Service" or "services." The sale, rental, supplying or furnishing
of:
         (a)   Clinical laboratory services or supplies
         (b)   X-ray laboratory services or supplies
         (c)   Inhalation therapy service or equipment
         (d)   Ambulances service
         (e)   Sick room supplies
         (f)   Physical therapy service or equipment
         (g)   Orthopedic or surgical appliances or supplies
         (h)   Drugs, medication or medical supplies
         (i)   Glasses, lenses or other optical supplies or equipment
         (j)   Hearing aids or devices
         (k)   Any other goods, services, supplies or procedures prescribed or
suggested for medical diagnosis, care or treatment.
   b.   For the better protection and preservation of the public health, safety
and welfare of the city and its inhabitants, it shall be unlawful for any
purveyor, directly or indirectly, to pay or give, permit or cause to be paid or
given, or offer to pay or give to any person, or for any person, directly or
indirectly, to request, receive or accept from any purveyor any sum of money,
credit or other valuable consideration as a commission, discount or gratuity
for:
      1.   Recommending or procuring a service of such purveyor for any other
person, or
      2.   Directing patronage or clientele to such purveyor, or
      3.   Influencing any person to refrain from using or utilizing a service
of any other purveyor.
   c.   The provisions of subdivision b of this section shall be inapplicable
to:
      1.   Compensation paid by a purveyor to his or her bona fide employees or
for bona fide advertising.
      2.   Trade discounts granted by one purveyor to another purveyor.
   d.   [Repealed.]
§ 17-337 Air quality standards for compressed air in underwater breathing
tanks.
Compressed air to be used in tanks for underwater breathing that are offered
for sale, sold, or distributed in the city of New York, shall, at a minimum,
meet the air quality standards for grade e air of the compressed gas
association publication "G-7.1-2004, commodity specification for air," or a
more stringent standard as may be determined by the department.
**** Subchapter 6: Dangerous Dog Regulation and Protection Law ****
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1991/002.
§ 17-342 Definitions.
Whenever used in this subchapter, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
   a.   "Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, joint stock company,
corporation or employee thereof, or other legal entity, unless otherwise
stated.
   b.   "Owner" means any person possessing, harboring, keeping, having an
interest in, or having control or custody of a dog.
   c.   "Dangerous dog" means (1) any dog that when unprovoked, approaches, or
menaces any person in a dangerous or terrorizing manner, or in an apparent
attitude of attack, upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds or
places; or (2) any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to
attack when unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of
human beings or domestic animals; or (3) any dog which bites, inflicts injury,
assaults or otherwise attacks a human being or domestic animal without
provocation on public or private property; or (4) any dog owned or harbored
primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting or any dog trained for dog
fighting.
   d.   "Severe injury" means any physical injury that results in broken bones
or disfiguring lacerations requiring either multiple stitches or cosmetic
surgery.
   e.   "Unprovoked" means that the dog was not hit, kicked, taunted or struck
by a person with any object or part of a person's body nor was any part of the
dog's body pulled, pinched or squeezed by a person.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1991/002.
§ 17-343 Acquisition of a dangerous dog prohibited.
   a.   No person shall own or harbor any dog for the purpose of dog fighting,
or train, torment, badger, bait or use any dog for the purpose of causing or
encouraging said dog to attack human beings or domestic animals when not
provoked.
   b.   No person shall sell, offer for sale, breed, buy or attempt to buy any
dangerous dog within the city of New York.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1991/002.
§ 17-344 Humane destruction.
The commissioner may order the humane destruction of any dog that kills or
causes severe injury to a human being.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1991/002.
§ 17-345 Determination of a dangerous dog.
The commissioner shall have the authority to make a determination that a dog is
dangerous, as defined in subdivision (c) of section
17-342, upon the complaint of any person that a dog is dangerous. The
Commissioner shall make such determination after a hearing, written notice of
which shall be given to the complainant and to the owner of the dog, within
fifteen days after seizure of the dog has been ordered by the department, where
the owner's address can be reasonably ascertained by the commissioner. The
hearing shall be held no less than ten days nor more than twenty days after
such notice is mailed to the owner of the dog. At such hearing all interested
persons shall have the opportunity to present evidence on the issue of the
dog's dangerousness. In the event that the dog in question has caused severe
injury to any person, the commissioner may impound the dog, at the owner's
expense, pending the hearing and determination of the complaint. If, after the
hearing, the commissioner determines that the dog is dangerous, he or she may
order the owner to comply with one or more of the following requirements, in
any combination thereof:
   a.   Registration. The commissioner may order the owner of a dangerous dog
to register such dog with the department. The application for such registration
shall contain the name and address of the owner, the breed, age, sex, color,
and any other identifying marks of the dog, the location where the dog is to be
kept if not at the address of the owner and any other information which the
commissioner may require. The application for registration pursuant to this
paragraph shall be accompanied by a registration fee of twenty-five dollars.
Each dog registered pursuant hereto shall be assigned an official registration
number by the department. Such registration number shall be inscribed on a
metal tag which shall be attached to the dog's collar at all times. The tag and
a certificate of registration shall be of such form and design and shall
contain such information as the commissioner shall prescribe and shall be
issued to the owner upon payment of the registration fee and the presentment of
sufficient evidence that the owner has complied with all of the orders of the
commissioner as prescribed at the determination hearing.
   b.   Muzzling or confinement. The commissioner may order the owner of a
dangerous dog to muzzle the dog or confine the dog, at all times, indoors or in
a proper enclosure for a dangerous dog which shall consist of a securely
enclosed and locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent the entry of young
children, or any part of their bodies or other foreign objects, and designed to
prevent the animal from escaping. Such pen or structure shall have secure sides
and prevent the dog from digging his way out through the bottom. The pen or
structure shall also provide the dog with protection from the elements. The
owner shall also conspicuously display a sign designed with a warning symbol
approved by the commissioner which indicates to both children and adults the
presence of a dangerous dog, on the pen or structure and on or near the
entrance to the residence where the dog is kept. At any time that the dog is
not confined as required herein, the dog shall be muzzled in such a manner as
to prevent it from biting or injuring any person, and kept on a leash no longer
than six feet with the owner or some other responsible person attending such
dog.
   c.   Liability insurance. The commissioner may order the owner of a
dangerous dog to maintain, in full force and effect, a liability insurance
policy of one hundred thousand dollars for personal injury or death of any
person, resulting from an attack of such dangerous dog.
   d.   Humane destruction. The commissioner may order the humane destruction
of any dog that kills or causes severe injury to a human being, based upon the
severity of the injury and the circumstances of the injury.
   e.   Other remedies. The commissioner may order (i) that the dog be
permanently removed from the city; or (ii) that the owner and the dog complete
a course of obedience and/or anti-bite training approved by the commissioner.
In the event that the owner or keeper of the dangerous dog is a minor, the
parent or guardian or such minor shall be liable for all injuries and property
damage sustained by any person or domestic animal caused by an unprovoked
attack by such dangerous dog.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1991/002.
§ 17-346 Confiscation and/or confinement of a dangerous dog.
   a.   In the event that the owner of a dangerous dog violates any order of
the commissioner as prescribed at the determination hearing, such owner's dog
may be confiscated and impounded by the proper authorities upon the order of
the commissioner. In addition, any dog determined to be dangerous shall be
immediately confiscated by the proper authorities if the dog bites or attacks a
human being and causes injury, or if the dog, at the sufferance of its owner,
is engaged in or apparently engaged in a dog fight contest or is proximately
near the area in which such a contest is being conducted.
   b.   The owner of a dog determined to be dangerous by the commissioner,
which has been confiscated pursuant to subdivision (a) of this section, may
request the commissioner to conduct a hearing to determine if the dog should be
returned to the owner. Upon such request, the commissioner shall provide for a
hearing within five days.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1991/002.
§ 17-347 Excused behavior.
No dog shall be declared dangerous pursuant to § 17-345 if the threat, injury,
or damage caused by such dog was sustained by a person who, at the time, was
committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the
owner of the dog, or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog, or has, in
the past, been observed or reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the
dog, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. Nor shall any dog be
declared dangerous if it was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting
itself, its kennels, or its offspring. If the trespass is determined to be of
an innocent nature, the commissioner may, depending on the circumstances, and
in accordance with the procedures set forth in section
17-345, find the dog to be dangerous.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1991/002.
§ 17-348 Regulations.
The commissioner, within ninety days of the effective date of this subchapter
and with the advice of the advisory board hereinafter established, shall
promulgate such regulations as are necessary to carry out the provisions of
this subchapter and to promote the health, safety and well-being of the public.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1991/002.
§ 17-349 Dangerous dog advisory board. [Repealed]
(Repealed L.L. 2023/068, 5/29/2023, eff. 6/28/2023)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1991/002.
§ 17-350 Violations and penalties.
   a.   Any person who violates any provision of this subchapter or any of the
regulations promulgated hereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
by a fine or not less than five hundred nor more than five thousand dollars or
by imprisonment for not more than one year, or both.
   b.   In addition to the penalties prescribed by subdivision a of this
section, any person who violates any of the provisions of this subchapter or
any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder shall be liable for a civil
penalty of not less than five hundred nor more than five thousand dollars.
   c.   Any fine or penalty assessed pursuant to this section may be reduced by
any amount which is paid as restitution by the owner of the dog to the person
or persons suffering serious physical injury as compensation for unreimbursed
medical expenses, lost earnings and other damages resulting from such injury.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1991/002.
§ 17-351 Enforcement.
Authorized officers, veterinarians and employees of the department, and of the
police department, and any other persons designated by the commissioner, shall
be empowered to enforce the provisions of this subchapter or any rule or
regulation promulgated hereunder.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1991/002.
§ 17-352 Construction.
The provisions of this subchapter shall not be construed to prohibit the
department, the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals or
any law enforcement officer from enforcing any other law, rule or regulation
regarding the humane treatment of animals.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1991/002.
§ 17-353 Exemptions.
The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to any federal, state or city
law enforcement agency.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1991/002.
§ 17-354 Severability.
If any provision of this subchapter is adjudged invalid by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or impair the validity
of the remainder of this subchapter.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1991/002.
**** Subchapter 7: Tattoo Regulation Act ****
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1997/012.
§ 17-355 Short title.
This subchapter shall be known as the "Tattoo Regulation Act."
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1997/012.
§ 17-356 Definitions.
As used in this subchapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
   a.   "Tattoo" means any mark on the body of a person made with indelible ink
or pigments injected beneath the outer layer of the skin, or to make such a
mark.
   b.   "Tattooist" means any person who applies a tattoo to the body of
another person.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1997/012.
§ 17-357 Licenses.
   a.   No person shall engage in the practice of tattooing without having
obtained a license to engage in such practice in the manner prescribed in this
subchapter.
   b.   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to a physician
licensed under article one hundred thirty-one of the New York state education
law.
   c.   Notwithstanding the requirements set forth in this section, the
commissioner may issue a seven-day temporary license to a person holding a
license or similar certification or registration to engage in the practice of
tattooing issued under the jurisdiction of another political subdivision, state
or nation. Such temporary license will allow a person to apply tattoos within
the city of New York under the direct supervision of a tattooist holding a
license issued by the department pursuant to subdivision a of this section.
Where an applicant for such a seven-day temporary license practices tattooing
in a jurisdiction that does not license or otherwise register tattooists, the
commissioner may issue such seven-day temporary license to such person upon the
presentation of proof satisfactory to the commissioner that the applicant has
received training equivalent to that necessary to satisfactorily pass the
examination required in section
17-358. The fee for such temporary license shall be established in rules
promulgated by the commissioner.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1997/012.
§ 17-358 Licenses, applications, procedures and requirements.
   a.   Any person intending to engage in the practice of tattooing shall apply
to the commissioner for a tattoo license, in the form and manner prescribed by
the commissioner. Such application shall contain such information as the
commissioner deems reasonable and necessary to determine the qualifications for
granting a license to the applicant. The application shall be subscribed by the
applicant and affirmed under penalty of perjury.
   b.   Any person eighteen years of age or older may apply to the commissioner
for a license to practice tattooing. No license may be issued to a person who
has been convicted of criminal tattooing of a minor in violation of section
260.21 of the New York state penal law within the year immediately preceding
such license application.
   c.   Each applicant for a tattoo license shall take an examination
administered by the department in accordance with rules promulgated by the
commissioner regarding health issues relating to tattooing, including but not
limited to, infection control, utilization of universal precautions as
recommended by the federal centers for disease control and prevention and
proper methods of waste disposal. The fee for such examination shall be
established pursuant to rules promulgated by the commissioner. An application
for a tattoo license must be accompanied by satisfactory evidence of passing
such examination. The commissioner shall issue an informational publication
which may be used by applicants for a tattoo license in preparing to take such
examination. The commissioner shall update such informational publication when
the commissioner determines that new health-related information or techniques
have become available.
   d.   The biennial fee for a tattoo license shall be one hundred dollars.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1997/012.
§ 17-359 Expiration; transfer; assignment; display.
   a.   All licenses shall be numbered and shall expire two years from the date
of issuance.
   b.   No license shall be assignable or transferable.
   c.   Each license issued pursuant to this subchapter and a sign in the form
prescribed by the commissioner indicating a department of health and mental
hygiene address or telephone number where customers may register complaints
shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises where the licensee is
applying tattoos.
   d.   A license may be renewed without examination; provided, however, that
if a license is not renewed within two years of its expiration, the licensee
shall be subject to the provisions of section
17-358.
   e.   Any holder of a license which has been revoked may, upon expiration of
the revocation period, reapply for such license under the provisions of section
17-358.
   f.   All advertising by or for a licensee must contain the phrase "LICENSED
BY THE NEW YORK CITY DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND MENTAL HYGIENE" and the license
number of such licensee. For the purposes of this subdivision, an alphabetical
listing in a telephone directory shall not be considered advertising.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1997/012.
§ 17-360 Sanitary conditions; physical facilities; equipment; procedures.
   a.   Every tattoo establishment, store, place or premises in which one or
more tattooists engage in the practice of tattooing, shall be kept in a clean
and sanitary condition at all times and shall have proper ventilation and
lighting, waste receptacles, washing facilities with cold and hot running
water, sanitary soap and towels for customers and tattooists and such other
sanitary conditions as required by rules promulgated by the commissioner.
   b.   The commissioner shall promulgate rules with respect to hand-washing by
tattooists, the wearing of latex gloves by tattooists and the wearing by
tattooists of any other protective garments as the commissioner may require.
   c.   The commissioner shall promulgate rules with respect to the proper
sterilization of tattoo equipment, proper sterilization and disposal of
needles, and the tattooing procedure, including, but not limited to, the
preparation of the skin to be tattooed and the treatment of the skin by the
tattooist and the customer following tattooing.
   d.   The commissioner shall promulgate rules with respect to the tattooing
of persons who have skin lesions or other conditions as determined by the
commissioner.
   e.   No person shall apply a tattoo to any person under eighteen years of
age.
   f.   After the tattooing procedure has been completed, every tattooist shall
provide his or her customers with written instructions on the proper care of
tattooed skin.
   g.   Every tattooist shall maintain a record of the name, address, and age
of every customer and date tattooed and any other information required by the
commissioner and shall report to the commissioner any information as the
commissioner shall determine.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1997/012.
§ 17-361 Advisory committee. [Repealed]
(Repealed L.L. 2023/068, 5/29/2023, eff. 6/28/2023)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1997/012.
§ 17-362 Violations and penalties.
   a.   The first conviction of a licensee for criminal tattooing of a minor
under section 260.21 of the New York state penal law shall result in the
suspension of such license for a period of six months. Not later than ten
business days prior to the expiration of such six-month suspension, where such
a suspended licensee intends to resume tattooing, such licensee shall post a
bond with the commissioner in such form and amount as the commissioner shall
require. Such bond shall remain in full force and effect for eighteen months
following the expiration of such six-month suspension. The second conviction of
a licensee for criminal tattooing of a minor under section 260.21 of the New
York state penal law within two years of the first conviction shall result in
the revocation of such license for a period of two years and the forfeiture of
such bond as may have been posted with the commissioner pursuant to this
section. The third conviction of a licensee for criminal tattooing of a minor
under section 260.21 of the New York state penal law within two years of the
first conviction shall result in the revocation of such license for a period of
five years. A license issued pursuant to this subchapter may be suspended or
revoked for any other reasonable cause specified by the commissioner in order
to ensure the health and safety of the public.
   b.   In addition to any other penalty imposed by any other provision of law
or rule promulgated thereunder, any person found to be in violation of this
subchapter or any of the rules promulgated hereunder shall be liable for a
civil penalty of not more than three hundred dollars for the first violation;
not more than five hundred dollars for the second violation within a two-year
period; and not more than one thousand dollars for the third and all subsequent
violations within a two-year period.
   c.   A proceeding to suspend or revoke a license authorized pursuant to
subdivision a of this section, or to recover any civil penalty authorized
pursuant to subdivision b of this section, shall be commenced by the service of
a notice of violation which shall be returnable to the administrative tribunal
established by the board of health. Such tribunal shall have the power to
suspend or revoke a license issued pursuant to this subchapter and to impose
the civil penalties prescribed by subdivision b of this section.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1997/012.
§ 17-363 Rules.
The commissioner shall promulgate rules in accordance with the provisions of
this subchapter, and such other rules as may be necessary for the purpose of
implementing and carrying out the provisions of this subchapter.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1997/012.
**** Subchapter 8: Boarding Kennel Regulation Act ****
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/067.
§ 17-364 Short title.
This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Boarding Kennel
Regulation Act".
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/067.
§ 17-365 Definitions.
For the purposes of this section, the term "boarding kennel, business or
establishment" means a facility other than an animal shelter where animals not
owned by the proprietor of such facility are sheltered, harbored, maintained,
groomed, fed or watered in return for a fee.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/067.
§ 17-366 Proof of vaccination required.
No dog shall be accepted at a boarding kennel, business or establishment unless
the owner of such dog is in compliance with section 161.15(e) of the New York
city health code.
(Am. L.L. 2019/206, 11/25/2019, eff. 2/23/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/067.
§ 17-367 Record keeping.
Every boarding kennel, business or establishment shall maintain and make
available for inspection records for each dog utilizing such facility for a
period of twelve (12) months from the last day of such utilization indicating:
the owner's name, address, telephone number and emergency contact; duration of
stay; services provided; and proof of vaccinations or veterinarian's statements
that vaccination is contraindicated.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/067.
§ 17-368 Inspection.
The department shall conduct an inspection of the records of each boarding
kennel, business or establishment to determine such facility's compliance with
the provisions of this subchapter.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/067.
§ 17-369 Rules.
The department may promulgate rules as may be necessary for the purpose of
implementing and carrying out the provisions of this subchapter.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/067.
§ 17-370 Violations and penalties.
Any owner or operator of a boarding kennel, business or establishment that
violates any provision of this subchapter shall be liable for a civil penalty
of two hundred and fifty dollars for each violation. A proceeding to recover
any such civil penalty shall be commenced by the service of a notice of
violation which shall be returnable to the administrative tribunal established
by the department. Such tribunal shall have the power to impose civil penalties
prescribed by this section.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/067.
**** Subchapter 9: Pet Shops ****
§ 17-371 Definitions.
As used in this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
   Arm’s length transaction. The term “arm’s length transaction” means a sale
of a business for consideration that reflects the fair market value of such
business or its assets, between 2 informed and willing parties, that is not
made, wholly or in part, for the purpose of enabling the seller to avoid
liability for violations issued by the department. A sale shall be presumed not
to be an arm's length transaction if it is:
      1.   A sale to an individual, or to a corporation or other business that
is owned by the spouse, domestic partner, parent, grandparent, child or
stepchild of any of the sellers, or is the direct descendent of a grandparent,
the spouse or domestic partner of any of the sellers;
      2.   A sale to an individual or entity that has a business or financial
interest in the seller; or
      3.   A sale to an entity in which any of the sellers has a business or
financial relationship.
   Permit. The term “permit” means a written license and authorization to carry
on specified activities as regulated by this subchapter or other applicable law
enforced by the department.
   Permittee. The term “permittee” means a natural person or other entity who
holds a valid permit issued by the commissioner pursuant to this subchapter or
other applicable law enforced by the department.
   Pet shop. The term “pet shop” means a facility other than an animal shelter,
as such term is defined in section
17-802, where live animals are sold, exchanged, bartered, or offered for sale
as pet animals to the general public at retail for profit. Such definition
shall not include duly incorporated humane societies dedicated to the care of
unwanted animals that make such animals available for adoption, whether or not
a fee for such adoption is charged.
(L.L. 2015/005, 1/17/2015, eff. 6/1/2015; Am. L.L. 2015/053, 6/2/2015, eff. 6/
1/2015; Am. L.L. 2024/132, 12/21/2024, retro. eff. 12/15/2024)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2015/005.
§ 17-372 Pet shop permits required.
   a.   No person shall operate a pet shop without a permit issued by the
commissioner pursuant to this subchapter.
   b.   Operating a business or conducting an activity regulated by this
subchapter without the permit therefor is hereby declared a nuisance.
      1.   No person may operate a business or conduct an activity regulated by
this subchapter without the permit required by this subchapter.
      2.   No person may allow the operation of a business or the conduct of an
activity regulated by this subchapter in any property owned by such person
unless the person operating such business or conducting such activity has a
permit as required by this section.
      3.   When the department determines that a business or activity regulated
by this subchapter is being operated or conducted without the permit required
by this section, the commissioner or his or her designee may order the person
operating the business or conducting the activity to cease and desist from such
business or activity. The department may also order the person who owns the
premises in which the business is operated or activity is conducted to take
whatever action may be necessary to prohibit such business or activity from
continuing on such premises.
      4.   If the business or activity ordered to cease and desist continues
without the required permit, the commissioner or his or her designee may, after
providing an opportunity for the person operating such business or conducting
such activity to be heard at the environmental control board or any tribunal
established wi hin the office of administrative trials and hearings as
designated by the commissioner, take any measure authorized by applicable law
to enforce an order to cease and desist. Such measures may include, but are not
limited to, ordering and arranging for the premises to be sealed and padlocked.
      5.   If the commissioner determines that exigent circumstances exist such
that the continued operation of the business or activity would pose an danger
to the public or the health and welfare of the animals in the custody of the
business, the commissioner may take any measure authorized by applicable law to
enforce an order to cease and desist, subject to a prompt post-enforcement
hearing at the environmental control board or any tribunal established within
the office of administrative trials and hearings as designated by the
commissioner.
(L.L. 2015/005, 1/17/2015, eff. 1/1/2016)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2015/005.
§ 17-373 Permit applications.
   a.   An application for a permit required pursuant to section
17-372 of this title or for the renewal of such a permit shall be made and
submitted on forms furnished by the department.
   b.   The applicant shall be eighteen years of age or older.
   c.   The application shall contain all information required by the
department. If the applicant for the permit is a sole proprietorship, the
application shall be signed by the individual who would be the permittee. If
the applicant is a partnership, the application shall be signed by a partner.
If the applicant is a limited partnership, the application shall be signed by
the managing or general partner. If the applicant is a corporation, the
application shall be signed by an officer or director of the corporation or by
any member, if management is vested in members. If the applicant is a limited
liability company, the application shall be signed by any manager of the
limited liability company. Such signature shall constitute an agreement that
the permittee assumes responsibility for the conduct of the business,
occupation or other activity concerned in accordance with the requirements of
this subchapter or other applicable law.
   d.   In addition to the following information, the application shall be
accompanied by such other information, evidence or documentation as the
department may require or as may be provided for in this subchapter or other
applicable law or rule applicable to the department. The application shall, at
a minimum, include:
      1.   The name, age, gender, residence and business address, and telephone
numbers of the applicant, each member of the partnership, limited liability
company or group, and each officer of the corporation, as applicable;
      2.   To the extent that such information is relevant to the conduct of
the business, trade, occupation or other activity under permit, information
concerning the applicant, its individual members or officers, relating to
education, training or experience, moral character, physical health, addiction
to alcohol or habit-forming drugs, history of prior criminal conviction,
including violations and offenses, history of mental illness, and record of
insolvency or bankruptcy;
      3.   Proof of current workers' compensation and disability benefits
insurance coverage for all employees, or of a certificate of exemption filed
with the workers' compensation board;
      4.   The e-mail address of (i) the individual owner of the business, (ii)
the person exercising daily management and control of the business, or (iii)
the person who is authorized by law to accept service of process on behalf of
the applicant; and
      5.   [Reserved.]
      6.   Any information that the department determines may be necessary in
order to contact the permittee in the event of an emergency.
   e.   The commissioner shall not issue or renew a permit unless department
records show there are no finally determined uncorrected violations or unpaid
outstanding fines, penalties or forfeitures imposed by any court,
administrative tribunal established within the office of administrative trials
and hearings or administrative tribunal established in accordance with the
administrative code or the charter, which are due and payable by the applicant
or the permittee.
   f.   The commissioner shall not issue a new permit or renewal of an existing
permit to any person listed on the animal abuse registry created pursuant to
chapter
sixteen of this title.
   g.   The commissioner shall not issue a new permit to any entity based on a
sale or change of ownership of a permitted business or activity regulated by
laws or rules enforced by the department, where department or other records
show any finally determined uncorrected violations or unpaid fines and
penalties, unless the applicant submits proof satisfactory to the department
that the transfer of the business was the result of an arm's length
transaction. Such proof shall consist of documents showing that:
      1.   The applicant has assumed complete management, control and operation
of the permitted business or activity from the prior permittee;
      2.   The applicant has paid market value consideration for the material
assets of the permitted business; and
      3.   Neither the applicant nor any member or officer of a partnership or
corporation is related by blood or marriage to the owner(s) or manager(s) of
the entity holding the permit prior to the transfer of the permitted business.
   The commissioner's denial of an application pursuant to this subdivision
shall be a final agency determination not subject to administrative appeal.
   h.   The acceptance of an application and fee for a new permit or the
renewal of a permit shall not preclude the commissioner from taking any action
that he or she deems necessary, including, but not limited to, the denial of a
new permit or renewal permit if department or other investigatory or pre-permit
inspections disclose conditions or circumstances indicating that a permit
should not be issued or renewed. If an application for a new permit or renewal
of an existing permit is denied, the application fee shall not be refunded.
(L.L. 2015/005, 1/17/2015, eff. 1/1/2016; Am. L.L. 2015/053, 6/2/2015, eff. 1/
1/2016; Am. L.L. 2024/132, 12/21/2024, retro. eff. 12/15/2024)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2015/005.
§ 17-374 Permit expiration dates; fees.
   a.   An application for a permit or for the renewal thereof shall be
accompanied by the payment of a fee of three hundred dollars. Permits shall
expire biennially and be eligible for renewal.
   b.   If a permit application is made when more than one-half of the fee
period has expired, one-half of the prescribed fee shall be paid. This
requirement shall not apply, however, if application is being made for renewal
of a permit which has expired.
   c.   The fees provided for herein shall be reduced by the amount of any fee
paid for a permit to operate a pet shop pursuant to the New York city health
code within the same fee period.
(L.L. 2015/005, 1/17/2015, eff. 1/1/2016)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2015/005.
§ 17-375 Permits not transferable; exception.
Any purported or attempted transfer of a permit to a person not named therein
as permittee or any change in the place of business stated in a permit shall
void such permit. When a permit is issued to two or more individuals, to a
partnership or to a group other than a partnership, and one or more of the
individuals concerned ceases to be active in the conduct of the business or
activity or otherwise ceases to be a permittee, the commissioner may approve in
writing the continuation of the business or activity by the remaining
permittees during the unexpired period of such permit. The permittee shall
notify the department in writing within ten business days of any change in the
owner(s), officers, directors, shareholders, partners or members of a permitted
entity that is owned by a sole proprietor, or that is a closely held
corporation or small limited liability company, or a partnership, consisting of
fewer than five shareholders, members or partners, who directly operate and
manage the business, and serve as directors or officers of the corporation,
with no outside investors. Notice of such changes shall not be required if the
permittee is a publicly held corporation or limited liability company whose
shareholders or members do not manage or control the entity or participate in
its business activities.
(L.L. 2015/005, 1/17/2015, eff. 1/1/2016)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2015/005.
§ 17-376 Conditions of permit and health code to be observed.
   a.   A person holding a permit, including the officers and directors of a
corporation holding a permit, shall comply with the conditions contained in his
or her permit as well as all applicable provisions of the New York city health
code, administrative code or other law or rule enforced by the department.
   b.   A person holding a permit, including the officers and directors of a
corporation holding a permit, shall be jointly and severally liable for
violations of the conditions of the permit or of the New York city health code,
administrative code or other applicable law enforced by the department that are
committed by employees or agents of the person or corporation when such acts
are committed in the regular course of the permitted business of such person or
corporation, or on the premises subject to the permit, or in the course of
using the permit.
(L.L. 2015/005, 1/17/2015, eff. 1/1/2016)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2015/005.
§ 17-377 Permit to be kept on premises; mutilation prohibited.
   a.   A permit shall be kept on the premises designated on the permit.
   b.   Such permit shall be placed in a clean, transparent cover or frame and
displayed in such a manner as to be clearly visible to the public.
   c.   Such permit shall be available for inspection at all times by the
department.
   d.   No person shall mutilate, obstruct or tear down such permit.
(L.L. 2015/005, 1/17/2015, eff. 1/1/2016; Am. L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 1/
14/2022)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2015/005 and
L.L. 2021/080.
§ 17-378 Permit suspension and revocation.
   a.   In addition to any of the powers that may be exercised by the
commissioner pursuant to this subchapter or this title, the rules promulgated
thereunder, or the New York city health code, the commissioner, after due
notice and an opportunity to be heard by the environmental control board or any
tribunal established within the office of administrative trials and hearings as
designated by the commissioner, may suspend or revoke a pet shop permit upon
the occurrence of any one or more of the following conditions:
      1.   Willful or continued violation of the provisions of title seventeen
of this code, the rules promulgated thereunder or the New York city health
code, or for such other reason as the commissioner determines, is sufficient
grounds for suspension or revocation;
      2.   The giving or offering to an employee or agent of the department or
other government agency, engaged in carrying out an inspection, survey or
examination or in the performance of any other duty for the department or such
agency, a gift, gratuity, benefit, favor or bribe, including but not limited to
money, food, or drink;
      3.   Submission or display by a permittee of a forged document or other
document that contains false or misleading statements, or making a false or
misleading statement to the department; or
      4.   Poor moral character that adversely reflects on the permittee's
fitness to conduct work regulated by this title.
   b.   Notwithstanding subdivision a of this section, if the commissioner
determines that exigent circumstances exist such that the continued operation
of a permittee's pet shop would pose a danger to the public or the health and
welfare of the animals in the permittee's custody, the commissioner may suspend
such permittee's permit subject to a prompt post-suspension hearing before the
environmental control board or any tribunal established within the office of
administrative trials and hearings as designated by the commissioner.
   c.   Following a hearing required pursuant to this section and the receipt
of a copy of the report and recommendations of the tribunal before which such
hearing was held, the commissioner may take such action as may be necessary,
adopting all or part of the report and recommendations, and may issue an order
revoking the permit, further suspending the permit, or reinstating the permit
subject to whatever conditions the commissioner deems necessary for the
continued safe operation of the permitted business.
   d.   All permits revoked pursuant to this section or in accordance with
other applicable law shall be surrendered to the department upon receipt of the
order. Permits or licenses that are not surrendered in accordance with this
section may be seized by any authorized employee or agent of the department or
officer of the police department.
(L.L. 2015/005, 1/17/2015, eff. 1/1/2016)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2015/005.
§ 17-379 Denial of issuance or renewal, suspension and revocation; when
effective; service of order or notice.
   a.   Effective date. The action of the commissioner denying issuance or
renewal of a permit, or suspending or revoking a permit, shall become final
five days after service of an order or other notice thereof, exclusive of the
day of service, on the applicant or permittee concerned.
   b.   Service of an order or notice shall be made as follows:
      1.   Enclosing the order or notice in a postpaid envelope directed to the
applicant or permittee at the address listed in the application or permit and
depositing such envelope at a United States post office or in a mail box or
mail chute maintained by the United States post office; or,
      2.   Leaving the order or notice with the applicant or permittee or, if
the permittee is not an individual, with a member of the partnership or other
group concerned or with an officer of the corporation; or,
      3.   Posting the order or notice at the entrance door of the premises
listed in the application or permit.
(L.L. 2015/005, 1/17/2015, eff. 1/1/2016)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2015/005.
§ 17-380 Forfeiture and seizure.
   a.   The commissioner or his or her designee may seize any animal in a pet
shop operating without a permit required pursuant to section
17-372 of this subchapter.
   b.   Any animal in a pet shop operating without a permit required pursuant
to section
17-372 of this subchapter or seized pursuant to subdivision a of this section
shall be subject to forfeiture upon notice and hearing.
   c.   The commissioner shall provide for the appropriate disposition of each
animal seized pursuant to this section. Such disposition may include
impoundment at an animal shelter or animal rescue group as such terms are
defined in section
17-802 of chapter
eight of this title.
   d.   The commissioner may impose upon the owner of a pet shop from which an
animal is seized pursuant to this section a fee representing expenses incurred
in connection with impounding such animal.
(L.L. 2015/005, 1/17/2015, eff. 1/1/2016; Am. L.L. 2015/053, 6/2/2015, eff. 1/
1/2016)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2015/005.
§ 17-381 Penalties.
   a.   Any person found in violation of any provision of this subchapter,
other than subdivision b of section
17-377, or any provision of any rule promulgated thereunder shall be subject to
a civil penalty of five hundred dollars per day for each such violation. Each
violation in connection with the sale of more than one animal shall be deemed a
separate violation with respect to each animal offered for sale. A notice of
violation served pursuant to this section shall be returnable at the
environmental control board or any tribunal established within the office of
administrative trials and hearings as designated by the commissioner.
   b.   Any person found in violation of subdivision b of section
17-377 or any provision of any rule promulgated thereunder shall be subject to
a civil penalty of one hundred dollars per day for each such violation.
   c.   Any person that violates subdivision b of section
17-377 or any rule promulgated thereunder shall not be subject to a civil
penalty for a first-time violation if such person proves to the satisfaction of
the department, within seven days of the issuance of the notice of violation
and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the
violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the
department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an
admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that
the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer
made by the department to a person who has received, for the first time, a
notice of violation of subdivision b of section
17-377 or any rules promulgated thereunder. The department shall permit such
proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in
the office of administrative trials and hearings, of the determination that the
person has not submitted proof of a cure within 15 days of receiving written
notification of such determination.
(L.L. 2015/005, 1/17/2015, eff. 1/1/2016; Am. L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 1/
14/2022)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2015/005 and
L.L. 2021/080.
§ 17-382 Rules.
The commissioner may promulgate such rules and prescribe such forms as are
necessary to carry out the provisions of this subchapter.
(L.L. 2015/005, 1/17/2015, eff. 1/1/2016)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2015/005.
Chapter 4: Standards Governing the Performance of Sterilizations
§ 17-401 Findings and declaration.
The council declares that due to the irreversible nature of the sterilization
procedure, it is essential that the patient fully comprehends the effects and
possible complications of the operation. The patient should have a reasonable
time to consider his or her decision and possible alternative methods of
contraception before the operation is performed. Since it is within the purview
of the public policy of the city to preserve, protect and improve the public
health, safety and welfare, it is imperative that the council establish
standards governing the performance of sterilizations.
§ 17-402 Definitions.
When used in this chapter:
   1.   "Sterilization" shall mean any procedure or operation, the purpose of
which is to render an individual permanently incapable of reproducing.
   2.   "Patient" shall mean a person, twenty-one years of age or older, who is
legally capable of giving his or her consent.
§ 17-403 Application of chapter.
This chapter shall apply to every sterilization performed within the city of
New York.
§ 17-404 Waiting period.
A sterilization may not be performed sooner than thirty days following the
initial informed consent given by the patient unless the patient waives the
thirty-day waiting period under the following circumstances:
   1.   A patient who has completed the appropriate forms and informational
session, and who has signed the required informed consent form at least thirty
days prior to her anticipated delivery date, may be sterilized in less than
thirty days, but in no case less than seventy-two hours following the initial
informed consent given by such patient if she delivers prior to the anticipated
date and the sterilization is performed at the time of delivery.
   2.   A patient who has completed the appropriate forms and informational
session and who signs the required consent form at least thirty days prior to
the anticipated sterilization may be sterilized in less than thirty days if
that patient is, within the thirty-day period, admitted to a facility for
emergency abdominal surgery and the sterilization is concurrent with the
abdominal surgery, but in no case shall the sterilization occur less than
seventy-two hours after the initial consent.
   3.   If a patient appears for delivery or emergency abdominal surgery at a
facility other than that at which the patient has completed the appropriate
forms and informational session, the receiving facility shall contact, by
telephone, the facility at which the forms and procedures were completed for
verification of same. This must be noted in the record, with the name and title
of the person providing the information, the date that the consent form was
signed and the anticipated delivery date if under subdivision one of this
section or sterilization date if under subdivision two of this section. If it
is verified that the consent form was signed at least thirty days prior to the
anticipated delivery or sterilization date, the receiving facility may perform
the sterilization operation. Telephone verification may not be waived unless
the patient presents a duplicate copy of the initial consent, duly signed,
witnessed and dated at least thirty days prior to the anticipated delivery or
sterilization date.
§ 17-405 Requirements for informed consent.
No sterilization shall be performed which does not meet the following
conditions:
   1.   Initial consent may not be elicited from a female patient during
admission or hospitalization for childbirth or abortion.
   2.   An informational session conducted by a counselor, who is not the
operating physician, must precede the patient's consent. During the session,
information about the irreversibility of sterilization, alternative methods of
contraception, and the corresponding risks must be discussed in the preferred
language of the patient.
   3.   Written informed consent for sterilization must be obtained from each
patient. A standardized consent form must be used to satisfy this requirement.
The form, supplied by the department must be explained orally by the counselor
in the presence of a witness. A copy of the signed consent form shall be
provided the patient.
   4.   On admission to the facility where the sterilization will be performed
each patient must give written affirmation of his or her informed consent to
the sterilization.
   5.   The patient must be given oral and written assurance that medical
services or benefits will not be lost as a result of refusing sterilization.
   6.   Contraceptive devices will be prescribed for the patient's use during
the thirty-day waiting period.
   7.   Consent for the sterilization may be revoked any time prior to the
operation.
§ 17-406 Consent form.
The standardized consent form provided by the department must include
information about the irreversibility of sterilization, alternative methods of
contraception and the corresponding risks.
§ 17-407 Reports.
The obstetrics or gynecology department of each hospital where sterilizations
are performed, the administrator in charge of each clinic where sterilizations
are performed, and physicians in private practice who perform sterilizations
must submit monthly reports of the number of sterilizations performed to the
department of health and mental hygiene. Forms will be provided by the
department.
§ 17-408 Enforcement proceedings.
   a.   Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law, any person violating
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable and responsible for a
penalty of not more than one thousand dollars to be recovered in a civil action
but in the name of the city in any court of record in the city.
   b.   The commissioner may in his or her discretion request the corporation
counsel to institute legal proceedings to restrain, correct or enjoin any
violation of this chapter; and the corporation counsel shall thereupon
institute such action or proceeding as may be necessary and appropriate for
such purpose.
   c.   Such actions and proceedings may be entered into by the corporation
counsel in any court of civil jurisdiction within the city. In such actions and
proceedings the city may apply for restraining orders, preliminary injunctions
or other provisional remedies with or without notice.
   d.   In no case shall the department or any officer or employee thereof be
liable for costs in any such action or proceeding and officers and employees of
the department, acting in good faith, shall be free from liability for acts
done in any action or proceeding.
Chapter 5: Smoke-Free Air Act
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1988/002.
§ 17-501 Short title.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Smoke-Free Air Act."
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1988/002 and
L.L. 1995/005 
§ 17-502 Definitions.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
   a.   "Auditorium" means the part of the building where an audience sits
including any corridors, hallways or lobbies adjacent thereto.
   b.   "Bar" means a business establishment or any portion of a non-profit
entity, which is devoted to the selling and serving of alcoholic beverages for
consumption by the public, guests, patrons, or members on the premises and in
which the serving of food, if served at all, is only incidental to the sale or
consumption of such beverages. For the purposes of this chapter, the term
"bar": (i) shall include a restaurant bar; and (ii) shall include any area
located in a hotel or motel, which is devoted to the selling and serving of
alcoholic beverages for consumption by the public, guests, patrons, or members
on the premises and in which the serving of food, if at all, is only incidental
to the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages. For the purposes of this
subdivision, (i) service of food shall be considered incidental to the sale or
consumption of alcoholic beverages if the food service generates less than
forty percent of total annual gross sales and (ii) any business establishment
or any portion of a non-profit entity which is devoted to the selling and
serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by the public, guests, patrons,
or members on the premises that generates forty percent or more of total annual
gross sales from the sale of food for on-premises consumption shall be a
restaurant.
   c.   "Business establishment" means any sole proprietorship, partnership,
association, joint venture, corporation or other entity formed for profit-
making purposes, including professional corporations and other entities where
legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, financial, counseling, and
other professional or consumer services are provided.
   d.   "Child day care center" means (i) any public, private or parochial
child care center, school-age child care program, day nursery school,
kindergarten, play school, or other similar school or service, (ii) any child
care arrangement licensed by the city, (iii) any facility that provides child
care services as defined in section four hundred ten-p of the New York state
social services law and (iv) any child day care center as defined in section
three hundred ninety of the New York state social services law. Such definition
applies whether or not care is given for compensation and whether or not the
child day care center is located in a private residence.
   e.   "Children's institution" means (i) any public, private or parochial
congregate institution, group residence, group home or other place where, for
compensation or otherwise, seven or more children under twenty-one years of age
are received for day and night care apart from their parents or guardians, (ii)
youth centers or facilities for detention as defined in sections five hundred
twenty-seven-A and five hundred two of the New York state executive law, (iii)
group homes for children as defined in section three hundred seventy-one of the
New York state social services law, (iv) public institutions for children as
defined in section three hundred seventy-one of the New York state social
services law and (v) residential treatment facilities for children and youth as
defined in section 1.03 of the New York state mental hygiene law.
   f.   "Commissioner" means the commissioner of the New York City department
of health and mental hygiene.
   g.   "Department" means the New York City department of health and mental
hygiene.
   h.   "Employee" means any person who is employed by any employer in return
for the payment of direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, or any person
who volunteers his or her services to such employer for no monetary
compensation.
   i.   "Employer" means any person, partnership, association, corporation or
non-profit entity which employs one or more persons, including agencies of the
city of New York, as defined in section
1-112 of the code, and the council of the city of New York.
   j.   [Repealed.]
   k.*   "Limousine" means a for-hire vehicle required to be licensed by the
taxi and limousine commission, designed to carry fewer than nine passengers,
excluding the driver, which is dispatched from a garage, maintains a minimum of
$500,000/$1,000,000 liability insurance coverage and in which passengers are
charged fees calculated on the basis of garage to garage service.
* Editor's note: there are two subsections designated as k.
   k.*   "Motion picture theater" means any public hall or room in which motion
pictures are displayed, including any corridors, hallways or lobbies adjacent
thereto. For purposes of this subdivision, "motion picture" means a display on
a screen or other device, of pictures or objects in motion or rapidly changing
scenery, whether or not such display shall be accompanied by a lecture,
recitation or music.
* Editor's note: there are two subsections designated as k.
   l.   "Non-profit entity" means any corporation, unincorporated association
or other association or other entity created for charitable, philanthropic,
educational, political, social or other similar purposes, the net proceeds from
the operations of which are committed to the promotion of the objects or
purposes of the organization and not to secure private financial gain. A public
agency is not a "non-profit entity" within the meaning of this subdivision.
   m.   "Place of employment" means any indoor area or portion thereof under
the control of an employer which employees normally frequent during the course
of employment and which is not generally accessible to the public, including,
but not limited to, private offices, work areas, employee lounges and
restrooms, conference and class rooms, employee cafeterias, employee
gymnasiums, auditoriums, libraries, storage rooms, file rooms, mailrooms,
employee medical facilities, rooms or areas containing photocopying or other
office equipment used in common by employees, elevators, stairways and
hallways. A private residence is not a "place of employment" within the meaning
of this subdivision, except that areas in a private residence where a child day
care center or health care facility is operated during the times when employees
are working in such child day care center or health care facility areas and
areas in a private residence which constitute common areas of a multiple
dwelling are "places of employment" within the meaning of this subdivision.
   n.   "Playground" means an outdoor area open to the public where children
play, which contains play equipment such as a sliding board, swing, jungle gym,
sandbox, or see-saw, or which is designated as a play area.
   o.   [Repealed.]
   p.   "Public place" means any area to which individuals other than employees
are invited or permitted, including, but not limited to, banks, educational
facilities, health care facilities, child day care centers, children's
institutions, shopping malls, property owned, occupied or operated by the city
of New York or an agency thereof, public transportation facilities, reception
areas, restaurants, catering halls, retail stores, theaters, sports arenas and
recreational areas and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a "public
place" within the meaning of this subdivision, except that areas in a private
residence where a child day care center or health care facility is operated
during the times of operation and areas in a private residence which constitute
common areas of a multiple dwelling are "public places" within the meaning of
this subdivision.
   q.   "Residential health care facility" means (i) a facility providing
therein nursing or other care to sick, invalid, infirm, disabled or
convalescent persons in addition to lodging and board service, (ii) an
inpatient psychiatric facility which provides individuals with active treatment
under the direction of a physician, and (iii) a residential facility providing
health related service.
   r.   "Restaurant" means any coffee shop, cafeteria, luncheonette, sandwich
stand, diner, short order cafe, fast food establishment, soda fountain, and any
other eating or beverage establishment (other than a bar), including a
restaurant located in a hotel or motel, or part of any organization, club,
boardinghouse or guest house, which gives or offers for sale food or beverages
to the public, guests, members, or patrons, whether food or beverages are
customarily consumed on or off the premises, but not an establishment whose
sole purpose is to serve food or beverages to employees of a common employer or
to students of a common educational institution.
   s.   "Restaurant bar" means a contiguous area (i) in a restaurant, (ii)
containing a counter and (iii) which is primarily devoted to the selling and
serving of alcohol beverages for consumption by patrons on the premises and in
which the serving of food, if served at all, is only incidental to the sale or
consumption of alcoholic beverages in such restaurant bar.
   t.   "Retail store" means any place which in the regular course of business
sells or rents goods directly to the public.
   u.   "Retail tobacco store" means a retail store devoted primarily to the
sale of any tobacco product, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars,
pipe tobacco and chewing tobacco, and accessories and in which the sale of
other products is merely incidental. The sale of such other products shall be
considered incidental if such sales generate less than fifty percent of the
total annual gross sales.
   v.   [Repealed.]
   w.   "Separate smoking room" means an enclosed room the exclusive purpose of
which is for smoking. No business transactions, including, but not limited to,
the sale, including by vending machines, and/or service of food, beverages, or
any other product, and/or collection of any payments, shall be conducted in
such room. Such room shall (i) be completely enclosed on all sides by solid
floor-to-ceiling walls; (ii) comply with all applicable fire and building code
requirements, and have a sprinkler system for fire safety (which may be part of
a sprinkler system of the premises in which the room is located); and (iii)
have a separate ventilation system whereby the air from such enclosed room is
immediately exhausted to an outdoor area (exclusive of any seating area) by an
exhaust fan rather than being recirculated inside, and which is compliant with
the additional specifications set forth in this subdivision; (iv) be clearly
designated as a separate smoking room wherein no services are offered. Such
room may contain furniture. Such room shall not contain the sole means of
ingress and egress to restrooms or any other smoke-free area, and shall not
constitute the sole indoor waiting area of the premises. Any doors in such room
shall be self-closing, and shall remain closed except to the extent necessary
to permit ingress and egress to such room. Such room shall not exceed twenty-
five percent of the aggregate square footage of the premises, including non-
smoking lounges and shall not in any event exceed three hundred fifty square
feet. In calculating the square footage of the premises pursuant to this
subdivision, all spaces, whether or not occupied by furniture or any counter,
including public dining areas, beverage service areas, the separate smoking
room, and lounges shall be included; provided however, that service areas
(including areas behind any counter) and other areas to which the general
public does not generally have access (such as storage rooms, kitchens, offices
and cloakrooms), restrooms, telephone areas and waiting areas (other than
waiting areas located in any lounges) shall not be included. No employee shall
be permitted to enter such room for the purposes of conducting any business
transaction, including but not limited to the sale or service of food,
beverages, or any other product, provided, however, that an employee shall be
allowed into such room to provide busing or other cleaning services when no
smoking has occurred for fifteen minutes prior to the employee entering the
room and no customers are present. Such room shall have a ventilation system in
which the ventilation rate is at least sixty cubic feet per minute per occupant
based on a maximum occupancy of seven individuals per one hundred feet of floor
space, and the negative air pressure is at a rate such that when measured by a
device approved by the department of health and mental hygiene, the pressure
differential is at least three hundredths of an inch of water column relative
to the air pressure in the adjacent room in which smoking is not permitted.
Such ventilation system shall discharge air from the separate smoking room at
least twenty-five feet away from operable windows, doors, air conditioning, and
any other heating, ventilation and air conditioning intakes.
   x.   "Service line" or "waiting area" means a queue, line or other formation
of persons, whether seated or standing, in which one or more persons are
waiting for service of any kind, whether or not such service involves an
exchange of consideration.
   y.   "Smoking" means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted or
heated cigar, cigarette, little cigar, pipe, water pipe, herbal cigarette, non-
tobacco smoking product, or any similar form of lighted object or device
designed for human use or consumption by the inhalation of smoke.
   z.   "Sports arena and recreational area" means any sports pavilion,
stadium, race track, boxing arena, roller and ice skating rink, billiard
parlor, bowling establishment and other similar place where members of the
general public assemble either to engage in physical exercise, participate in
athletic or recreational competition or activity or witness sports, cultural,
recreational or similar activities. Playgrounds, gymnasiums, health clubs,
enclosed areas containing a swimming pool and areas where bingo is played are
not "sports arenas and recreational areas" within the meaning of this
subdivision.
   aa.   "Tobacco business" means a sole proprietorship, corporation,
partnership or other enterprise in which the primary activity is the sale or
manufacture of tobacco, tobacco products and accessories at wholesale, and in
which the sale or manufacture of other products is merely incidental, and in
which smoking on the premises is essential to the entity for the testing or
product development of such tobacco or tobacco products.
   bb.   "Zoo" means any indoor area open to the public for the purpose of
viewing animals. An aquarium is a "zoo" within the meaning of this sub-
division.
   cc.   "Day treatment program" means a facility which is (i) licensed by the
state department of health or the office of alcoholism and substance abuse
services, the office of mental health, or the office for people with
developmental disabilities within the state department of mental hygiene to
provide treatment to aid in the rehabilitation or recovery of its patients
based on a structured environment requiring patient participation for no less
than three hours each day; or (ii) which is authorized by the state
commissioner of health to conduct a program pursuant to section 80.135 of title
ten of the New York code of rules and regulations.
   dd.   "Health related service" means service in a facility which provides or
offers lodging, board and physical care including, but not limited to, the
recording of health information, dietary supervision and supervised hygienic
services incident to such service.
   ee.   "Member" means, for purposes of subdivision ff of this section, a
person who (i) satisfies the requirements for membership in a membership
association, and (ii) affirmatively accepts an invitation from such membership
association to become a member.
   ff.   "Membership association" means a not-for-profit entity which has been
created or organized for a charitable, philanthropic, educational, political,
social or other similar purpose and which is registered with the department of
health and mental hygiene in accordance with the rules of the department. In
determining whether such an entity is a "membership association," the
department of health and mental hygiene shall consider, but need not be limited
to, the following factors:
      (i)   whether it has by-laws or a similar governing instrument and
whether such by-laws or similar governing instrument expressly provides for
members;
      (ii)   whether it has established permanent and identifiable membership
selection criteria, the purpose of which is to screen potential members on a
basis related to its charitable, philanthropic, educational, political, social
or other similar purpose;
      (iii)   whether it conducts elections to select its governing structure
and/or body;
      (iv)   whether the premises within which it is located are controlled by
its membership;
      (v)   whether it is operated solely for the benefit and pleasure of its
membership;
      (vi)   whether it expressly acknowledges the acceptance of members, such
as by sending a membership card or by the inclusion of a member on a membership
roster. Such registration shall remain in effect for two years and shall be
renewable based upon the factors described in this subdivision and the rules of
the department.
   gg.   "Owner operated bar" means a bar in which all duties with respect to
preparing food and drink, cleaning, dishwashing and racking glasses, serving,
maintaining inventory, stocking shelves and providing of security for such a
bar are performed at all times only by individuals who are principal owners of
such bar as defined in this section and which is registered with the department
of health and mental hygiene in accordance with the rules of the department;
provided, however, that individuals other than the principal owners may perform
cleaning functions at times when the bar is not open to the public, guests,
members or patrons.
   hh.   "Principal owner" shall mean an individual who holds a twenty-five
percent or greater ownership interest in a bar and is a state liquor authority
licensee for such bar, or an individual who holds a twenty-five percent or
greater ownership interest in a partnership, joint venture, corporation or
limited liability corporation, which is the sole owner of a bar and the state
liquor authority licensee for such bar; provided, however, that an owner
operated bar shall have no more than three principal owners.
   ii.   "Tobacco product" means any substance which contains tobacco,
including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco and chewing
tobacco.
   jj.   "Tobacco bar" is a bar that, in the calendar year ending December 31,
2001, generated ten percent or more of its total annual gross income from the
on-site sale of tobacco products and the rental of on-site humidors, not
including any sales from vending machines, and is registered with the
department of health and mental hygiene in accordance with the rules of such
agency. Such registration shall remain in effect for one year and shall be
renewable only if: (i) in the preceding calendar year, the previously
registered tobacco bar generated ten percent or more of its total annual gross
income from the on-site sale of tobacco products and the rental of on-site
humidors; and (ii) the tobacco bar has not expanded its size or changed its
location from its size or location as of December 31, 2001.
   kk.   "Negative air pressure" shall mean the air exhausted to the outdoors
from a room is at a greater volume than the volume of air supplied into the
room.
   ll.   "Ventilation rate" shall mean the rate at which air is supplied into a
room.
   mm.   "Hospital," for the purposes of paragraph 6 of subdivision c of
section
17-503, shall mean a general hospital as defined in section twenty-eight
hundred one of the public health law, diagnostic center and treatment center as
defined in section 751.1 of part seven hundred fifty one of title ten of the
New York codes, rules and regulations and residential health care facilities as
defined in section twenty-eight hundred one of the public health law.
   nn.   "Hospital grounds" means the outdoor grounds contained within a
hospital's legally defined property boundaries.
   oo.   "Park or other property under the jurisdiction of the department of
parks and recreation" means public parks, beaches, waters and land under water,
pools, boardwalks, marinas, playgrounds, recreation centers and all other
property, equipment, buildings and facilities now or hereafter under the
jurisdiction, charge or control of the department of parks and recreation.
   pp.   "Pedestrian plaza" means an area designated by the department of
transportation for use as a plaza located within the bed of a roadway, which
may contain benches, tables or other facilities for pedestrian use.
   qq.   "Electronic cigarette" means a battery-operated device that heats a
liquid, gel, herb, or other substance and delivers vapor for inhalation.
Electronic cigarette shall include any refill, cartridge, and any other
component of an electronic cigarette.
   rr.   "Retail electronic cigarette store" means a retail store devoted
primarily to the sale of electronic cigarettes, and in which the sale of other
products is merely incidental. The sale of such other products shall be
considered incidental if such sales generate less than fifty percent of the
total annual gross sales.
   ss.   "Smokeless tobacco" means any tobacco product that is intended for any
oral or nasal use other than smoking. Examples of smokeless tobacco include but
are not limited to snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, dissolvable tobacco
products and snus.
   tt.   "Class A multiple dwelling" means a class A multiple dwelling as such
term is defined in paragraph eight of subdivision a of section
27-2004.
   uu.   "Smoking policy" means a written declaration that states in a clear
and conspicuous fashion where smoking is permitted or prohibited on the
premises of a class A multiple dwelling.
   vv.   "Owner of a class A multiple dwelling" means the following:
      (i)   In the case of a building with one or more rental dwelling units,
other than rental dwelling units in a condominium or a cooperative apartment
corporation, the owner of record.
      (ii)   In the case of a condominium, including a rental dwelling unit in
a condominium, the board of managers.
      (iii)   In the case of a cooperative apartment corporation, including a
rental dwelling unit in a cooperative apartment corporation, the board of
directors.
   ww.   "Condominium unit owner" means the person or persons owning a dwelling
unit in a condominium building.
   xx.   "Tenant" means a tenant, tenant-shareholder of a cooperative apartment
corporation, condominium unit owner, subtenant, lessee, sublessee or other
person entitled to the possession or to the use or occupancy of a dwelling
unit, when the term "tenant" is used in reference to a dwelling unit in a class
A multiple dwelling.
   yy.   "Tenant-shareholder" means the person who owns stock of a cooperative
apartment corporation.
   zz.   "Non-tobacco smoking product" means any product that does not contain
tobacco or nicotine and that is designed for human use or consumption by the
inhalation of smoke, including but not limited to (i) pipes, water pipes,
rolling papers, and any other component, part, or accessory of such product and
(ii) shisha, as defined in subdivision z of section
17-702, provided that such shisha does not contain tobacco or nicotine.
   aaa.   "Non-tobacco hookah establishment" means an establishment that, as of
the date of enactment of the local law that added this subdivision, generated
fifty percent or more of its total annual gross sales during the preceding
calendar year from the on-site sale of non-tobacco smoking products, and that
has a permit issued by the department pursuant to section
17-513.5.
(Am. L.L. 2016/042, 4/6/2016, eff. 4/6/2016; Am. L.L. 2017/141, 8/28/2017, eff.
2/24/2018; Am. L.L. 2017/144, 8/28/2017, eff. 1/25/2018; Am. L.L. 2017/147, 8/
28/2017, eff. 8/28/2018; Am. L.L. 2017/187, 10/16/2017, eff. 4/14/2018; Am.
L.L. 2017/214, 11/27/2017, eff. 3/27/2018; Am. 2019 N.Y. Laws Ch. 672, 12/16/
2019, eff. 12/16/2019)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1988/002,
L.L. 1995/005,
L.L. 1995/030,
L.L. 2002/047,
L.L. 2013/152,
L.L. 2017/144, and
L.L. 2017/187.
§ 17-503 Prohibition of smoking and use of electronic cigarettes.
   a.   Smoking, and using electronic cigarettes, are prohibited in all
enclosed areas within public places except as otherwise restricted in
accordance with the provisions below. Such public places include, but are not
limited to, the following:
      1.   Public transportation facilities, including, but not limited to,
ticketing, boarding and waiting areas of public transit depots.
      2.   Public means of mass transportation, including, but not limited to,
subway cars and all underground areas of a subway station, buses, vans,
taxicabs and all for-hire vehicles, including but not limited to limousines,
required to be licensed or franchised by the city of New York.
      3.   Public restrooms.
      4.   Retail stores (other than retail tobacco stores).
      5.   Restaurants.
      6.   Business establishments (other than retail tobacco stores)
including, but not limited to, banks and other financial institutions, catering
halls, offices where trade or vocational activity occurs or professional or
consumer services are rendered and non-profit entities, including religious
institutions; provided however, that this paragraph shall not apply to
membership associations, and provided further, however, that this paragraph
shall not apply to the smoking of non-tobacco smoking products in non-tobacco
hookah establishments.
      7.   Libraries, museums and galleries.
      8.   Motion picture theaters, concert halls, buildings or areas or rooms
in buildings primarily used for or designed for the primary purpose of
exhibiting movies or presenting performances, including, but not limited to,
stage, musical recital, dance, lecture or other similar performances, except
that smoking, and using electronic cigarettes, may be part of a theatrical
production.
      9.   Auditoriums.
      10.   Convention halls.
      11.   Sports arenas and recreational areas.
      12.   Gymnasiums, health clubs and enclosed areas containing a swimming
pool.
      13.   Places of meeting or public assembly during such time as a meeting
open to the public is being conducted for educational, religious, recreational,
or political purposes, but not including meetings conducted in private
residences, unless such meetings are conducted in an area in a private
residence where a child day care center or health care facility is operated
during the times of operation or in an area which constitutes a common area of
a multiple dwelling.
      14.   Health care facilities including, but not limited to, hospitals,
clinics, psychiatric facilities, residential health care facilities, physical
therapy facilities, convalescent homes, and homes for the aged; provided
however, that this paragraph shall not prohibit smoking, or the use of
electronic cigarettes, by patients in separate enclosed rooms of residential
health care facilities or facilities where day treatment programs are provided,
which are designated as smoking rooms for patients of such facilities or
programs, provided, however, that prior written approval is received from the
fire commissioner pursuant to section 310.2 of the fire code.
      15.   All schools other than public and private pre-primary, primary, and
secondary schools providing instruction for students at or below the twelfth-
grade level, including, but not limited to, community colleges, technical
training establishments, specialty schools, colleges and universities.
      16.   Children's institutions.
      17.   Zoos.
      18.   Elevators.
      19.   Public areas where bingo is played.
      20.   Bars; provided however, that smoking shall be permitted in tobacco
bars.
      21.   Tobacco businesses, except that smoking shall be permitted in areas
within a tobacco business designated by such business for the purpose of
testing or development of tobacco or tobacco products; provided, however, that
such areas must all be located on no more than two floors of the building where
such business is located.
      22.   Membership associations; provided however, that smoking shall only
be allowed in membership associations in which all of the duties with respect
to the operation of such association, including, but not limited to, the
preparation of food and beverages, the service of food and beverages, reception
and secretarial work, and the security services of the membership association
are performed by members of such membership association who do not receive
compensation of any kind from the membership association or any other entity
for the performance of such duties.
   b.   Smoking, and using electronic cigarettes, are prohibited on any service
line, waiting area, or portion thereof, whether located indoor or outdoor
during the times in which the public is invited or permitted, notwithstanding
the fact that the service line, waiting area, or portion thereof, is in an area
otherwise designated for smoking, or using electronic cigarettes, pursuant to
subdivision a of this section; provided, however, that this subdivision shall
not be construed to prohibit smoking, or using electronic cigarettes, in any
area where smoking, or using electronic cigarettes, is permitted pursuant to
section
17-505.
   c.   Smoking, and using electronic cigarettes, are prohibited in the
following outdoor areas of public places, except as otherwise restricted in
accordance with the provisions below:
      1.   Outdoor dining areas of restaurants including but not limited to any
area operated by a restaurant as a sidewalk cafe, or a roadway cafe, as those
terms are defined in section
19-101.
      2.   Outdoor seating or viewing areas of open-air motion picture
presentations or open-air concert, stage, dance, lecture or recital
presentations or performances or other similar open-air presentations or
performances, when seating or standing room is assigned by issuance of tickets.
      3.   Outdoor seating or viewing areas of sports arenas and recreational
areas, when seating or standing room is assigned by issuance of tickets.
      4.   Outdoor areas of all children's institutions.
      5.   Playgrounds.
      6.   Hospital grounds, within fifteen feet of any hospital entrance or
exit and within fifteen feet of the entrance to or exit from any hospital
grounds.
      7.   Pedestrian plazas.
   d.   Smoking, and using electronic cigarettes, are prohibited in all indoor
and outdoor areas of the following public places at all times:
      1.   All public and private pre-primary, primary, and secondary schools
providing instruction for students at or below the twelfth-grade level, and any
vehicles owned, operated or leased by such schools which are used to transport
such students or the personnel of such schools.
      2.   All child day care centers; provided, however, that with respect to
child day care centers operated in private residences, this paragraph shall
apply only to those areas of such private residences where the child day care
centers are operated during the times of operation or during the time employees
are working in such child day care centers.
      3.   Any park or other property under the jurisdiction of the department
of parks and recreation; provided, however, that this paragraph shall not apply
to: (a) the sidewalks immediately adjoining parks, squares and public places;
(b) any pedestrian route through any park strip, median or mall that is
adjacent to vehicular traffic; (c) parking lots; and (d) theatrical
productions.
(Am. L.L. 2017/141, 8/28/2017, eff. 2/24/2018; Am. L.L. 2017/187, 10/16/2017,
eff. 4/14/2018; Am. L.L. 2023/121, 8/16/2023, retro. eff. 6/20/2023)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1988/002,
L.L. 1992/083,
L.L. 1995/005,
L.L. 2002/047,
L.L. 2013/152,
L.L. 2017/187, and
L.L. 2023/121.
§ 17-503.1 Prohibition of using smokeless tobacco at sports arenas and
recreational areas that issue tickets.
   Using smokeless tobacco is prohibited at all times at sports arenas and
recreational areas if seating or standing room is assigned by issuance of
tickets for any event held at such arenas and areas.
(L.L. 2016/042, 4/6/2016, eff. 4/6/2016)
§ 17-504 Regulation of smoking, and use of electronic cigarettes, in places of
employment.
   a.   Smoking, and using electronic cigarettes, are prohibited in those
indoor areas of places of employment to which the general public does not
generally have access. This section shall not prohibit smoking, or using
electronic cigarettes, in any area where smoking, or using electronic
cigarettes, is not regulated pursuant to section
17-505.
   b.   [Repealed.]
   c.   Smoking, and using electronic cigarettes, are prohibited in company
vehicles occupied by more than one person. Smoking, and using electronic
cigarettes, are prohibited in all vehicles owned by the city of New York.
   d.   No employer shall take any retaliatory adverse personnel action against
any employee or applicant for employment on the basis of such person's
exercise, or attempt to exercise, his or her rights under this chapter with
respect to the place of employment. Such adverse personnel action includes, but
is not limited to, dismissal, demotion, suspension, disciplinary action,
negative performance evaluation, any action resulting in loss of staff,
compensation or other benefit, failure to hire, failure to appoint, failure to
promote, or transfer or assignment or failure to transfer or assign against the
wishes of the affected employee. The employer shall establish a procedure to
provide for the adequate redress of any such adverse personnel action taken
against an employee in retaliation for that employee's attempt to exercise his
or her rights under this chapter with respect to the place of employment.
   e.   By November 1, 1995, every employer subject to the provisions of this
chapter shall adopt, implement, make known, maintain and update to reflect any
changes, a written smoking and electronic cigarette use policy which shall
contain at minimum, the following requirements:
      1.   The prohibition of smoking, and using electronic cigarettes, except
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and any rules promulgated
pursuant thereto, and a description of the smoking restrictions and
restrictions on the use of electronic cigarettes adopted or implemented.
      2.   As set forth in subdivision d of this section, the (A) protection
from retaliatory adverse personnel action with respect to all employees or
applicants for employment who exercise, or attempt to exercise, any rights
granted under such subdivision; and (B) the establishment of a procedure to
provide for the adequate redress of any such adverse personnel action taken
against an employee in retaliation for that employee's attempt to exercise his
or her rights under this chapter with respect to the place of employment.
   f.   Employers shall prominently post the smoking and electronic cigarette
use policy in the workplace, and shall, within three weeks of its adoption and
any modification, disseminate the policy to all employees, and to new employees
when hired.
   g.   Employers shall supply a written copy of the smoking and electronic
cigarette use policy upon request to any employee or prospective employee.
   h.   A copy of the smoking and electronic cigarette use policy shall be
provided to the department, the department of buildings, the department of
consumer and worker protection, the department of environmental protection, the
fire department and the department of sanitation upon request.
   i.   This section shall not be construed to permit smoking, and using
electronic cigarettes, in any area in which smoking, and using electronic
cigarettes, are prohibited or restricted pursuant to section
17-503. Where a place of employment is also a public place where smoking, and
using electronic cigarettes, are prohibited or restricted pursuant to section
17-503, and is not exempt from regulation under section
17-505, smoking, and using electronic cigarettes, shall be prohibited.
   j.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair, diminish, or
otherwise affect any collectively bargained procedure or remedy available to an
employee, existing as of February 1, 1995, with respect to disputes arising
under the employer's smoking policy or with respect to the establishment of a
procedure for redress of any adverse personnel action taken against an employee
in retaliation for that employee's attempt to exercise his or her rights under
this chapter with respect to the place of employment. Upon expiration of any
such collectively bargained procedure or remedy, the provisions of this section
shall take effect.
(Am. L.L. 2020/080, 8/28/2020, eff. 8/28/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1988/002,
L.L. 1995/005,
L.L. 2002/047,
L.L. 2013/152, and
L.L. 2020/080.
§ 17-505 Areas where smoking, and using electronic cigarettes, are not
regulated by this chapter.
   The following areas shall not be subject to the smoking and electronic
cigarette restrictions of this chapter; provided however, that nothing in this
section shall be construed to permit smoking, or using electronic cigarettes,
where smoking, and using electronic cigarettes, are otherwise prohibited or
restricted by any other law or rule:
   a.   [Repealed.]
   b.   Private residences, except any area of a private residence where a
child day care center or health care facility is operated (i) during the times
of operation or (ii) during the times when employees are working in such child
day care center or health care facility areas; provided, however, that a common
area of a multiple dwelling shall be subject to smoking and electronic
cigarette use restrictions.
   c.   Hotel and motel rooms occupied by, or available for, occupancy by
guests.
   d.   [Reserved.]
   e.   [Reserved.]
   f.   Private automobiles.
   g.   Retail tobacco stores.
   h.   Enclosed rooms in restaurants, bars, catering halls, convention halls,
hotel and motel conference rooms, and other such similar facilities during the
time these enclosed areas or rooms are being used exclusively for functions
where the public is invited for the primary purpose of promoting and sampling
tobacco products or electronic cigarettes, and the service of food and drink is
incidental to such purpose, provided that the operator of such function shall
have provided notice to the department of health and mental hygiene in a form
satisfactory to such department at least two weeks before such a function
begins, and such notice has identified the dates on which such function shall
occur. No such facility may permit smoking, or using electronic cigarettes,
under this subdivision for more than five days in any calendar year.
   i.   Retail electronic cigarette stores; provided however, that such stores
may only permit the use of electronic cigarettes.
(Am. L.L. 2017/141, 8/28/2017, eff. 2/24/2018)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1988/002,
L.L. 1995/005,
L.L. 2002/047, and
L.L. 2013/152.
§ 17-506 Posting of signs; prohibition of ashtrays.
   a.   Except as may otherwise be provided by rules promulgated by the
commissioner, "Smoking" or "No Smoking" signs or the international symbols
indicating the same, "Electronic Cigarette Use Permitted" or "Electronic
Cigarette Use Prohibited" signs, "No Tobacco Use Permitted" or "Use of Tobacco
Products Prohibited" signs, or any other signs necessary to comply with the
provisions of this chapter, as applicable, shall be prominently and
conspicuously posted where smoking, using electronic cigarettes, or using
smokeless tobacco is either prohibited, permitted or otherwise regulated by
this chapter, by the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of
such area. The size, style and location of such signs shall be determined in
accordance with rules promulgated by the commissioner, but in promulgating such
rules, the commissioner shall take into consideration the concerns of the
various types of establishments regulated herein with respect to the style and
design of such signs.
   b.   In addition to the posting of signs as provided in subdivision a, every
owner, manager or operator of a theatre which exhibits motion pictures to the
public shall show upon the screen for at least five seconds prior to the
showing of each feature motion picture, information indicating that smoking,
and using electronic cigarettes, are prohibited within the premises.
   c.   The owner, operator or manager of a hotel or motel that chooses to
develop and implement a smoking and electronic cigarette use policy for rooms
rented to guests shall post a notice at the reception area of the establishment
as to the availability, upon request, of smoke-free and electronic cigarette-
free rooms.
   d.   Ashtrays are prohibited in all smoke-free areas covered by this chapter
except (i) ashtrays offered for sale or (ii) ashtrays placed immediately
adjacent to hotel and motel elevators and immediately adjacent to public
entrances to hotels and motels, provided that such ashtrays are positioned so
that second-hand smoke emanating from such ashtrays will not ordinarily
activate smoke detectors and provided further that "No Smoking" signs as set
forth in subdivision a of this section and in any rules promulgated by the
commissioner shall be posted immediately adjacent to such ashtrays.
   e.   A non-tobacco hookah establishment shall prominently and conspicuously
display at its entrance, and in any room or area where non-tobacco smoking
products are smoked, a sign warning of the health risks associated with smoking
non-tobacco smoking products. The size, style, and content of such signs shall
be determined in accordance with rules promulgated by the commissioner.
(Am. L.L. 2016/042, 4/6/2016, eff. 8/4/2016; Am. L.L. 2017/190, 10/16/2017,
eff. 4/14/2018)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1988/002,
L.L. 1995/005,
L.L. 2002/047,
L.L. 2013/152, and
L.L. 2017/190.
§ 17-506.1 Obligation of owners of class A multiple dwellings to adopt and
disclose a smoking policy.
   a.   Adoption of smoking policy.
      1.   The owner of a class A multiple dwelling shall adopt a smoking
policy.
      2.   The smoking policy shall address all indoor locations of the class A
multiple dwelling, including common areas and dwelling units, and all outdoor
areas of the premises, including common courtyards, rooftops, balconies, and
patios, and any outdoor areas connected to dwelling units.
      3.   The smoking policy shall apply to tenants, including invitees of
tenants, and any other person on the premises.
      4.   The smoking policy or any material changes thereto shall not be
binding on a tenant renting or leasing a dwelling unit during the term of the
lease, sublease, or other rental agreement in effect at the time of the
adoption of such smoking policy or of any material changes thereto, unless
otherwise provided in such lease, sublease, or other rental agreement.
      5.   The smoking policy or any material changes thereto shall not be
binding on any tenant in occupancy of a rent controlled or rent stabilized
dwelling unit prior to the adoption of the initial smoking policy required by
this section or on any family member who succeeds to the rights of such tenant,
as required by subdivision 4 of section 14 of the public housing law.
   b.   Disclosure of smoking policy.
      1.   Upon adoption of a smoking policy, the owner of a class A multiple
dwelling shall provide a copy of the building's smoking policy to all tenants
or post, in a prominent location within such dwelling, a copy of the building's
smoking policy.
      2.   Except as provided in paragraph 3 of this subdivision, the owner of
a class A multiple dwelling shall incorporate the building's smoking policy
into any agreement to rent or lease a dwelling unit in such building.
      3.   In a condominium or cooperative apartment corporation, the
condominium unit owner or tenant-shareholder of a cooperative apartment
corporation shall incorporate the building's smoking policy into any agreement
to rent or purchase the dwelling unit or shares in the cooperative apartment
corporation.
      4.   In a condominium, the board of managers shall incorporate the
building's smoking policy into the condominium bylaws or rules.
      5.   In a cooperative apartment corporation, the board of directors shall
incorporate the building's smoking policy into the bylaws or rules of the
cooperative apartment corporation.
      6.   A tenant who is renting or leasing a dwelling unit shall incorporate
the building's smoking policy into any agreement to rent or lease the dwelling
unit to a subtenant or sublessee.
      7.   Annual disclosure of the smoking policy. On an annual basis, the
owner of a class A multiple dwelling shall provide a copy of the building's
smoking policy to all tenants or post, in a prominent location within such
dwelling, a copy of the building's smoking policy.
   c.   Notification of a material change to smoking policy. The owner of a
class A multiple dwelling shall provide notification in writing to all tenants
of any material change to the smoking policy or post, in a prominent location
within such dwelling, any material change to the smoking policy.
   d.   Document retention. The owner of a class A multiple dwelling shall make
available for inspection by the department copies of the following:
      1.   the disclosure required by paragraph 1 of subdivision b of this
section, or the annual disclosure required by paragraph 7 of subdivision b of
this section, for the current year; and
      2.   each notification of a material change made within the past year
pursuant to subdivision c of this section.
(L.L. 2017/147, 8/28/2017, eff. 8/28/2018)
§ 17-507 Enforcement.
   a.   The department shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. In
addition, designated enforcement employees of the department of buildings, the
department of consumer and worker protection, the department of environmental
protection, the fire department and the department of sanitation shall have the
power to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   b.   Any person who desires to register a complaint under this chapter may
do so with the department.
   c.   With respect to a public place or place of employment, the operator or
employer shall inform, or shall designate an agent who shall be responsible for
informing, individuals smoking, using electronic cigarettes, or using smokeless
tobacco in restricted areas that they are in violation of this local law;
provided, however, that the obligations under this subdivision with respect to
an operator of a multiple dwelling shall be limited to (i) those multiple
dwellings where an agent is on duty and (ii) designating such agent to be
responsible for informing individuals smoking, or using electronic cigarettes,
in restricted common indoor areas where such agent is on duty, during the times
such agent is on duty, that such individuals are in violation of this local
law.
   d.   Where an owner or building manager of a public place where smoking, and
using electronic cigarettes, are prohibited or restricted pursuant to section
17-503 is not the operator of such public place but has an agent on duty in
such place, the owner or building manager shall designate such agent to inform
individuals smoking, or using electronic cigarettes, in restricted common
indoor areas (i) where such agent is on duty and (ii) during the times when
such agent is on duty, that such individuals are in violation of this local
law.
   d-1.   Where an owner or building manager of a sports arena or recreational
area where using smokeless tobacco is prohibited pursuant to section
17-503.1 is not the operator of such arena or area but has an agent on duty in
such arena or area, the owner or building manager shall designate such agent to
inform individuals using smokeless tobacco (i) where such agent is on duty and
(ii) during the times when such agent is on duty, that such individuals are in
violation of this local law.
   e.   Where an owner or building manager of a building in which a place of
employment is located where smoking, and using electronic cigarettes, are
prohibited or restricted pursuant to section
17-504 is not the operator or employer of such place of employment but has an
agent on duty in such place, the owner or building manager shall designate such
agent to inform individuals smoking, or using electronic cigarettes, in
restricted common indoor areas (i) where such agent is on duty and (ii) during
the times when such agent is on duty, that such individuals are in violation of
this local law. Such owner or building manager shall also mail a notice to
tenants operating such place of employment, informing such tenants of their
obligations under this chapter with respect to such restricted common indoor
areas. A copy of the mailed notice shall be provided to the department upon
request.
   f.   The department shall seek to obtain voluntary compliance with this
chapter by means of publicity and education programs, and the issuance of
warnings, where appropriate.
   g.   The department of parks and recreation shall have the power to enforce
section
17-503 as it relates to property under its jurisdiction.
(Am. L.L. 2016/042, 4/6/2016, eff. 4/6/2016; Am. L.L. 2017/141, 8/28/2017, eff.
2/24/2018; Am. L.L. 2020/080, 8/28/2020, eff. 8/28/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1988/002,
L.L. 1995/005,
L.L. 2013/152, and
L.L. 2020/080.
§ 17-508 Violations and penalties.
   a.   It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or
otherwise controls the use of premises in which smoking, using electronic
cigarettes, or using smokeless tobacco is prohibited or restricted pursuant to
this chapter, or the designated agent thereof, to (i) provide a room designated
for smoking, or using electronic cigarettes, including, but not limited to, a
separate smoking room, room for using electronic cigarettes or an enclosed
room, which fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter; provided,
however, that the obligations of an owner or building manager of a building
(where such owner or building manager of a building in which a public place is
located is not the operator or employer of such public place) with respect to
such a room shall be limited to work authorized by any permits necessary to
perform construction obtained by the owner or his or her agent; (ii) fail to
post the signs required by section
17-506; (iii) fail to remove ashtrays as required by subdivision d of section
17-506; or (iv) fail to make a good faith effort to comply with subdivisions c,
d, d-1, and e of section
17-507. In actions brought for violations of this subdivision, the following
shall be affirmative defenses: (i) that during the relevant time period actual
control of the premises was not exercised by the respondent or a person under
the control of the respondent, but rather by a lessee, sublessee or any other
person; provided, however, that after receiving the notice of violation, the
respondent submits to the department within five business days, by certified
mail, a sworn affidavit and other such proof as may be necessary, indicating
that he or she has not exercised actual control during the relevant time
period; (ii) that a person smoking, using an electronic cigarette, or using
smokeless tobacco in any area where such activity is prohibited pursuant to
section
17-503 or section
17-503.1 was informed by a person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise
controls the use of such premises, or the designated agent thereof, that such
person smoking, using an electronic cigarette, or using smokeless tobacco is in
violation of this local law and that such person who owns, manages, operates or
otherwise controls the use of such premises has complied with all applicable
provisions of this chapter during the relevant time period; provided, however,
that after receiving notice of violation, the respondent submits to the
department within five business days, by certified mail, a sworn affidavit and
other such proof as may be necessary, indicating that respondent informed the
person smoking, using an electronic cigarette, or using smokeless tobacco in
any area where such activity is prohibited pursuant to section
17-503 or section
17-503.1 that such person was in violation of this local law and that
respondent has complied with all applicable provisions of this chapter during
the relevant time period; or (iii) that a person smoking, or using an
electronic cigarette, in any restricted common indoor area where smoking, and
using electronic cigarettes, are prohibited pursuant to section
17-503 was not informed by the owner or building manager of the premises (where
such owner or building manager of a building in which a public place or a place
of employment is located is not the operator or employer of such public place
or place of employment) or by the operator of a multiple dwelling that such
person smoking, or using an electronic cigarette, is in violation of this local
law because such owner, building manager or operator did not have a designated
agent on duty when such person was smoking, or using an electronic cigarette,
and that such owner or building manager has, where applicable, complied with
the mailing of a notice required pursuant to subdivision e of section
17-507; provided, however, that after receiving notice of violation, the
respondent submits to the department within five business days, by certified
mail, a sworn affidavit and other such proof as may be necessary, indicating
that a person smoking, or using an electronic cigarette, in any restricted
common indoor area where smoking, and using electronic cigarettes, are
prohibited pursuant to section
17-503 was not informed by the respondent that such person smoking, or using an
electronic cigarette, is in violation of this local law because the respondent
did not have a designated agent on duty when such person was smoking, or using
an electronic cigarette, and that the respondent has, where applicable, mailed
the notice required pursuant to subdivision e of section
17-507.
   b.   It shall be unlawful for an employer whose place of employment is
subject to regulation under section
17-504 to fail to comply with the provisions of that section, including, but
not limited to, those provisions requiring the adoption, implementation,
dissemination and maintenance of a written smoking and electronic cigarette use
policy which conforms to the requirements of subdivision e of section
17-504, or to fail to make a good faith effort to comply with subdivision c of
section
17-507. In actions brought for violations of this subdivision, it shall be an
affirmative defense that the employer (i) has made good faith efforts to insure
that employees comply with the provisions of such written smoking and
electronic cigarette use policy and (ii) has complied with all applicable
provisions of this chapter.
   c.   [Repealed.]
   d.   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke, use an electronic
cigarette, or use smokeless tobacco in any area where such activity is
prohibited under section
17-503, section
17-503.1 or section
17-504.
   d-1.   It shall be unlawful for any owner of a class A multiple dwelling to
fail to:
      1.   adopt a smoking policy as required by subdivision a of section
17-506.1;
      2.   disclose such policy as required by subdivision b of such section;
      3.   provide notification of a material change to such policy as required
by subdivision c of such section; or
      4.   make available copies of such policy as required by subdivision d of
such section.
   d-2.   It shall be unlawful for any tenant-shareholder, condominium unit
owner, or tenant who rents or leases a dwelling unit to another person to fail
to disclose a smoking policy as required by paragraph 3 or 6 of subdivision b
of section
17-506.1.
   e.   1.   Every person who violates subdivisions a or b of this section
shall, for a first violation thereof, be liable for a civil penalty of not less
than two hundred dollars nor more than four hundred dollars; for a second
violation, both of which were committed within a period of twelve months, be
liable for a civil penalty of not less than five hundred dollars nor more than
one thousand dollars; and for a third or subsequent violation, all of which
were committed within a period of twelve months, be liable for a civil penalty
of not less than one thousand dollars nor more than two thousand dollars.
Notwithstanding any provision of law in this paragraph to the contrary, where a
person prohibits smoking and the use of electronic cigarettes in all indoor
places of employment pursuant to subdivision a of section
17-504, and such person is in compliance with subdivision a of section
17-506 of this chapter, a violation of subdivision b of this section by such
person for failure to comply with subdivision f of section
17-504 through failure to post a smoking and electronic cigarette use policy in
the workplace shall, for a first violation thereof, make such person liable for
a civil penalty of fifty dollars; for a second violation thereof, both of which
were committed within a period of twelve months, liable for a civil penalty of
one hundred dollars; and for a third or subsequent violation thereof, all of
which were committed within a period of twelve months, liable for a civil
penalty of one hundred fifty dollars.
      2.   Where a person prohibits smoking and the use of electronic
cigarettes in all indoor places of employment pursuant to subdivision a of
section
17-504, and such person is in compliance with subdivision a of section
17-506 of this chapter, such person shall not be subject to a civil penalty for
a violation of subdivision b of this section for failure to comply with
subdivision f of section
17-504 through failure to post a smoking and electronic cigarette use policy if
such person proves to the satisfaction of the department, within thirty days of
the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an
adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured. The
submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the
violation has been cured, shall be deemed an admission of liability for all
purposes. The option of presenting proof that the violation has been cured
shall be offered as part of any settlement offer made by the department to a
person who has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of
subdivision b of this section by failing to comply with subdivision f of
section
17-504 through failure to post a smoking and electronic cigarette use policy or
any rule or regulation issued thereunder. The department shall permit such
proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A person may seek review, in
the office of administrative trials and hearings, of the determination that the
person has not submitted proof of a cure within fifteen days of receiving
written notification of such determination.
      3.   Every person who violates subdivision d of this section shall be
liable for a civil penalty of one hundred dollars for each violation, except
that every person who violates subdivision d of this section by smoking, or
using an electronic cigarette, in a pedestrian plaza as prohibited by paragraph
seven of subdivision c of section
17-503 or in a park or other property under the jurisdiction of the department
of parks and recreation as prohibited by paragraph three of subdivision d of
section
17-503 shall be liable for a civil penalty of fifty dollars for each violation.
Every owner of a class A multiple dwelling who violates subdivision d-1 of this
section, and every tenant-shareholder, condominium unit owner and tenant who
violates subdivision d-2 of this section, shall be liable for a civil penalty
of one hundred dollars for each violation, provided that a violation of
paragraph two, three or four of subdivision d-1 shall be considered a single
violation regardless of whether such owner failed to disclose a smoking policy,
to provide notification of adoption of such policy or a material change to such
policy, or to make available copies of such policy to more than one person.
   f.   A proceeding to recover any civil penalty authorized pursuant to the
provisions of subdivision e of this section shall be commenced by the service
of a notice of violation which shall be returnable to the office of
administrative trials and hearings, acting pursuant to section 558 and
subdivision 2 of section 1048 of the charter, except that a proceeding to
recover a civil penalty authorized pursuant to subdivision e for violation of
subdivision d by smoking, or using an electronic cigarette, in a pedestrian
plaza or in a park or other property under the jurisdiction of the department
of parks and recreation, as prohibited by paragraph seven of subdivision c and
by paragraph three of subdivision d of section
17-503 respectively, shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation
which shall be returnable to the environmental control board. The office of
administrative trials and hearings, acting pursuant to section 558 and
subdivision 2 of section 1048 of the charter, or acting pursuant to section
1049-a of the charter, shall have the power to impose the civil penalties
prescribed by subdivision e of this section.
   g.   Whenever a notice of violation of subdivision a or b of this section is
served by a person with power to enforce the provisions of this chapter
pursuant to subdivision a of section
17-507, such notice shall, where applicable, include an order which requires
the respondent to correct the condition constituting the violation and to file
a certification with the department that the condition has been corrected. Such
order shall require that the condition be corrected within ten days from the
date that the order is issued and that certification of the correction of the
condition be filed with the department in a manner and form within such further
period of time to be determined in accordance with rules and regulations
promulgated by the commissioner.
   h.   If the administrative tribunal established by the board of health or
the environmental control board finds, upon good cause shown, that the
respondent cannot correct the violation specified in subdivision g of this
section, it may postpone the period for compliance with such order upon such
terms and conditions and for such period of time as shall be appropriate under
the circumstances.
   i.   In any proceeding before the office of administrative trials and
hearings, acting pursuant to subdivision g of this section, if such office
finds that the department or other agency issuing the notice of violation has
failed to prove the violation charged, it shall notify the department or other
agency issuing the notice of violation, and the order requiring the respondent
to correct the condition constituting the violation shall be deemed to be
revoked.
   j.   When the owner or operator of a bar has been found to be in violation
of subparagraph c of paragraph twenty of subdivision a of section
17-503 on two or more occasions on the basis of one or more employees being in
a separate smoking room at times not permitted under this chapter, the tribunal
shall revoke the right of such owner or operator to maintain a separate smoking
room in such bar.
   k.   The penalties provided by this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other provision of law or regulation thereunder.
   l.   When a person who has been issued a permit to operate a non-tobacco
hookah establishment has been found to have been in violation of subdivision a
of section
17-508 or subdivision 1 of section 1399-s of the public health law, the
commissioner shall revoke the permit issued to such person to operate such non-
tobacco hookah establishment.
   m.   A non-tobacco hookah establishment found to be in violation of
subdivision a of section
17-508 or subdivision 1 of section 1399-s of the public health law shall be
responsible for any expert costs relating to proving such violation. The
recovery of the costs authorized by this subdivision shall be in addition to
any other penalties imposed by this section or by any other provision of law.
(Am. L.L. 2016/042, 4/6/2016, eff. 4/6/2016; Am. L.L. 2017/141, 8/28/2017, eff.
2/24/2018; Am. L.L. 2017/147, 8/28/2017, eff. 8/28/2018; Am. L.L. 2017/187, 10/
16/2017, eff. 4/14/2018; Am. L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 1/14/2022)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1988/002,
L.L. 1995/005,
L.L. 2002/047,
L.L. 2013/152,
L.L. 2017/187, and
L.L. 2021/080.
§ 17-509 Waiver. [Repealed]
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1988/002,
L.L. 1995/005, and
L.L. 2002/047.
§ 17-510 Public education.
   The department shall engage in a continuing program to explain and clarify
the provisions and purposes of this chapter and shall provide assistance to
those persons who seek to comply, and to those who want to stop smoking, using
electronic cigarettes, or using smokeless tobacco.
(Am. L.L. 2016/042, 4/6/2016, eff. 4/6/2016)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1988/002 and
L.L. 2013/152.
§ 17-511 Governmental agency cooperation.
   The department shall seek to encourage state and federal governmental and
educational agencies having facilities within the city of New York, but not
subject to the provisions of this chapter, to establish local operating
procedures which substantially conform to the requirements of this chapter.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1988/002.
§ 17-512 General provisions.
   a.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to permit smoking, using
electronic cigarettes, or using smokeless tobacco where such activity is
otherwise prohibited by law or regulation.
   b.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit owners,
operators, managers, employers or other persons having control of any
establishment subject to this chapter from adopting a smoke-free, electronic
cigarette-free, or tobacco-free policy which completely prohibits smoking,
using electronic cigarettes, or using smokeless tobacco on the premises of such
establishment at all times.
   c.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require owners,
operators, managers, employers or other persons having control of any
establishment subject to this chapter to choose to construct a separate smoking
room, an enclosed room where smoking is permitted or a solid floor-to-ceiling
partition separating a restaurant bar from the indoor dining area of a
restaurant as the means of complying with this chapter.
   d.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to preclude owners,
operators, managers, employers or other persons having control of any
establishment covered by this act from prohibiting smoking, using electronic
cigarettes, or using smokeless tobacco in such establishment to a greater
extent than is provided by this chapter, in accordance with applicable law.
   e.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to allow owners, operators,
managers, employers or other persons having control of any establishment
covered by this act to be subject to any legal proceeding or action to enforce
this chapter in any court by any party, other than the city of New York or its
designated agencies, based on such owners', operators', managers', employers'
or other persons alleged manner or method of compliance with the provisions of
this chapter or his or her alleged failure to comply with the same.
(Am. L.L. 2016/042, 4/6/2016, eff. 4/6/2016)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1988/002,
L.L. 1995/005, and
L.L. 2013/152.
§ 17-513 Rules.
   a.   The commissioner shall promulgate rules in accordance with the
provisions contained in this chapter, and such other rules as may be necessary
for the purpose of implementing and carrying out the provisions of this
chapter.
   b.   The department of parks and recreation and the department of
transportation may promulgate rules as may be necessary for the purpose of
implementing and carrying out the provisions of this chapter.
In determining the advisability of requiring that certain protections from
second-hand smoke be provided in restaurant bars, the commissioners shall
consider any applicable standards or recommendations of the American Society of
Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers, any applicable standards
or recommendations of the United States environmental protection agency and the
occupational safety and health administration of the United States department
of labor with respect to indoor air quality relating to second-hand smoke, the
impact on public health of exposure to second-hand smoke and any other factors
which such commissioners deem appropriate. Such commissioner shall report to
the council by January 1, 1996 regarding the results of the study required
pursuant to this subdivision and any recommendations.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1988/002 and
L.L. 1995/005.
§ 17-513.1 Effective dates for membership associations, owner operated bars,
tobacco bars and non-tobacco hookah establishments.
   a.   Any entity who in good faith believes itself to be a membership
association shall have one hundred eighty days from the effective date of the
local law that added this section to apply to the department of health and
mental hygiene for registration as a membership association. During the period
of time from the effective date of the local law which added this section until
the expiration of one hundred eighty days, no provision of the local law that
added this section, except for the provisions of this section, shall apply to
such entity, but all provisions of local law 5 for the year 1995 shall continue
to apply to such entity.
   b.   Any entity who in good faith believes itself to be an owner operated
bar shall have one hundred eighty days from the effective date of the local law
that added this section to apply to the department of health and mental hygiene
for registration as an owner operated bar. During the period of time from the
effective date of the local law which added this section until the expiration
of one hundred eighty days, no provision of the local law that added this
section, except for the provisions of this section, shall apply to such entity,
but all provisions of local law 5 for the year 1995 shall continue to apply to
such entity.
   c.   Any entity who in good faith believes itself to be a tobacco bar shall
have one hundred eighty days from the effective date of the local law that
added this section to apply to the department of health and mental hygiene for
registration as a tobacco bar. During the period of time from the effective
date of the local law which added this section until the expiration of one
hundred eighty days, no provision of the local law that added this section,
except for the provisions of this section, shall apply to such entity, but all
provisions of local law 5 for the year 1995 shall continue to apply to such
entity.
   d.   Any entity that in good faith believes itself to be a non-tobacco
hookah establishment shall have 180 days from the effective date of the local
law that added this subdivision to apply to the department for a permit as a
non-tobacco hookah establishment. No permit application shall be approved by
the department for any entity that fails to meet any requirement for a permit
contained in subdivision g of section
17-513.5. During the period of time from the effective date of the local law
that added this subdivision until the expiration of 180 days, no provision of
the local law that added this subdivision, except for the provisions of this
section, shall apply to such entity.
(Am. L.L. 2017/187, 10/16/2017, eff. 4/14/2018)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2002/047 and
L.L. 2017/187.
§ 17-513.2 Construction.
   a.   The provisions of this chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to
permit smoking, using electronic cigarettes, or using smokeless tobacco where
such activity is prohibited or otherwise restricted by other applicable laws,
rules or regulations.
   b.   Class A multiple dwelling smoking policy requirement. The civil penalty
provided in paragraph 3 of subdivision e of section
17-508 shall be the sole remedy for violation of subdivision d-1 or d-2 of such
section.
(Am. L.L. 2016/042, 4/6/2016, eff. 4/6/2016; Am. L.L. 2017/147, 8/28/2017, eff.
8/28/2018; Am. L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 1/14/2022)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2002/047,
L.L. 2013/152, and
L.L. 2021/080.
§ 17-513.3 Retail tobacco store and retail electronic cigarette store
registration.
   It shall be unlawful for any individual to operate a retail tobacco store or
a retail electronic cigarette store without having registered with the
department in accordance with the rules of the department.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2013/152.
§ 17-513.4 Retail tobacco store and retail electronic cigarette store
verification.
   The department shall promulgate rules and regulations necessary to establish
a system for review and verification of total annual gross sales of retail
tobacco stores and retail electronic cigarette stores.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2013/152.
§ 17-513.5 Non-tobacco hookah establishments.
   a.   It shall be unlawful for a person to operate a non-tobacco hookah
establishment without a permit from the department.
   b.   A permit issued pursuant to this section shall be valid for one year.
   c.   A permit issued pursuant to this section is not assignable or
transferrable.
   d.   Where any person becomes the beneficial owner of 10 percent or more of
the stock of an organization to which a permit has been granted pursuant to
this section, if such person previously did not hold at least a 10 percent
interest, such permit shall immediately become void.
   e.   Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall immediately become
void upon the addition or termination of any general partner or upon the
dissolution of a partnership that owns a non-tobacco hookah establishment.
   f.   The department may charge a fee of $25 for a permit issued pursuant to
this section.
   g.   To obtain and renew a permit issued pursuant to this section for a non-
tobacco hookah establishment, a person shall demonstrate that:
      1.   such non-tobacco hookah establishment generated 50 percent or more
of its total annual gross sales during the preceding calendar year from the on-
site sale of non-tobacco smoking products;
      2.   such non-tobacco hookah establishment has been operating as a non-
tobacco hookah establishment since at least the date of enactment of the local
law that created this section, and has not expanded its size or changed its
location on or after the date of enactment of the local law that added this
section;
      3.   such non-tobacco hookah establishment has not been found to have
served shisha containing tobacco or nicotine, in violation of subdivision a of
section
17-508 or subdivision 1 of section 1399-s of the public health law, after the
effective date of the local law that added this section;
      4.   such non-tobacco hookah establishment does not owe a civil penalty
for a violation of any provision of this chapter or of
chapter 7 of title 17; and
      5.   the permit of such non-tobacco hookah establishment issued pursuant
to this section has not been revoked pursuant to subdivision l of section
17-508 or subdivision b of section
17-716.
(L.L. 2017/187, 10/16/2017, eff. 4/14/2018)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2017/187.
§ 17-514 Report.
   Not later than twelve months after the effective date of this local law, and
each year thereafter, the department shall submit a report to the mayor and the
council concerning the administration and enforcement of this local law.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1988/002 and
L.L. 1995/005.
Chapter 6: Drug Testing of School System Conveyance Drivers
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1989/104.
§ 17-601 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
   a.   "Driver" or "Bus driver" shall mean every person employed by a motor
carrier who drives and operates a bus or other motor vehicle to transport
school children and every person employed by a motor carrier who drives and
operates a mobile instructional unit pursuant to a contract between the motor
carrier and the board of education.
   b.   "Motor carrier" shall mean any person, corporation, or entity who
operates or employs others to operate buses or other motor vehicles to
transport school children and any person, corporation, or entity who operates
or employs others to operate mobile instructional units pursuant to a contract
with the board of education.
   c.   "The department" shall mean the New York city department of health and
mental hygiene.
   d.   "Board" or "Board of education" shall mean the New York city board of
education.
   e.   "Illegal drug" shall mean marijuana or concentrated cannabis, cocaine
and its derivatives, opiates, amphetamines, phencyclidine and any other drug
the board of education shall designate by rule pursuant to section
17-609 of this chapter.
   f.   "Drug test" shall mean a scientific procedure employing an initial
screening test and, where required by this chapter, a subsequent confirmatory
test on urine to detect the presence of illegal drugs.
   g.   "Sample" shall mean a portion of a urine specimen used for testing.
   h.   "Screening test" shall mean an immunoassay screen using a test at least
as reliable as the enzyme multiplied immunoassay test.
   i.   "Confirmatory test" shall mean a second analytical procedure performed
on a different sample of the same specimen that has tested positive on the
screening test.
   j.   "Pre-employment test" shall mean a drug test given to an applicant for
the position of driver.
   k.   "Random test" shall mean a drug test given annually to a predetermined
percentage of drivers who are selected on a scientifically defensible random
and unannounced basis.
   l.   "Post-accident test" shall mean a drug test administered to a driver
after a serious accident or series of accidents, as defined in section
17-607, has occurred during his or her operation of a bus or other motor
vehicle in the course of his or her employment.
   m.   "Return to duty test" shall mean a drug test given to a driver who
previously tested positive to a drug test and is returning to active duty, and
any additional, unannounced drug test administered for a period of up to sixty
months after a positive test result.
   n.   "Serious accident" shall mean an accident associated with the operation
of a bus or other motor vehicle used to transport school children in which an
individual dies or must be taken to a medical treatment facility, or in which
property damage is estimated to be more than two thousand five hundred dollars.
   o.   "Chain of custody procedures" shall mean procedures to account for the
integrity of each urine specimen by tracking its handling and storage from
point of specimen collection to final disposition of the specimen.
   p.   "Medical review officer" shall mean a licensed physician responsible
for receiving and interpreting laboratory results generated by a drug testing
program.
   q.   "Positive test result" shall mean that the drug test result shows
positive evidence that an illegal drug is present in a driver's system in a
level established by the board of education pursuant to section
17-609.
   r.   "Pass a drug test" shall mean that a medical review officer has
determined, pursuant to section
17-609 herein, that the results of a drug test administered under this chapter:
(1) showed no evidence or insufficient evidence of an illegal drug; (2) showed
evidence of an illegal drug but there was a legitimate medical explanation for
the result; (3) were scientifically insufficient to warrant further action; or
(4) were suspect because of irregularities in the administration of the test or
observation of chain of custody procedures.
   s.   "Active duty" shall mean the operation of a bus or other motor vehicle
used for the transportation of school children.
   t.   "School year" shall mean the period of time commencing September first
and ending on August thirty-first.
   u.   "Mobile instructional unit" shall mean a vehicle in which federally
mandated educational services are provided to eligible non-public school
children pursuant to title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of
1965, as amended.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1989/104.
§ 17-602 Drug testing of school system drivers.
Every motor carrier shall certify to the board of education that it requires
all drivers employed by such motor carrier to submit to pre-employment drug
testing, random drug testing, reasonable suspicion drug testing, post-accident
drug testing and return to duty drug testing, in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter and any rules promulgated pursuant hereto.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1989/104.
§ 17-603 Prior notice of testing policy.
At the beginning of each school year, every motor carrier shall give written
notice of its drug testing policy, as provided by the board of education
pursuant to section
17-609(d)(2) of this chapter, to all drivers employed by it. The written notice
shall contain the following information: the need for drug testing; the
procedure for confirming an initial positive drug test result; the right to
obtain an additional drug test on the same specimen at the driver's own
expense; the consequences pursuant to this chapter of not passing a drug test
or refusing to take a drug test; and the right to explain a positive test
result.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1989/104.
§ 17-604 Pre-employment testing.
For the purposes of this chapter, a motor carrier shall not hire or assign an
individual as a driver unless he or she passes a drug test in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1989/104.
§ 17-605 Random testing.
   a.   All drivers employed by a motor carrier subject to this chapter shall
be subject to drug testing on an unannounced and random basis.
   b.   During the school year commencing September 1, 1990 and ending August
31, 1991, every motor carrier shall administer a number of random drug tests
equal to twenty-five percent of all drivers employed during that year. For each
subsequent school year, every motor carrier shall administer a number of random
drug tests equal to fifty percent of all drivers employed by such motor carrier
during that year.
   c.   Each driver shall be in a pool from which random selection is made.
Each driver in the pool shall have an equal chance of selection and shall
remain in the pool after he or she has been tested.
   d.   A driver shall be selected for drug testing on a random basis by using
a scientifically valid random number generation method.
   e.   Testing shall be spread through the twelve-month period of the school
year.
   f.   The board of education shall select the dates and times that random
drug tests shall be administered and shall be responsible for the driver
selection process required by subdivision d of this section.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1989/104.
§ 17-606 Reasonable suspicion testing.
Nothing in this chapter shall preclude a motor carrier from administering a
drug test when the motor carrier has a reasonable suspicion that a driver is
using an illegal drug or when the chancellor of the board of education, or his
or her designee, has a reasonable suspicion that a driver is using an illegal
drug and requests that a driver take a drug test.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1989/104.
§ 17-607 Post-accident testing.
   a.   A drug test must be administered to any bus driver who, during the
course of his or her employment, (i) is involved in a serious accident while
operating a bus or other motor vehicle; or (ii) during any twelve month period,
is involved in three or more accidents while operating a bus or other motor
vehicle, regardless of the amount of property damage caused or injuries
sustained.
   b.   The specimen for a post-accident drug test required by this section
shall be collected as soon after the accident as is practicable, but not later
than thirty-two hours after the accident. In those cases involving testing
under paragraph (ii) of subdivision a of this section, the specimen shall be
collected in accordance with the requirements of this subdivision after the
third accident.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1989/104.
§ 17-608 Return to active duty testing.
A driver who has been removed from active duty pursuant to this chapter may not
resume active duty until he or she passes a drug test and the medical review
officer has determined the driver is fit to return to active duty. A driver who
is tested under this section may be administered one or more unannounced drug
tests for up to sixty months after returning to active duty.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1989/104.
§ 17-609 Drug testing procedures.
   a.   All drug tests administered pursuant to this chapter shall utilize
those reliable screening and confirmatory procedures set forth in rules
promulgated by the board of education which are at least as reliable as the
enzyme multiplied immunoassay screening test and the gas chromatography/mass
spectrometry confirmatory test.
   b.   If a sample yields a positive test result, another sample from the same
specimen shall be re-tested using a test at least as reliable as the gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry test. Such a confirmatory test shall use a
portion of the same test specimen collected from the employee for use in the
first test. If such confirmatory test yields a positive test result the driver
may, at his or her option and expense, have an additional test conducted on a
sample from the same specimen by any laboratory eligible to conduct drug
testing under this chapter within thirty days of the administration of the
original test.
   c.   (1)   All test results shall be interpreted and verified by a medical
review officer employed by the motor carrier. The medical review officer shall
be a licensed physician with knowledge of substance abuse disorders and
appropriate medical training to interpret and evaluate an individual's test
result together with his or her individual medical history and any other
relevant biomedical information.
      (2)   The medical review officer shall (i) receive the results of all
drug tests from the laboratory; (ii) verify that the laboratory report and
assessment of all drug test results are reliable and treat the results as
confidential until such verification is made; (iii) determine whether an
individual passes a drug test; (iv) promptly report all test results to the
driver in writing; (v) report each test that does not pass to the individual
whom the motor carrier has designated to receive the results and the chancellor
of the board of education or his or her designee; (vi) recommend to the motor
carrier whether a driver who refused to take or did not pass a drug test
administered under this chapter and who passes a subsequent return to active
duty test may return to active duty; and (vii) maintain records of all
recommendations to the motor carrier concerning removal from or return to
active duty and in cases where rehabilitation is not recommended after a
confirmed positive test result, the reasons for such recommendation shall be
submitted to the chancellor of the board of education or his or her designee.
      (3)   When reviewing positive results of a confirmatory test under this
section, the medical review officer may consider the individual's medical
history, including any medical records and biomedical information provided, in
determining whether there is a legitimate medical explanation for the result,
including the use of a legally prescribed medication.
      (4)   A driver may submit a list of any legally prescribed medication he
or she is using to the medical review officer prior to the administration of a
drug test.
   d.   (1)   The board of education, in consultation with the department of
health and mental hygiene, shall promulgate rules, which to the extent
practicable are consistent with the procedures established by the United States
department of transportation, to implement this chapter. Such rules shall
include initial cutoff levels to be used when screening urine specimens to
determine whether they test positive for illegal drugs, chain of custody
procedures to account for the integrity of each urine specimen by tracking its
handling and storage from point of specimen collection to final disposition,
specimen collection procedures, quality assurance and quality control programs,
procedures governing the reporting and review of test results and procedures to
safeguard the confidentiality of drivers.
      (2)   The board of education shall provide motor carriers with written
guidelines and procedures for the implementation of the drug testing program
pursuant to this chapter no later than the effective date of this local law.
   e.   Motor carriers subject to this chapter shall use only those
laboratories certified under the United States department of health and human
services mandatory guidelines for federal workplace drug testing programs or
approved by the New York state department of health, to execute the drug
testing program required by this chapter.
   f.   Laboratories employed by motor carriers to execute the drug testing
program pursuant to this chapter shall report drug test results to the medical
review officer in writing within five days after a drug test has been
administered. All drug test specimens shall be retained by such laboratories
for at least six months.
   g.   Two or more motor carriers may join together for the purpose of
employing a medical review officer and/or a laboratory to comply with the
requirements of this chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, each motor carrier
shall be individually responsible for complying with the provisions of this
chapter.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1989/104.
§ 17-610 Consequences of failure to pass a drug test; refusal to take a drug
test.
   a.   Any driver who does not pass a drug test administered pursuant to this
chapter shall immediately be removed from active duty. The medical review
officer may, where appropriate, recommend rehabilitation or other treatment
programs. No driver shall return to active duty unless he or she submits proof
of successful completion of a rehabilitation program or other recommended
treatment and passes a return to active duty drug test as required by section
17-608.
   b.   Any driver who does not pass a drug test shall receive within ten days
of the confirmatory test, together with written notification of his or her test
result, written notice of the right to undergo an additional drug test
performed on a sample of the same specimen, at his or her option and expense,
within thirty days after the administration of the original drug test.
   c.   Any driver who refuses to take a drug test shall immediately be removed
from active duty for a period of at least one year and shall not return to
active duty until passing a return to active duty drug test as required by
section
17-608.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1989/104.
§ 17-611 Recordkeeping and reporting.
   a.   Motor carriers shall designate an individual or individuals to serve as
drug testing program designees to ensure compliance with this chapter. The
designees shall be responsible for the implementation of the drug testing
program and maintaining all records related to the administration of drug
tests. Motor carriers shall retain records related to the collection process
and reports of individuals who have not passed a drug test for at least five
years and records of individuals who have passed a drug test for at least one
year.
   b.   The medical review officer shall maintain records of individuals who
have not passed a drug test for at least five years and the records of
individuals who have passed a drug test for at least one year.
   c.   A motor carrier shall permit the chancellor of the board of education
or his or her designee to examine all records relating to the administration
and results of the drug testing program established by such motor carrier
pursuant to this chapter.
   d.   A motor carrier shall promptly give written notice to the chancellor of
the board of education or his or her designee whenever a driver is removed from
active duty or returned to active duty pursuant to this chapter. Such written
notice shall include the driver's name and the date of removal from or return
to active duty.
   e.   A motor carrier shall submit semi-annual reports to the board of
education on April first and October first of each year summarizing the
following information for the periods from September first through March first
and March second through August thirty-first, respectively:
      (1)   The total number of drug tests administered;
      (2)   The number of drug tests administered and the dates of
administration in each testing category (i.e., pre-employment, post-accident,
reasonable suspicion, random, and return to duty);
      (3)   The number of post-accident drug tests administered and the dates
of administration in each accident category (i.e., fatal, personal injury,
property damage or three accidents);
      (4)   For post-accident tests, the number of hours between the accident
and the collection of a urine specimen;
      (5)   The total number of individuals who did not pass a drug test; (6)
The number of individuals who did not pass a drug test by testing category;
      (7)   The number of individuals who did not pass a post-accident drug
test by accident category;
      (8)   The action taken by the motor carrier with respect to each
individual who did not pass a drug test;
      (9)   The number of drug tests submitted to the laboratory that showed
evidence of one or more illegal drugs in the immunoassay screening test in a
sufficient quantity to warrant a confirmatory test;
      (10)   The total number of drug tests submitted to the laboratory that
showed evidence of one or more illegal drugs in the confirmatory test in a
sufficient quantity to be reported as positive to the medical review officer;
      (11)   The number of drug tests submitted to the laboratory that showed
evidence of one or more illegal drugs in the confirmatory test in a sufficient
quantity to be reported as positive by the medical review officer;
      (12)   Such other relevant information as the board of education shall
require.
   f.   The first semi-annual report required by this section shall be due on
April 1, 1991.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1989/104.
§ 17-612 Certification of compliance.
   a.   A motor carrier shall certify to the board that it has established a
drug testing program as required by the provisions of this chapter. Such
certification shall be submitted to the board of education no later than one
month after the effective date of this chapter, and annually thereafter.
   b.   The text of the certification required by this section shall be as
follows: I, [name], [title], certify that [name of motor carrier] has
established and implemented a drug-testing program in accordance with the terms
of chapter 6 of Title 17 of the administrative code of the city of New York.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1989/104.
§ 17-613 Termination of contracts.
The board of education may terminate the contract of any motor carrier that
does not comply with the provisions of this chapter.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1989/104.
§ 17-614 No abrogation of rights.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall limit any right of a motor carrier to
terminate or otherwise discipline any of its drivers who fail to pass a drug
test.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1989/104.
§ 17-615 Costs.
The costs associated with drug testing shall be borne by the motor carriers.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1989/104.
Chapter 7: Regulation of Tobacco Products
**** Subchapter 1: Tobacco Product Regulation Act ****
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1992/083.
§ 17-701 Short title.
This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Tobacco Product
Regulation Act."
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1992/083.
§ 17-702 Definitions.
For purposes of this subchapter, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
   a.   "Affiliated company" means any business entity which is the holder of a
right to place or display advertisements in or on a unit of advertising space
and which has a relationship with a holder of a right to place or display
advertisements in or on another unit of advertising space; such relationship
shall be an identity of all principal owners or all directors; provided,
however, that only entities which are holders of a right to place or display
advertisements on the same type of units of advertising space shall be
considered affiliated companies for purposes of this subchapter.
   b.   "Authorizing agency" means the agency or other unit of local government
of the city of New York which is (i) acting on behalf of the city with respect
to a written agreement between the city and a private party which allows the
placement or display of advertisements in or on a unit of advertising space;
(ii) any agency designated by the mayor as having responsibility for a unit of
advertising space that is the subject of a written agreement with the city
which allows the placement or display of advertisements in or on such unit; or
(iii) the issuer of a license or permit that expressly grants the right to
place or display advertisements in or on a unit of advertising space. In the
event that there is no authorizing agency as defined by this subdivision for a
unit of advertising space, the authorizing agency for such unit shall be the
agency with the primary expertise in the subject area covered by the written
agreement with the city which allows the placement or display of advertisements
in or on such unit.
   c.   [Repealed.]
   d.   "City of New York" or "city" means the city of New York or any of its
agencies or other unit of local government.
   e.   "Employee" means any person who provides services for the payment of
direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, or any person who volunteers his
or her services without monetary compensation.
   f.   "For-hire vehicle" means "for-hire vehicle" as defined in section
19-502 of the code.
   g.   "For-hire vehicle base" means a place of business from which for-hire
vehicles are dispatched.
   h.   "Instrumentality of public transportation" means buses operated
pursuant to a franchise or consent issued by or from the city of New York,
ferries and ferry terminals owned or operated by the city of New York, trams
and their appurtenances, bus stop shelters and licensed vehicles as defined in
section
19-502 of the code.
   i.   "Person" means any natural person, partnership, corporation, government
agency, association or other legal entity.
   j.   "Public health message" means words, pictures, photographs, symbols,
graphics or visual images of any kind, or any combination thereof, the primary
purpose of which is to communicate the health risks of tobacco product use or
the health benefits of not using tobacco products.
   k.   "Retail dealer" means "retail dealer" as defined in section
20-201, and any employee or other agent of such retail dealer.
   l.   "School premises" means the buildings, grounds or facilities, or any
portion thereof, owned or occupied by public or private institutions for the
primary purpose of providing educational instruction to students at or below
the twelfth grade level.
   m.   "Special event" means an event (i) for which a permit has been issued
by the city of New York; (ii) which has a duration of no longer than seven
days; and (iii) for which an agreement has been entered into with the city that
provides for the placement or display of signage intended to discourage the use
of tobacco products.
   n.   "Taxicab" means "taxicab" as defined in section
19-502 of the code.
   o.   "Taxicab fleet" means a corporate entity organized for the ownership or
operation of twenty-five or more taxicabs, which taxicabs are dispatched from a
single location serving as both garage and office of record, which location has
been approved by the taxi and limousine commission as adequate for the storage,
maintenance, repair and dispatch of the fleet taxicabs, and which location has
a dispatcher on the premises at least eighteen hours every day who is
responsible for assigning drivers to fleet taxicabs.
   p.   "Taxicab minifleet" means a corporation licensed by the taxi and
limousine commission to own and operate two or more taxicabs.
   q.   "Tobacco advertisement" means words, pictures, photographs, symbols,
graphics or visual images of any kind, or any combination thereof, which bear a
health warning required by federal statute, the purpose or effect of which is
to identify a brand of a tobacco product, a trademark of a tobacco product or a
trade name associated exclusively with a tobacco product, or to promote the use
or sale of a tobacco product.
   r.   "Tobacco product" means any product which contains tobacco that is
intended for human consumption, including any component, part, or accessory of
such product. Tobacco product shall include, but not be limited to, any cigar,
little cigar, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, roll-your-own tobacco, snus, bidi,
snuff, tobacco-containing shisha, or dissolvable tobacco product. Tobacco
product shall not include cigarettes, electronic cigarettes or e-liquid or any
product that has been approved by the United States food and drug
administration for sale as a tobacco use cessation product or for other medical
purposes and that is being marketed and sold solely for such purposes.
   s.   "Trademark" means any word, name, symbol, logo, emblem or device, or
any combination thereof, used by a person to identify and distinguish his or
her goods from those manufactured or sold by others and to indicate the source
of the goods, even if that source is unknown.
   t.   "Trade name" means any name used by a person to identify his or her
business or vocation
   u.   "Unit of advertising space" means any real property, space, facility or
instrumentality of public transportation, or any portion thereof, (i) owned or
operated by, or leased from or to the city, or which is located or operates on
real property owned or operated by or leased from or to the city, and which is
the subject of the same contract, lease, rental agreement, franchise, revocable
consent, concession or other similar written agreement with the city which
allows the placement or display of advertisements, but not including any real
property, space or facility leased from the city for a term of thirty years or
more during the entire term of the lease or any real property, space or
facility leased from or to the industrial development agency; or (ii) with
respect to which a license or permit has been issued by the city that expressly
grants the right to place or display advertisements, but not including licenses
or permits issued pursuant to the building code.
   v.   "Wholesale dealer" means "wholesale dealer" as defined in section
11-1301 of the code, and any employee or other agent of such wholesale dealer.
   w.   "Cigarette" means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of
tobacco or any other substance, irrespective of size or shape and whether or
not such tobacco or substance is flavored, adulterated or mixed with any other
ingredient, the wrapper or cover of which is made of paper or any other
substance or material but is not made in whole or in part of tobacco.
   x.   "Cigar" means any roll of tobacco for smoking that is wrapped in leaf
tobacco or in any substance containing tobacco, with or without a tip or
mouthpiece. Cigar does not include a little cigar as defined in this section.
   y.   "Little cigar" means any roll of tobacco for smoking that is wrapped in
leaf tobacco or in any substance containing tobacco and that weighs no more
than four pounds per thousand or has a cellulose acetate or other integrated
filter.
   z.   "Shisha" means any product made primarily of tobacco or other leaf, or
any combination thereof, smoked or intended to be smoked in a hookah or water
pipe.
   aa.   "Herbal cigarette" means a product that is meant to be smoked like a
cigarette but is composed of one or more herbs and does not contain tobacco.
   bb.   "Electronic cigarette" has the same meaning as such term is defined in
section
20-560.
   cc.   "Non-tobacco smoking product" means any product that does not contain
tobacco or nicotine and that is designed for human use or consumption by the
inhalation of smoke, including but not limited to (i) pipes, water pipes,
rolling papers, and any other component, part, or accessory of such product and
(ii) shisha, as defined in subdivision (z) of this section, provided that such
shisha does not contain tobacco or nicotine.
(Am. L.L. 2017/144, 8/28/2017, eff. 1/25/2018; Am. L.L. 2017/145, 8/28/2017,
eff. 6/1/2018; Am. L.L. 2017/146, 8/28/2017, eff. 2/24/2018; Am. L.L. 2017/191,
10/16/2017, eff. 4/14/2018; Am. L.L. 2019/228, 12/16/2019, eff. 7/1/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1992/083,
L.L. 2000/002,
L.L. 2013/094,
L.L. 2013/097,
L.L. 2017/144,
L.L. 2017/145,
L.L. 2017/146, and
L.L. 2019/228.
§ 17-703 License Required.
It shall be unlawful for a person to engage in any act as a wholesale dealer
without a license as prescribed in section
11-1303 of the code, or engage in any act as a retail dealer without a license
as prescribed in section
20-202 of the code.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2000/002 and
L.L. 2013/097.
§ 17-703.1 Sign required.
A retail dealer shall post a sign in a conspicuous place at the point of sale
of cigarettes or at the place where cigarettes are displayed or offered for
sale stating that cigarettes sold in the city of New York must be in packages
bearing valid tax stamps.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2013/097.
§ 17-703.2 Requirements for retail dealers concerning cigarette tax.
   a.   Any package containing cigarettes sold or offered for sale by a retail
dealer shall bear a valid tax stamp as required by section
11-1302 of the code. Except as provided in subdivision b of section
11-1305 of the code, any cigarettes possessed or transported in the city by a
retail dealer shall be in a package bearing a valid tax stamp.
   b.   No retail dealer shall engage in a sale or purchase prohibited by
subdivision e of section
11-1303 or section
20-205 of the code.
   c.   No retail dealer shall sell, offer for sale, possess or transport any
affixed or unaffixed false, altered or counterfeit cigarette tax stamp, imprint
or impression.
   d.   No retail dealer shall engage in any act to hide or conceal:
      (1)   any cigarettes in unstamped or unlawfully stamped packages;
      (2)   any affixed or unaffixed false, altered or counterfeit cigarette
tax stamp, imprint or impression; or
      (3)   any cigarettes that are outside of a package in violation of
subdivision a of this section.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2013/097.
§ 17-704 Minimum package sizes.
   a.   No retail dealer shall sell or offer for sale any cigarettes or tobacco
products unless such cigarettes or tobacco products are sold in the package,
box, carton or other container provided by the manufacturer, importer or
packager which bears any such health warning as may be required by federal
statute, rule or consent order.
   a-1.   No retail dealer shall sell or offer for sale cigarettes unless the
cigarettes are sold in a package of at least twenty cigarettes.
   b.   [Reserved.]
   c.   No retail dealer shall sell or offer for sale a little cigar unless the
little cigar is sold in a package of at least twenty little cigars.
   d.   No retail dealer shall sell or offer for sale snus unless it is sold in
a package of at least 0.32 ounces, and any other smokeless tobacco unless it is
sold in package of at least 1.2 ounces.
   e.   No retail dealer shall sell or offer for sale shisha or non-tobacco
shisha unless any such shisha is sold in a package of at least 3.5 ounces.
   f.   No retail dealer shall sell or offer for sale loose tobacco unless the
loose tobacco is sold in a package of at least 1.5 ounces.
(Am. L.L. 2017/145, 8/28/2017, eff. 6/1/2018)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2013/097 and
L.L. 2017/145.
§ 17-704.1 Prohibition on delivery.
   a.   No retail dealer shall deliver cigarettes or tobacco products by foot,
bicycle or any motor vehicle to any location outside its place of business.
   b.   No electronic cigarette retail dealer, as defined in section
20-560, shall deliver electronic cigarettes by foot, bicycle or any motor
vehicle to any location outside its place of business.
(L.L. 2017/145, 8/28/2017, eff. 6/1/2018)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2017/145.
§ 17-705 Age restriction on handling.
It shall be unlawful for a retail dealer to permit an employee or other agent
of the retail dealer to sell, dispense or otherwise handle cigarettes or a
tobacco product unless such employee or other agent is (1) at least eighteen
years of age; or (2) under the direct supervision of the retail dealer or an
employee or other agent of the retail dealer who is at least eighteen years of
age, and who is present on the premises.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1992/083 and
L.L. 2013/097.
§ 17-706 Sale of cigarettes, tobacco products, liquid nicotine, electronic
cigarettes, or non-tobacco smoking products to minors and young adults
prohibited.
   a.   Any person operating a place of business wherein cigarettes, tobacco
products, or liquid nicotine are sold or offered for sale is prohibited from
selling such cigarettes, tobacco products, or liquid nicotine to individuals
under twenty-one years of age. Sale of cigarettes, tobacco products, or liquid
nicotine in such places shall be made only to an individual who demonstrates,
through a driver's license or other photographic identification card issued by
a government entity or educational institution, that the individual is at least
twenty-one years of age. Such identification need not be required of any
individual who reasonably appears to be at least thirty years of age, provided,
however, that such appearance shall not constitute a defense in any proceeding
alleging the sale of cigarettes, tobacco products, or liquid nicotine to an
individual under twenty-one years of age.
   a-1.   Any person operating a place of business wherein electronic
cigarettes are sold or offered for sale is prohibited from selling such
electronic cigarettes to individuals under twenty-one years of age. Sales of
electronic cigarettes in such places shall be made only to an individual who
demonstrates, through a driver's license or other photographic identification
card issued by a government entity or educational institution, that the
individual is at least twenty-one years of age. Such identification need not be
required of any individual who reasonably appears to be at least thirty years
of age, provided, however, that such appearance shall not constitute a defense
in any proceeding alleging the sale of electronic cigarettes to an individual
under twenty-one years of age.
   b.   Any person operating a place of business wherein non-tobacco smoking
products are sold or offered for sale is prohibited from selling such non-
tobacco smoking products to individuals under twenty-one years of age. Sale of
non-tobacco smoking products in such places shall be made only to an individual
who demonstrates, through a driver's license or other photographic
identification card issued by a government entity or educational institution,
that the individual is at least twenty-one years of age. Such identification
need not be required of any individual who reasonably appears to be at least
thirty years of age, provided, however, that such appearance shall not
constitute a defense in any proceeding alleging the sale of non-tobacco smoking
products to an individual under twenty-one years of age.
   c.   Any person operating a place of business wherein cigarettes, tobacco
products, liquid nicotine, electronic cigarettes, or non-tobacco smoking
products are sold or offered for sale shall post in a conspicuous place a sign,
in accordance with the rules of the department, advising persons about the
minimum age requirements for the purchase of such items.
(Am. L.L. 2017/144, 8/28/2017, eff. 1/25/2018; Am. L.L. 2017/191, 10/16/2017,
eff. 4/14/2018)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1992/083,
L.L. 2000/002,
L.L. 2013/094, and
L.L. 2017/144.
§ 17-707 Public health messages required where tobacco advertisements appear on
certain properties. [Repealed]
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1992/083 and
L.L. 2013/097.
§ 17-708 Use of tobacco products on school premises prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use a tobacco product, including chewing
tobacco, on school premises at any time.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1992/083.
§ 17-709 Enforcement.
The department of health and mental hygiene and the department of finance shall
enforce the provisions of this subchapter. The department of consumer and
worker protection shall enforce sections
17-703,
17-703.1,
17-704,
17-704.1,
17-705 and
17-706. In addition, designated enforcement employees of any authorizing agency
shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
(Am. L.L. 2017/145, 8/28/2017, eff. 6/1/2018; Am. L.L. 2020/080, 8/28/2020,
eff. 8/28/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1992/083,
L.L. 2000/002,
L.L. 2013/097,
L.L. 2017/145, and
L.L. 2020/080.
§ 17-709.1 Rules.
The commissioner of the department and the commissioner of finance shall
promulgate any rules as may be necessary for the purposes of carrying out the
provisions of this subchapter.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2013/097.
§ 17-710 Violations and penalties.
   a.   Civil penalties and license revocation for a person found to be in
violation of the provisions of this subchapter shall be as follows:
      (1)   Any person found to be in violation of section
17-703 shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than five thousand
dollars for the first violation, and not more than five thousand dollars for
each additional violation found on that day; and not more than ten thousand
dollars for the second violation and each subsequent violation by that person.
      (2)   Any person found to be in violation of section
17-703.1 shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than five hundred
dollars in any single day.
      (3)   In addition to any penalty that may be imposed pursuant to
subdivision b of section
11-1317 of the code, any person found to be in violation of section
17-703.2 of the code shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than two
thousand dollars for the first violation, and not more than two thousand
dollars for each additional violation found on that day, and not more than five
thousand dollars for the second violation and each subsequent violation at the
same place of business within a three-year period.
      (4)   Any person found to be in violation of section
17-704,
17-704.1,
17-705 or subdivision a, a-1 or b of section
17-706 shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than one thousand
dollars for the first violation, and not more than one thousand dollars for
each additional violation found on that day; and not more than two thousand
dollars for the second violation and each subsequent violation at the same
place of business within a three-year period. Any person found to be in
violation of subdivision c of section
17-706 shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than five hundred
dollars in any single day.
      (5)   In addition, for a second violation of any of section
17-703, section
17-703.2, subdivision a of section
17-704, subdivision a of section
17-704.1, section
17-705 or subdivision a or b of section
17-706 occurring on a different day and any subsequent violations occurring on
different days at the same place of business within a three-year period, any
person who engages in business as a retail dealer shall be subject to the
mandatory revocation of such dealer's retail tobacco dealer license for such
place of business. Any violation of section
17-703, section
17-703.2, subdivision a of section
17-704, subdivision a of section
17-704.1, section
17-705 or subdivision a or b of section
17-706 by any license holder at a place of business shall be included in
determining the number of violations by such license holder and by any
subsequent license holder at the same place of business unless the subsequent
license holder provides the commissioner of the department that has commenced
the proceeding to recover a civil penalty pursuant to subdivision b of this
section with adequate documentation demonstrating that the subsequent license
holder acquired the premises or business through an arm's length transaction as
defined in subdivision e of this section and that the sale or lease was not
conducted, in whole or in part, for the purpose of permitting the original
licensee to avoid the effect of violations on the premises. A retail tobacco
dealer license shall be revoked at the same hearing at which a retail dealer is
found liable for a second violation or subsequent violations at the same place
of business within a three-year period.
      (6)   Any person who violates section
17-708 shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than fifty dollars for
each violation.
   b.   A proceeding to recover any civil penalty authorized pursuant to the
provisions of subdivision a of this section for a violation of section
17-703,
17-703.1,
17-703.2,
17-704,
17-704.1,
17-705 or
17-706 shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation which shall
be returnable to the office of administrative trials and hearings acting
pursuant to section 558 and subdivision 2 of section 1048 of the charter where
the department of health and mental hygiene issues such notice, the office of
administrative trials and hearings acting pursuant to section 2203 and
subdivision 2 of section 1048 of the charter where the department of consumer
and worker protection or a designated employee of any authorizing agency issues
such notice, or an adjudication division of the department of finance or the
administrative tribunal selected by the commissioner of finance where the
department of finance issues such notice. Such notice shall contain a statement
that any hearing for a second violation or subsequent violation of any of the
provisions described in paragraph (5) of subdivision a of this section at the
same place of business within a three-year period shall also constitute a
hearing for the revocation of a retail dealer's tobacco license where the
retail dealer is found to be in violation of any such sections. The department
of health and mental hygiene, the department of consumer and worker protection
and the department of finance shall notify each other within thirty days of a
final determination that a retail dealer has been found to be in violation of
section
17-703,
17-703.2,
17-704,
17-704.1,
17-705 or subdivision a or b of section
17-706. A proceeding to recover any civil penalty authorized pursuant to the
provisions of subdivision a of this section for a violation of section
17-708 shall be returnable to the office of administrative trials and hearings
acting pursuant to section 558 and subdivision 2 of section 1048 of the
charter. Such tribunal shall have the power to impose the civil penalties
prescribed by subdivision a of this section. The office of administrative
trials and hearings acting pursuant to section 558 or section 2203 of the
charter, in addition to subdivision 2 of section 1048 of the charter and an
adjudication division of the department of finance or the administrative
tribunal selected by the commissioner of finance shall have the power to impose
the civil penalties prescribed by subdivision a of this section for a violation
of section
17-703,
17-703.1,
17-703.2,
17-704,
17-704.1,
17-705 or
17-706.
   c.   The penalties provided by subdivision a of this section shall be in
addition to any other penalty imposed by any other provision of law or rule
promulgated thereunder.
   d.   Whenever any person has engaged in any acts or practices which
constitute a violation of any provision of this subchapter or of any rule
promulgated thereunder, the city may make application to a court of competent
jurisdiction for an order enjoining such acts or practices and for an order
granting a temporary or permanent injunction, restraining order or other order
enjoining such acts or practices.
   e.   For purposes of this section, "arm's length transaction" means a sale
of a fee or all undivided interests in real property, or lease of any part
thereof, or a sale of a business, in good faith and for valuable consideration,
that reflects the fair market value of such real property or lease, or
business, in the open market, between two informed and willing parties, where
neither is under any compulsion to participate in the transaction, unaffected
by any unusual conditions indicating a reasonable possibility that the sale or
lease was made for the purpose of permitting the original licensee to avoid the
effect of violations on the premises. The following sales or leases shall be
presumed not to be arm's length transactions unless adequate documentation is
provided demonstrating that the sale or lease was not conducted, in whole or in
part, for the purpose of permitting the original licensee to avoid the effect
of violations on the premises:
      (1)   a sale between relatives; or
      (2)   a sale between related companies or partners in a business; or
      (3)   a sale or lease affected by other facts or circumstances that would
indicate that the sale or lease is entered into for the primary purpose of
permitting the original licensee to avoid the effect of violations on the
premises, such as a sale or lease entered into while there are violations
pending against the original licensee that could result in revocation or
suspension of the license.
   f.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision a of this section, the
mandatory revocation of a license for a second offense shall be waived if, upon
the submission of satisfactory proof, the commissioner determines that the
person or persons who committed the violations which are the basis for the
mandatory revocation acted against the licensee's will in committing such
violations, the licensee utilized extensive precautionary measures to prevent
violations of the provisions of sections
17-704,
17-705 and
17-706 of this code, and the licensee has terminated any financial or
employment relationship with each person who committed the violations which are
the basis of the mandatory revocation of its license or has taken other
significant disciplinary action against such persons. The commissioner shall
not determine that a licensee utilized extensive precautionary measures to
prevent violations of the provisions of sections
17-704,
17-705 and
17-706 of this code unless the licensee submits satisfactory proof
demonstrating that the licensee had, prior to the second violation which is the
basis for the mandatory revocation of its license, done the following:
      (1)   implemented a clear policy requiring all persons working in the
place of business to strictly comply with the provisions of sections
17-704,
17-705 and
17-706 of this code and permitting persons working in the place of business to
complete a tobacco product sales transaction only after establishing the age of
a prospective purchaser of tobacco products through identification that has
been verified for authenticity or through photographic identification as
required by section
17-706 of this code; and
      (2)   trained all persons working in the place of business to comply with
any such policy before they are allowed to sell tobacco products to the public;
and
      (3)   monitored the performance of persons working in the place of
business to ensure that they adhere to such policy, or, in accordance with
rules promulgated by the commissioner, conducted periodic retraining of persons
working in the place of business.
   g.   Any retail dealer who fails to pay (1) any civil penalty imposed under
chapter thirteen of title eleven of the code for the violation of any provision
thereunder, or (2) any civil penalty imposed under this chapter for any
violation thereof or under section
17-176.1 or section
17-177 of this title for any violation of such sections, shall be subject to
suspension of his or her retail dealer license for the place of business where
the violation occurred until such retail dealer pays all such civil penalties.
Such retail dealer license shall not be renewed until such retail dealer pays
all such civil penalties. A proceeding to suspend a retail dealer license
pursuant to this subdivision may be commenced by the department to which
payment of the penalty is due, in the same manner as a proceeding pursuant to
subdivision b of this section to recover a civil penalty. The office of
administrative trials and hearings acting pursuant to section 2203 and
subdivision 2 of section 1048 of the charter, the office of administrative
trials and hearings acting pursuant to section 558 and subdivision 2 of section
1048 of the charter and an adjudication division of the department of finance
or the administrative tribunal selected by the commissioner of finance shall
have the power to suspend a retail dealer's license pursuant to this
subdivision.
(Am. L.L. 2017/144, 8/28/2017, eff. 6/1/2018; Am. L.L. 2017/145, 8/28/2017,
eff. 6/1/2018; Am. L.L. 2020/080, 8/28/2020, eff. 8/28/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1992/083,
L.L. 2000/002,
L.L. 2013/097,
L.L. 2017/144,
L.L. 2017/145, and
L.L. 2020/080.
§ 17-711 Report.
Not later than twelve months after the effective date of the local law that
added this section and each year thereafter, the department shall submit a
report to the mayor and the city council concerning the administration and
enforcement of this subchapter.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1992/083.
§ 17-712 Construction.
Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed to preclude the city of
New York from prohibiting the placement or display of tobacco advertisements in
or on units of advertising space.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 1992/083.
**** Subchapter 2: Regulation of the Sale of Flavored Tobacco Products,
Flavored Electronic Cigarettes and Flavored E-liquid, and Regulation of Age of
Entry to Non-Tobacco Hookah Establishments ****
(Am. L.L. 2019/228, 12/16/2019, eff. 7/1/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2019/228.
§ 17-713 Definitions.
Whenever used in this subchapter, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
   Characterizing flavor. The term "characterizing flavor" means a
distinguishable taste or aroma, other than the taste or aroma of tobacco,
imparted either prior to or during consumption of a tobacco product, electronic
cigarette or e-liquid, including, but not limited to, tastes or aromas relating
to any menthol, mint, wintergreen, fruit, chocolate, vanilla, honey, candy,
cocoa, dessert, alcoholic beverage, herb, spice, or any "concept flavor" that
imparts a taste or aroma that is distinguishable from tobacco flavor but may
not relate to any particular known flavor; provided, however, that no tobacco
product, electronic cigarette or e-liquid shall be determined to have a
characterizing flavor solely because of the use of additives or flavorings or
the provision of ingredient information.
   Cigarette. The term "cigarette" means any roll for smoking made wholly or in
part of tobacco or any other substance, irrespective of size or shape and
whether or not such tobacco or substance is flavored, adulterated or mixed with
any other ingredient, the wrapper or cover of which is made of paper or any
other substance or material but is not made in whole or in part of tobacco.
   Electronic cigarette. The term "electronic cigarette" has the same meaning
as such term is defined in section
20-560.
   E-liquid. The term "e-liquid" has the same meaning as such term is defined
in section
20-560.
   Flavored electronic cigarette. The term "flavored electronic cigarette"
means any electronic cigarette that imparts a characterizing flavor. A public
statement or claim made or disseminated by the manufacturer of an electronic
cigarette, or by any person authorized or permitted by the manufacturer to make
or disseminate public statements concerning such electronic cigarette, that
such electronic cigarette has or produces a characterizing flavor shall
constitute presumptive evidence that such electronic cigarette is a flavored
electronic cigarette.
   Flavored e-liquid. The term "flavored e-liquid" means any e-liquid that
imparts a characterizing flavor. A public statement or claim made or
disseminated by the manufacturer of an e-liquid, or by any person authorized or
permitted by the manufacturer to make or disseminate public statements
concerning such e-liquid, that such e-liquid has or produces a characterizing
flavor shall constitute presumptive evidence that such e-liquid is a flavored
e-liquid.
   Flavored tobacco product. The term "flavored tobacco product" means any
tobacco product that imparts a characterizing flavor other than menthol, mint
and wintergreen. A public statement or claim made or disseminated by the
manufacturer of a tobacco product, or by any person authorized or permitted by
the manufacturer to make or disseminate public statements concerning such
tobacco product, that such tobacco product has or produces a characterizing
flavor, other than menthol, mint and wintergreen, shall constitute presumptive
evidence that the tobacco product is a flavored tobacco product.
   Person. The term "person" means any natural person, partnership, firm, joint
stock company, corporation, or employee thereof, or other legal entity.
   Tobacco bar. The term "tobacco bar" has the meaning as such term is defined
in subdivision jj of section
17-502.
   Tobacco product. The term "tobacco product" means any product which contains
tobacco that is intended for human consumption, including any component, part,
or accessory of such product. Tobacco product shall include, but not be limited
to, any cigar, little cigar, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, roll-your-own
tobacco, snus, bidi, snuff, tobacco-containing shisha, or dissolvable tobacco
product. Tobacco product shall not include cigarettes, electronic cigarettes or
e-liquid or any product that has been approved by the United States food and
drug administration for sale as a tobacco use cessation product or for other
medical purposes and that is being marketed and sold solely for such purposes.
(Am. L.L. 2017/191, 10/16/2017, eff. 4/14/2018; Am. L.L. 2019/228, 12/16/2019,
eff. 7/1/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2013/097 and
L.L. 2019/228.
§ 17-714 Sale of herbal cigarettes to minors prohibited. [Repealed]
(Repealed L.L. 2017/191, 10/16/2017, eff. 4/14/2018)
§ 17-715 Sale of flavored tobacco products, flavored electronic cigarettes and
flavored e-liquid prohibited.
   a.   1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, or
to possess with intent to sell or offer for sale, any flavored tobacco product
except in a tobacco bar.
      2.   There shall be a presumption that a retail dealer, as defined in
section
17-702, in possession of four or more flavored tobacco products, which shall
include individual tobacco products, packages of tobacco products, or any
combination thereof, possesses such tobacco products with intent to sell or
offer for sale.
   b.   1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, or
to possess with intent to sell or offer for sale, any flavored electronic
cigarette or flavored e-liquid.
      2.   There shall be a presumption that an electronic cigarette retail
dealer, as defined in section
20-560, in possession of six or more flavored electronic cigarettes, or more
than 12 fluid ounces (354.882 mL) of flavored e-liquid, possesses such flavored
electronic cigarettes or flavored e-liquid with intent to sell or offer for
sale.
(Am. L.L. 2019/228, 12/16/2019, eff. 7/1/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2013/097 and
L.L. 2019/228.
§ 17-716 Violations and penalties.
   a.   Any person who violates subdivision a of section
17-715 shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than one thousand
dollars for the first violation, and not more than one thousand dollars for
each additional violation found on that day; and not more than two thousand
dollars for the second violation at the same place of business within a three-
year period, and not more than two thousand dollars for each additional
violation found on that day; and not more than five thousand dollars for the
third and all subsequent violations at the same place of business within a
three-year period. In addition, for a third violation occurring on a different
day and all subsequent violations occurring on different days at the same place
of business within a three-year period, any person who engages in business as a
retail dealer, as such term is defined in section
20-201, shall be subject to the mandatory suspension of his or her license,
issued pursuant to section
20-202, for such place of business, for a period not to exceed one year. Such
license shall be suspended at the same hearing at which a retail dealer is
found liable for a third violation or subsequent violations at the same place
of business within a three-year period.
   a-1.   Any person who violates subdivision b of section
17-715 shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than one thousand
dollars for the first violation, and not more than one thousand dollars for
each additional violation found on that day; and not more than two thousand
dollars for the second violation at the same place of business within a three-
year period, and not more than two thousand dollars for each additional
violation found on that day; and not more than five thousand dollars for the
third and all subsequent violations at the same place of business within a
three-year period. In addition, for a third violation occurring on a different
day and all subsequent violations occurring on different days at the same place
of business within a three-year period, any person who engages in business as
an electronic cigarette retail dealer, as such term is defined in section
20-560, shall be subject to the mandatory suspension of his or her license,
issued pursuant to section
20-561, for such place of business, for a period not to exceed one year. Such
license shall be suspended at the same hearing at which an electronic cigarette
retail dealer is found liable for a third violation or subsequent violations at
the same place of business within a three-year period.
   b.   Any person who violates subdivision a of section
17-719 shall be liable for a civil penalty of two hundred dollars for the first
violation, and not more than two hundred dollars for each additional violation
found on the same day; and five hundred dollars for the second violation and
each subsequent violation at the same place of business. A proceeding to
recover any such civil penalty shall be commenced by the service of a notice of
violation returnable to the office of administrative trials and hearings or any
tribunal established within any agency of the city designated to conduct such
proceedings. When a person has been found to be in violation of subdivision a
of section
17-719 on two or more occasions at a non-tobacco hookah establishment, the
commissioner shall revoke the non-tobacco hookah establishment permit issued to
such person pursuant to section
17-513.5.
   c.   Any person found to be in violation of subdivision b of section
17-719 shall be liable for a civil penalty of one hundred dollars for the first
violation and not more than one hundred dollars for each additional violation
found on the same day, and two hundred dollars for each subsequent violation at
the same place of business. A proceeding to recover any such civil penalty
shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation returnable to the
office of administrative trials and hearings or any tribunal established within
any agency of the city designated to conduct such proceedings.
(Am. L.L. 2017/146, 8/28/2017, eff. 2/24/2018; Am. L.L. 2017/191, 10/16/2017,
eff. 4/14/2018; Am. L.L. 2019/228, 12/16/2019, eff. 7/1/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2013/097,
L.L. 2017/146, and
L.L. 2019/228.
§ 17-717 Enforcement.
The department, the department of consumer and worker protection and the
department of finance shall enforce the provisions of this subchapter. A
proceeding to recover any civil penalty authorized pursuant to section
17-716 shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation returnable to
the office of administrative trials and hearings acting pursuant to section 558
and subdivision 2 of section 1048 of the charter where the department issues
such a notice or to the office of administrative trials and hearings acting
pursuant to section 2203 and subdivision 2 of section 1048 of the charter where
the department of consumer and worker protection issues such a notice or to an
adjudication division of the department of finance or the administrative
tribunal selected by the commissioner of finance where the department of
finance issues such notice. The notice of violation or copy thereof when filled
in and served shall constitute notice of the violation charged. Such notice
shall contain a statement that any hearing for a third violation or subsequent
violation of section
17-715 at the same place of business within a three-year period shall also
constitute a hearing for the suspension of a retail dealer's license where the
retail dealer is found to be in violation of such section. The office of
administrative trials and hearings acting pursuant to section 558 and
subdivision 2 of section 1048 of the charter, the office of administrative
trials and hearings acting pursuant to section 2203 and subdivision 2 of
section 1048 of the charter and an adjudication division of the department of
finance or the administrative tribunal selected by the commissioner of finance
shall have the power to render decisions and to impose the remedies and
penalties provided for in section
17-716, in addition to any other remedies or penalties provided for the
enforcement of such provisions under any other law including, but not limited
to, civil or criminal actions or proceedings. The department, the department of
consumer and worker protection and the department of finance shall notify each
other within 30 days of finding that a retail dealer has been found liable for
any section of this subchapter.
(Am. L.L. 2017/146, 8/28/2017, eff. 2/24/2018; Am. L.L. 2020/080, 8/28/2020,
eff. 8/28/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2013/097,
L.L. 2017/146, and
L.L. 2020/080.
§ 17-718 Rules.
The commissioner of the department, the commissioner of consumer and worker
protection and the commissioner of finance shall promulgate any rules as may be
necessary for the purposes of carrying out the provisions of this subchapter.
(Am. L.L. 2020/080, 8/28/2020, eff. 8/28/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2013/097 and
L.L. 2020/080.
§ 17-719 Requirements relating to non-tobacco hookah establishments.
   a.   It shall be unlawful for a person to permit an individual under 21
years of age to enter a non-tobacco hookah establishment during operating
hours. Entry into such non-tobacco hookah establishment shall be permitted only
to an individual who demonstrates, through a driver's license or other
photographic identification card issued by a government entity or educational
institution, that the individual is at least 21 years of age. Such
identification need not be required of any individual who reasonably appears to
be at least 30 years of age, provided, however, that such appearance shall not
constitute a defense in any proceeding alleging the granting of permission to
enter such an establishment to an individual under 21 years of age.
   b.   Non-tobacco hookah establishments, as defined in section
17-502, shall clean and sanitize the interior of the bowl, stem, hose, base,
and any other part of paraphernalia provided to customers for smoking non-
tobacco smoking products, as defined in section
17-502, in accordance with rules promulgated by the department.
(L.L. 2017/187, 10/16/2017, eff. 4/14/2018)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2017/187.
Chapter 8: Animal Shelters and Sterilization Act
(Title amended by L.L. 2015/007, 1/17/2015, eff. 6/1/2015)
§ 17-801 Legislative findings. [Repealed]
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2011/059.
§ 17-802 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
   a.   "Adoption" means the delivery of a dog or cat deemed appropriate and
suitable by an animal shelter to an individual at least eighteen years of age
who has been approved to own, care and provide for the animal by the animal
shelter.
   b.   "Animal rescue group" means a duly incorporated not-for-profit
organization that accepts homeless, lost, stray, abandoned, seized, surrendered
or unwanted animals from an animal shelter or other place and attempts to find
homes for, and promote adoption of, such animals by the general public.
   c.   "Animal shelter" means a not-for-profit facility holding a permit in
accordance with § 161.09 of the New York city health code where homeless, lost,
stray, abandoned, seized, surrendered or unwanted animals are received,
harbored, maintained and made available for adoption to the general public,
redemption by their owners or other lawful disposition, and which is owned,
operated, or maintained by a duly incorporated humane society, animal welfare
society, society for the prevention of cruelty to animals, or other
organization devoted to the welfare, protection or humane treatment of animals.
   c-1.   "Companion animal" means any dog or cat, and also means any other
domesticated animal normally maintained in or near the household of the owner
or person who cares for such other domesticated animal. "Companion animal" does
not include a farm animal as defined in section 350 of the agriculture and
markets law or a wild animal as defined in section 161.01 of the New York city
health code.
   d.   "Consumer" means any individual purchasing an animal from a pet shop. A
pet shop shall not be considered a consumer.
   e.   "Feral cat" means an animal of the species felis catus who has no
owner, is unsocialized to humans and has a temperament of extreme fear of and
resistance to contact with humans.
   f.   "Full-service shelter" means a person required to have a permit issued
pursuant to subdivision (b) of section 161.09 of the New York city health code
that houses lost, stray or homeless animals and:
      (1)   accepts dogs and cats twelve hours per day, seven days per week;
      (2)   has an adoption program available seven days per week; and
      (3)   provides sterilization services for dogs and cats and any other
veterinary services deemed necessary by a licensed veterinarian at such shelter
or at a veterinary facility.
   g.   "Person" means any individual, corporation, partnership, association,
municipality, or other legal entity.
   h.   "Pet shop" has the same meaning as such term is defined in section
17-371 of this title.
   i.   "Sterilization" means rendering a dog or cat that is at least eight
weeks of age and that weighs at least two pounds unable to reproduce, by
surgically altering such animal's reproductive organs as set forth in the rules
of the department or by non-surgical methods or technologies approved by the
United States food and drug administration or the United States department of
agriculture and acceptable to the department. Such definition shall include the
spaying of a female dog or cat or the neutering of a male dog or cat.
   j.   "Trap-neuter-return" means a program to trap, vaccinate for rabies,
sterilize and identify feral cats and return them to the locations where they
were found.
   k.   "Adoptable animal" means any companion animal subject to adoption as
defined in subdivision a of this section.
(Am. L.L. 2015/007, 1/17/2015, eff. 6/1/2015; Am. L.L. 2015/053, 6/2/2015, eff.
6/1/2015; Am. L.L. 2019/200, 11/25/2019, eff. 12/25/2019; Am. L.L. 2019/222,
12/15/2019, eff. 1/14/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2002/012 and
L.L. 2011/059.
§ 17-803 Animal shelters.
   a.   A full-service shelter shall be maintained and operated in each borough
of the city of New York. At least one of the full-service shelters shall be
open to the public for the purpose of receiving animals twenty-four hours per
day, seven days per week.
   b.   Field services having the capacity to pick up and bring to a shelter
lost, stray, homeless or injured dogs and cats from all five boroughs shall be
maintained and operated seven days per week, twelve hours per day. Where public
health and safety is threatened, they shall have the capacity to pick up such
animals twenty-four hours per day.
(Am. L.L. 2018/123, 6/26/2018, eff. 7/1/2024)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2011/059 and
L.L. 2018/123.
§ 17-804 Sterilization required.
   a.   No full-service shelter or other shelter for homeless animals required
to have a permit issued pursuant to subdivision (b) of section 161.09 of the
New York city health code shall release a dog or cat to a person claiming
ownership thereof, or to a person adopting such dog or cat, unless such dog or
cat has been sterilized by a licensed veterinarian; provided, however, that
such requirement shall not apply:
      (1)   if a licensed veterinarian certifies to such shelter that he or she
has examined such dog or cat and found that because of a medical reason, the
life of such dog or cat would be endangered by sterilization; provided,
however, that such reason shall not consist solely of the youth of such dog or
cat, if such dog or cat is at least eight weeks of age;
      (2)   in the case of a dog, if such dog, within the time period provided
for by law, rule or regulation, is claimed by a person claiming ownership
thereof, and such person demonstrates to the satisfaction of the shelter that
such dog has a breed ring show record from the American Kennel Club or United
Kennel Club or other similar, registry association, dated no more than twelve
months prior to the date such dog entered such shelter, or such person claiming
ownership is able to provide proof that such dog has successfully completed the
requirements of the American Kennel Club or United Kennel Club or other
similar, registry association, for the title Champion or its equivalent, at any
time prior to the arrival of the dog at the shelter;
      (3)   in the case of a dog, if such dog, within the time period provided
for by law, rule or regulation, is claimed by a person claiming ownership
thereof, and such person demonstrates to the satisfaction of the shelter that
such dog is a guide dog, hearing dog, service dog or police work dog; or
      (4)   in the case of a cat, if such cat within the time period provided
for by law, rule or regulation, is claimed by a person claiming ownership
thereof, and such person demonstrates to the satisfaction of such shelter that
such cat has a breed show record from the Cat Fancier Association or other
similar, registry association dated no more than twelve months prior to the
date such cat entered such shelter or such person claiming ownership is able to
provide proof that such cat has successfully completed the requirements of the
Cat Fancier Association or other similar, registry association for the title
Champion, Grand Champion or its equivalent, at any time prior to the arrival of
the cat at the shelter.
   b.   No pet shop shall release to a consumer a dog or cat that has not been
sterilized by a licensed veterinarian. Such veterinarian shall provide to the
pet shop a certificate, in such form and manner as determined by rules
promulgated by the department, stating the date on which such sterilization was
performed.
   c.   Every pet shop, in accordance with rules promulgated by the department,
shall maintain records of all sales of dogs and cats, sterilization procedures
performed at the request of the pet shop, and veterinarian letters and
certificates received, and shall retain such records, letters and certificates
for a period of five years. Such records, letters, and certificates shall be
made available to the department according to rules promulgated by the
department. The department may require that such documents be submitted by
electronic means.
   d.   Every owner of a cat who permits such cat to roam outside the interior
of the owner's dwelling shall have such cat sterilized. At the request of
employees or authorized agents of the department, owners shall provide proof
satisfactory to the department that a cat found roaming has been sterilized.
The Department shall not seize a cat solely on the ground that the cat has not
been sterilized.
   e.   The department shall post and maintain on its website a regularly
updated list of organizations in New York city that offer trap-neuter-return
information and conduct trap-neuter-return activities.
   f.   A pet shop that allows an animal shelter or animal rescue group to use
such pet shop's premises for the purpose of making animals available for
adoption shall be exempt from the requirements of subdivisions b and c of this
section with respect to such animals, provided such pet shop does not have an
ownership interest in any of the animals that are made available for adoption.
(Am. L.L. 2015/007, 1/17/2015, eff. 6/1/2015; Am. L.L. 2015/053, 6/2/2015, eff.
6/1/2015)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2011/059 and
L.L. 2012/043.
§ 17-805 Reporting requirements.
The department shall provide the mayor and the city council with a report by
February twenty-eight of each year which shall set forth information regarding
the management and operation of all full-service shelters performing services
pursuant to a contract with the city of New York, including but not limited to:
   a.   The following information with respect to the previous calendar year:
      (1)   the total number of animals accepted by each full-service shelter;
      (2)   the total number of animals that were sterilized at each full-
service shelter;
      (3)   the total number of animals that were humanely euthanized at each
full-service shelter;
      (4)   the total number of healthy animals that were humanely euthanized
at each full-service shelter;
      (5)   the total number of animals that were adopted at each full-service
shelter;
      (6)   the total number of animals at each full-service shelter that were
returned to their owner; and
      (7)   the number of animals at each full-service shelter that were
provided to other shelters for adoption.
   b.   The following information for each month of the previous calendar year:
      (1)   the total number of animals, disaggregated by borough, picked up by
field services during regular business hours and delivered to (A) receiving
facilities and (B) full-service shelters;
      (2)   the total number of animals, disaggregated by borough, picked up by
field services during off hours and delivered to (A) receiving facilities and
(B) full-service shelters;
      (3)   the total number of animals taken in and transferred to a full-
service shelter from each receiving facility; and
      (4)   the staffing levels at all full-service shelters and receiving
facilities.
   c.   The department shall report to the mayor and the council each month the
total number of healthy animals that were humanely euthanized at each full-
service shelter during the previous month.
   d.   No later than twenty-four months after the effective date of the local
law that added this subdivision, the department shall provide to the mayor and
the council a report that summarizes and describes trends in the reporting
requirements provided annually in accordance with this section.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2002/012 and
L.L. 2011/059.
§ 17-806 Violations.
Any person found to be in violation of subdivision (b), (c) or (d) of section
17-804, section
17-814, or section
17-815 of this chapter or any of the rules promulgated thereunder shall be
liable for a civil penalty of five hundred dollars for each violation. A
proceeding to recover any civil penalty authorized pursuant to the provisions
of this section shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation
which shall be returnable to the administrative tribunal authorized to
adjudicate violations of the health code or the administrative code.
(Am. L.L. 2015/007, 1/17/2015, eff. 6/1/2015)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2011/059.
§ 17-807 Rules.
The commissioner may promulgate such rules as are necessary for the purposes of
implementing and carrying out the provisions of this chapter.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2011/059 and
L.L. 2012/043.
§ 17-808 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion of this
local law is, for any reason, declared unconstitutional or invalid, in whole or
in part, by any court of competent jurisdiction such portion shall be deemed
severable, and such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this law, which remaining portions shall
continue in full force and effect.
§ 17-809 No limitation on additional services.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to limit the department's
authority to offer additional services or facilities to facilitate the decline
in numbers of unwanted and uncared for animals in New York city.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2002/012 and
L.L. 2011/059.
§ 17-810 Euthanizing animals; time frame for making such determination.
In determining when a full-service shelter may euthanize a lost, stray or
homeless animal held by it, such shelter shall exclude from the calculation of
the number of hours that such shelter is required by law to hold such animal
before euthanizing such animal those hours when such shelter is not required to
accept dogs and cats pursuant to paragraph one of subdivision d of section
17-802 of this chapter. Such calculation of the number of hours shall not take
into consideration the full-service shelter required to accept dogs and cats
twenty-four hours per day pursuant to subdivision a of section
17-803 of this chapter.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2002/012 and
L.L. 2011/059.
§ 17-811 Animal population control program.
The department shall promulgate rules and regulations to establish and
implement an animal population control program within one hundred eighty days
from the effective date of this section. The purpose of this program shall be
to reduce the population of unwanted stray dogs and cats thereby reducing
potential threats to public health and safety and reducing the costs of caring
for these animals. This program shall seek to accomplish its purpose by
encouraging residents of the city of New York who are the owners of dogs and
cats to have them spayed or neutered by providing no or low-cost spaying and
neutering services to such owners. The department shall promulgate rules and
regulations necessary to establish an animal population control program
including, but not limited, to creating clinics or mobile units where such
services shall be performed and establishing criteria for pet owner eligibility
to use such services. Indicia of eligibility for pet owners seeking no or low-
cost spay and neuter services shall include but not be limited to any criteria
deemed acceptable by the agencies performing the services. The commissioner may
solicit and accept funds from the animal population control fund established
pursuant to section
17-812 of this chapter and any other public or private source to help carry out
the provisions of this section.
§ 17-812 Animal population control fund.
   1.   There is hereby established in the joint custody of the city
comptroller and commissioner of finance a fund to be known as the "animal
population control fund" which shall be used by the department to subsidize the
city's animal population control program as established by section
17-811 of this chapter.
   2.   Such fund shall consist of all moneys collected from the animal
population control program established pursuant to section
17-811 of this chapter, all moneys collected for the additional fee charged for
a license to be issued or renewed for an unsterilized dog pursuant to
subdivision three of section two of chapter one hundred fifteen of the laws of
eighteen hundred ninety-four, that portion of any penalties assessed under
section three of such chapter due to be paid to such fund, and all other moneys
credited or transferred thereto from any other fund or source pursuant to law.
   3.   Moneys of the fund shall be made available to the department and shall
be expended for the purposes of carrying out animal population control programs
pursuant to the provisions of section
17-811 of this chapter. Moneys shall be paid out of the fund on the audit and
warrant of the city comptroller and approved by the commissioner. Any interest
received by the city comptroller on moneys on deposit in the animal population
control fund shall be retained in and become part of such fund.
§ 17-813 Dog license fee.
   a.   In addition to the fees required pursuant to chapter 115 of the laws of
1894, as amended, any person applying for a dog license shall pay twenty-five
dollars and fifty cents for any dog four months of age or older that has not
been spayed or neutered unless an owner presents with the license application a
statement certified by a licensed veterinarian stating that he or she has
examined the dog and found that because of old age or other reasons, the life
of the dog would be endangered by spaying or neutering.
   b.   Fees collected pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be
directed to the animal population control fund established pursuant to section
17-812.
§ 17-814 Licensing of dogs required.
   a.   No pet shop or animal rescue group shall sell or release a dog to a
purchaser or adopter unless such purchaser or adopter first completes an
application for a license and tenders the license fees required by law. If such
application is completed in connection with the purchase of a dog from a pet
shop, such application shall include the following information: the date of
purchase, the name and address of the pet shop, and if such pet shop has an
operating permit issued by the department, such pet shop's permit number. Such
pet shop or animal rescue group shall forward such completed application and
license fees to the department in such manner as may be specified by the
department.
   b.   A pet shop or animal rescue group shall be exempt from the requirements
of subdivision a of this section for any sale or adoption of a dog to a
purchaser or adopter who executes and submits to such pet shop or animal rescue
group a written statement that the dog to be purchased or adopted is to be
harbored outside of the city and proof in a form determined by the department
that the purchaser or adopter resides outside the city.
   c.   Every pet shop shall, on at least a monthly basis, report to the
department on a form furnished by the department all dogs which have been sold
and adopted, indicating for each such dog whether or not the pet shop submitted
to the department a license application. Such form shall include the name and
address of each such dog's purchaser or adopter, the license or license
application number if known, as well as any other descriptive information
regarding such dog as may be required by the department.
   d.   A pet shop that allows an animal shelter or animal rescue group to use
such pet shop's premises for the purpose of making animals available for
adoption shall be exempt from the requirements of this section with respect to
such animals, provided such pet shop does not have an ownership interest in any
of the animals that are being made available for adoption, and the pet shop
does not derive a fee for providing such adoption services.
(L.L. 2015/007, 1/17/2015, eff. 6/1/2015; Am. L.L. 2015/053, 6/2/2015, eff. 6/
1/2015)
§ 17-815 Microchipping required.
   a.   No pet shop or animal rescue group shall release a dog or cat to a
purchaser or adopter unless:
      (1)   such animal has been implanted with a microchip as a permanent
identification;
      (2)   such pet shop or animal rescue group has registered such animal's
microchip with such purchaser's contact information with a bona fide pet
microchip registration company; and
      (3)   such pet shop or animal rescue group has provided such purchaser
with (i) usage instructions for such microchip provided by the manufacturer of
such microchip or the company with which such microchip is registered and (ii)
written certification of compliance with paragraphs one and two of this
subdivision, signed by such purchaser as acknowledgement of receipt, in a form
and manner set forth in rules promulgated by the department.
   b.   Every pet shop and animal rescue group shall retain for a period of ten
years from the date of sale of any dog or cat, a copy of the certification
signed by the purchaser required by paragraph three of subdivision a of this
section.
   c.   A pet shop that allows an animal shelter or animal rescue group to use
such pet shop's premises for the purpose of making animals available for
adoption shall be exempt from the requirements of subdivisions a and b of this
section with respect to such animals, provided such pet shop does not have an
ownership interest in any of the animals that are being made available for
adoption, and the pet shop does not derive a fee for providing such adoption
services.
(L.L. 2015/008, 1/17/2015, eff. 6/1/2015; Am. L.L. 2015/055, 6/2/2015, eff. 6/
1/2015)
§ 17-816 Promotion of adoptable animals.
Any full-service animal shelter operated by New York city shall post
photographs of, and relevant information about, each adoptable animal in its
possession, including but not limited to age and sex, within three days of
receiving such animal, provided that such animal is not affected by a medical
or behavioral condition that makes it unsafe or unsuitable for photographing.
The department shall encourage any other animal shelter that holds a permit
under section 161.09 of the New York City health code to make its best efforts
to promote the placement of adoptable animals.
(L.L. 2019/200, 11/25/2019, eff. 12/25/2019)
§ 17-817 Disposal of deceased animals.
The department shall provide information regarding city services that are
available for proper disposal of deceased animals and shall post such
information to its website.
(L.L. 2019/227, 12/15/2019, eff. 3/14/2020)
§ 17-818 Animals discovered during eviction or action taken pursuant to any
order or judgment granting legal possession.
An animal shelter directed by a sheriff or city marshal executing a warrant of
eviction or any order or judgment granting legal possession to retrieve a
companion animal from such premises shall retrieve such companion animal as
expeditiously as possible after receiving such direction.
(L.L. 2019/222, 12/15/2019, eff. 1/14/2020)
§ 17-819 Civil cause of action for persons denied possession of companion
animals.
   a.   Except as provided in this section or as otherwise provided by law, any
person claiming to be denied possession of their companion animal by a landlord
still in possession of such companion animal after the execution of a warrant
of eviction or action taken pursuant to any order or judgment granting legal
possession shall have a cause of action against such landlord in any court of
competent jurisdiction for any or all of the following relief:
      1.   Compensatory and punitive damages;
      2.   Injunctive and declaratory relief;
      3.   An order of seizure pursuant to article 71 of the civil practice law
and rules;
      4.   Attorney's fees and costs.
   b.   No person shall be liable under this section if a companion animal is
received by its owner or by an animal shelter, animal rescue group or any
animal care and control organization approved or designated by or acting on
behalf of the department within three days of the warrant of eviction or action
taken pursuant to any order or judgment granting legal possession.
   c.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to create a cause of action
against:
      1.   The city of New York, or any agency, officer, employee, or agent
thereof, including, but not limited to, any city marshal;
      2.   The state or any county or any municipality of New York or any
agency, officer, employee or agent thereof;
      3.   The United States, or any other officer, employee or agent thereof;
or
      4.   Any animal shelter, animal rescue group, or animal care and control
organization approved or designated by or acting on behalf of the department,
or any officer, employee or agent thereof.
(L.L. 2019/222, 12/15/2019, eff. 1/14/2020)
Chapter 9: Lead
Editor's note: this chapter was amended in its entirety by L.L. 2019/064, 4/14/
2019, eff. 8/12/2019. For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2004/001 and
L.L. 2019/064.
**** Subchapter 1: Lead Testing Requirements and Standards ****
§ 17-910 Definitions.
As used in this subchapter:
   Child of applicable age. The term "child of applicable age" has the same
meaning as the term "applicable age" as defined in section
27-2056.18.
   Covered agency. The term "covered agency" means the following agencies that
provide services for or relating to children of applicable age: the department,
the department of social services/human resources administration, the
department of education, the administration for children's services, the
department of youth and community development, the department of homeless
services, the department of parks and recreation and any other agencies the
mayor may designate that provide services for or relating to children.
   Lead-based paint hazard. The term "lead-based paint hazard" shall have the
meaning ascribed to such term by section
27-2056.2.
(L.L. 2019/064, 4/14/2019, eff. 8/12/2019)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2019/064.
§ 17-911 Required investigation.
   a.   In addition to or as part of any investigation required pursuant to
section
27-2056.14, whenever a report has been made to the department of a person under
18 years of age with an elevated blood lead level that is at or above the blood
lead reference level established pursuant to this subchapter, the department
shall conduct such investigation as may be necessary to identify potential
sources of such elevated blood lead level, including, but not limited to,
inspecting the following areas:
      1.   Any dwelling unit in which the department determines such person is
routinely present for 10 or more hours per week; and
      2.   Where a lead-based paint hazard is found in such a dwelling unit,
any other dwelling unit in the same building in which a child under the age of
one year resides, except that the department shall not be required to inspect
any such dwelling unit that is required to be inspected by another agency or
governmental entity; and
      3.   Any covered facility, as such term is defined in section
17-920, where the department determines the person with such elevated blood
lead level is routinely present for 10 or more hours per week; and
      4.   Any park, playground or other area that is covered in bare soil
where a risk assessment conducted by the department indicates that such bare
soil presents a potential source of lead exposure contributing to such person's
elevated blood lead level, except that the department of parks and recreation
shall inspect any such park, playground or other area under its jurisdiction.
   b.   Whenever a report has been made to the department of a pregnant person
with an elevated blood lead level, the department shall (i) conduct such
investigation as may be necessary to identify potential sources of such
elevated blood lead level, and (ii) after the birth of a child by such pregnant
person, screen such child for elevated blood lead levels and assess whether the
dwelling unit where such child resides contains a lead-based paint hazard or
unsafe lead paint.
   c.   The department shall conduct outreach to any new parent or person
imminently expecting to become a parent regarding the availability of
inspections conducted pursuant to section
27-2056.9. Such outreach shall include information about blood lead testing for
children, unsafe construction or renovation work practices and the availability
of inspections for such practices.
   d.   Wherever the department is required to conduct an inspection pursuant
to subdivision a of this section, such inspection shall include:
      1.   An inspection of the dwelling unit for lead-based paint hazards or
unsafe lead paint, as applicable, including analysis by an x-ray fluorescence
analyzer, in accordance with subdivision (7) of section
27-2056.2, of all friction surfaces, chewable surfaces, peeling paint,
deteriorated subsurfaces and impact surfaces as such terms are defined in
section
27-2056.2;
      2.   For a dwelling unit described in paragraph 1 of subdivision a of
this section, assisting with the ordering of a free test kit supplied by the
department of environmental protection to enable testing of drinking or cooking
water for lead and conducting outreach, as needed, to promote the return of
such test kit for testing; and
      3.   Lead testing of soil from any area on the property that (i) is
covered in bare soil and (ii) presents a potential source of lead exposure
contributing to the person's elevated blood lead level, as determined by the
department's investigation.
   e.   In the event an inspection by the department pursuant to paragraph 1 of
subdivision d of this section finds any lead-based paint hazards or unsafe lead
paint on any surfaces, it shall order the correction of such conditions
pursuant to the requirements of the New York city health code.
   f.   Nothing in this section shall require the department to analyze any
area with an x-ray fluorescence analyzer more than once in any three-month
period where no visual evidence of peeling paint or any deteriorated subsurface
is observed.
(L.L. 2019/064, 4/14/2019, eff. 8/12/2019; Am. L.L. 2020/030, 2/11/2020, eff.
2/11/2021; Am. L.L. 2021/039, 4/18/2021, eff. 10/18/2022)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2019/064.
§ 17-912 Lead reference levels and action levels.
   a.   For the purposes of this subchapter, section
27-2056.14 and any local law referring to a blood lead reference level except
as otherwise provided by such local law, the blood lead reference level shall
be five micrograms per deciliter, except that, if the federal centers for
disease control and prevention or a successor agency defines a lower blood lead
reference level the department shall (i) by rule define such lower level as the
blood lead reference level for the purposes of this subchapter, section
27-2056.14 and any local law referring to a blood lead reference level except
as otherwise provided by such local law or (ii) submit a report to the mayor
and the speaker of the council detailing the reasons why such lower blood lead
reference level should not be adopted for the city or should result in
alternative public health actions other than those provided for in this
subchapter.
   b.   Notwithstanding subdivision a of this section, for the purposes of this
subchapter, section
27-2056.14 and any local law referring to a blood lead reference level except
as otherwise provided by such local law, the board of health may define in the
health code a lower blood lead reference level than that defined by the federal
centers for disease control and prevention or a successor agency that shall
apply to this subchapter, section
27-2056.14, and any local law referring to a blood lead reference level except
as otherwise provided by such local law, if the board determines that defining
such a lower blood lead reference level is in the interest of public health.
(L.L. 2019/066, 4/14/2019, eff. 8/12/2019)
§ 17-913 Testing water for lead.
   a.   Whenever testing water for lead from a fixture or other source is
required by law or rule, or an order issued by a court or agency of appropriate
jurisdiction, such testing shall include (i) taking a first-draw sample from
such source, (ii) taking at least one additional sample, when practicable, from
such source, except that the department may by rule determine specific
circumstances in which a first-draw sample is sufficient, and (iii) analysis of
such samples by a laboratory certified to analyze water samples for lead by the
federal environmental protection agency or a state agency having appropriate
jurisdiction, unless otherwise provided for by federal, state, or local law or
rule. For the purposes of this section, the term "first-draw sample" means a
first draw tap sample for lead and copper, as such term is defined in section
5-1.1 of title 10 of the New York codes, rules and regulations.
   b.   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the department from requiring an
additional sample from such source.
   c.   Notwithstanding subdivisions a and b of this section: (i) if the
federal environmental protection agency or a successor agency provides any
guidance on testing standards that differs from the requirements of this
section, the department may by rule adopt such guidance in lieu of the testing
standards requirements of this section; and (ii) if a water lead action level
is established by federal, state, or local law or rule that requires new
sampling requirements, the department may by rule adopt such sampling
requirements in lieu of the sampling requirements of this section.
(L.L. 2019/067, 4/14/2019, eff. 4/14/2020)
§ 17-914 Lead screening referrals by agencies.
When the parent or guardian of a child of applicable age seeks a service from a
covered agency for such child, such agency shall provide a pamphlet developed
by the department or other materials approved by the department that include
information on how to obtain a blood lead screening.
(L.L. 2019/068, 4/14/2019, eff. 8/12/2019)
§ 17-915 Lead hazard inspection and testing.
When the parent or guardian of a child of applicable age seeks a service from a
covered agency for such child, such agency shall provide a parent or guardian
of such child with a pamphlet developed by the department of health and mental
hygiene pursuant to section
17-179 of this code, and inform a parent or guardian of such child that they
may, without cost or payment:
   a.   obtain an inspection conducted by the department of housing
preservation and development or its successor agency for peeling paint, a
deteriorated subsurface, or an underlying defect in their multiple dwelling
rental unit by calling 311; and
   b.   obtain a lead testing kit for drinking water from the department of
environmental protection, have a sample of their drinking water sent to a
laboratory for analysis, and receive the results of such analysis within 30
days of such sample being tested.
(L.L. 2019/073, 4/14/2019, eff. 8/12/2019)
§ 17-916 Report regarding objections to department orders.
   a.   The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the
council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on
the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation
received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section
173.13 of the health code, or successor provision. Such report shall specify
the number of such objections received from a housing development operated by
the New York city housing authority. The department shall issue such report
twice a year no later than August 30 for the period covering January through
June of the same year, and no later than February 28 for the period covering
July through December of the prior year.
   b.   The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall
include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated
by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department;
      2.   Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or
      3.   Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected.
(L.L. 2023/112, 8/13/2023, eff. 8/13/2023)
**** Subchapter 2: Remediation of Lead-Based Paint Hazards in Schools and
Facilities Providing Day Care Services ****
(Title amended by L.L. 2020/028, 2/11/2020, eff. 2/11/2021)
§ 17-920 Definitions.
As used in this subchapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
   Chewable surface. The term "chewable surface" means a protruding interior
window sill in a dwelling unit in a multiple dwelling where a child of
applicable age resides, or a covered facility where services for or relating to
a child of applicable age are provided, and which is readily accessible to such
child. "Chewable surface" also means any other type of interior edge or
protrusion in a dwelling unit in a multiple dwelling, such as a rail or stair,
where there is evidence that such other edge or protrusion has been chewed or
where an occupant has notified the owner that a child of applicable age who
resides in that dwelling unit has mouthed or chewed such edge or protrusion.
   Covered facility. The term "covered facility" means the rooms, areas and
other spaces regulated by articles 43 or 47 of the New York city health code.
   Day care service. The term "day care service" means a program or service
regulated by articles 43 or 47 of the New York city health code.
   Deteriorated subsurface. The term "deteriorated subsurface" has the same
meaning as such term is defined in section
27-2056.2.
   Friction surface. The term "friction surface" has the same meaning as such
term is defined in section
27-2056.2.
   Impact surface. The term "impact surface" has the same meaning as such term
is defined in section
27-2056.2.
   Lead-based paint. The term "lead-based paint" has the same meaning as such
term is defined in section
27-2056.2.
   Lead-based paint hazard. The term "lead-based paint hazard" means any
condition in a dwelling or dwelling unit, or in a covered facility, that causes
exposure to lead from lead-contaminated dust, from lead-based paint that is
peeling, or from lead-based paint that is present on chewable surfaces,
deteriorated subsurfaces, friction surfaces or impact surfaces that would
result in adverse human health effects.
   Lead-contaminated dust. The term "lead-contaminated dust" has the same
meaning as such term is defined in section
27-2056.2.
   Peeling. The term "peeling" has the same meaning as such term is defined in
section
27-2056.2.
   Remediation. The term "remediation" has the same meaning as such term is
defined in section
27-2056.2.
(L.L. 2019/064, 4/14/2019, eff. 8/12/2019; Am. L.L. 2020/028, 2/11/2020, eff.
2/11/2021)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2019/064.
§ 17-921 Lead-based paint presumption.
   a.   All paint or similar surface-coating material on the interior of any
covered facility in a structure erected before January 1, 1978, shall be
presumed to be lead-based paint.
   b.   The presumption established by this section may be rebutted by the
operator of the covered facility or by the owner of the premises where such
facility is located by submitting to the department a sworn written statement
by such operator or owner supported by lead-based paint testing or sampling
results, a sworn written statement by the person who performed the testing if
performed by an employee or agent of such operator or owner and such other
proof as the department may require. Testing performed to rebut the presumption
may only be performed by a person who has been certified as an inspector or
risk assessor in accordance with subparts L and Q of part 745 of title 40 of
the code of federal regulations or successor regulations. The determination as
to whether such proof is adequate to rebut the presumption established by this
section shall be made by the department.
(Am. L.L. 2019/064, 4/14/2019, eff. 8/12/2019)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2019/064.
§ 17-922 Remediation of lead-based paint hazards.
   a.   There shall be no peeling lead-based paint in any portion of any
covered facility.
   b.   Lead-based paint or paint of unknown lead content that is peeling, or
which is present on chewable surfaces, deteriorated subsurfaces, friction
surfaces, or impact surfaces shall be immediately remediated in a manner
authorized by the department.
   c.   Any equipment that is painted shall be painted with lead-free paint.
   d.   Whenever a condition prohibited by this section is found to exist, the
department shall immediately serve an order on the operator of such facility to
remediate the condition. After such order has been served, the operator shall
post such notices near the entrance of such facility as required by the rules
provided for in section
17-923 of this subchapter. In the event such order is not complied with within
21 days after service thereof, the department shall immediately request an
agency of the city of New York to execute such order pursuant to the provisions
of section
17-147 of this code. The agency shall execute the order within 21 days of the
department's request. Where compliance with the time requirements of this
subdivision would cause undue hardship, and where the operator demonstrates a
good faith effort to comply timely and shows that it is maintaining interim
controls to protect children from a lead-based paint hazard, the department may
extend the time for compliance for an additional 24 days. The department may
extend the time for compliance beyond such additional 24 days, in accordance
with rules promulgated by the department. The city of New York shall be
entitled to enforce its rights for reimbursement of expenses incurred thereby,
including as credits toward lease payments.
   e.   When lead-based paint hazards are remediated pursuant to this section
such work shall be performed in compliance with work practices established by
the department pursuant to section
17-923 of this subchapter.
(Am. L.L. 2019/064, 4/14/2019, eff. 8/12/2019)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2019/064.
§ 17-923 Department rules.
The department shall promulgate such rules as may be necessary for the
implementation of this subchapter. Such rules shall incorporate work practices
that are no less protective of public health than those set forth in
subdivisions d and e of section 173.14 of the health code and those parts of
subdivision b of such section of the health code applicable thereto or a
successor rule, and shall include a requirement that lead-contaminated dust
clearance testing be performed at the completion of such work. Such rules shall
require that such work be performed by a person who has, at a minimum,
successfully completed a course on lead-safe work practices given by or on
behalf of the department or, by the United States environmental protection
agency or an entity authorized by it to give such course, or by the United
States department of housing and urban development or an entity authorized by
it to gives such course. Such rules shall not apply where such work disturbs
surfaces of less than (i) two square feet of peeling lead-based paint per room
or (ii) ten percent of the total surface area of peeling paint on a type of
component with a small surface area, such as a window sill or door frame.
(Am. L.L. 2019/064, 4/14/2019, eff. 8/12/2019)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2019/064.
§ 17-924 Annual survey for lead-based paint hazards.
   a.   The operator of a covered facility shall conduct a survey of such
facility annually, and more often if necessary, to determine the physical
condition of surface-coating material throughout each such facility and shall
provide a copy of the survey results (i) to the department, which will make the
information publicly available online, and (ii) to the parent or guardian of
each child that attends such facility, as required by rules of the department.
The department may require by rule that such annual survey be submitted
electronically.
   b.   In a covered facility located in a school operated by the department of
education, the survey required by subdivision a of this section shall include
rooms and areas where children of an applicable age are located, including
classrooms, libraries, cafeterias, and gymnasiums designated for use by such
children of an applicable age. A room or area of a school operated by the
department of education may not be designated for use as a covered facility
unless such room or area has, within the prior year, been included in a survey
conducted in accordance with this section.
   c.   In addition to the requirements of this section, department of
education shall conduct a survey of classrooms in a covered facility located in
a school operated by the department at least three times a year to determine
the physical condition of surface-coating material in classrooms and shall
provide a copy of the survey results (i) to the department, which will make the
information publicly available online, and (ii) to the parent or guardian of
each child that attends such facility, as required by rules of the department.
(Am. L.L. 2019/071, 4/14/2019, eff. 8/12/2019; Am. L.L. 2020/028, 2/11/2020,
eff. 2/11/2021)
Chapter 10: Prescription Drug Discount Card Act
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/019.
§ 17-1001 Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Prescription Drug Discount
Card Act."
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/019.
§ 17-1002 Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the term "rebate" shall mean a refund of a certain
portion of the wholesale price of a drug based on a negotiated agreement
between a drug manufacturer and any administrator of the prescription drug
discount card program created pursuant to this chapter.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/019.
§ 17-1003 Prescription drug discount card program.
   a.   The department shall develop a prescription drug discount card program
which shall be made available to all New York city residents, regardless of
age, income, immigration status or health insurance coverage status, for the
purpose of providing all New York city residents with a prescription drug
discount card which may be used to buy prescription drugs at reduced prices at
participating pharmacies. Such prescription drug discount card program shall
enable each user of such program to purchase at a reduced price from a pharmacy
that participates in the program any prescription drug that is eligible for a
discount through such program. The prescription drug discount card program
shall allow users to purchase a drug at the lower of either the drug price
available through the prescription drug discount card program or the pharmacy's
customary and usual price. Any prescription drug discount card issued pursuant
to this section may not be utilized in conjunction with another type of
prescription drug discount card for the same transaction.
   b.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to provide any governmental
entity other than the department with access to any individually identifiable
information regarding users of the prescription drug discount card program
established pursuant to this section. The department shall keep confidential
all information concerning the identity of users of the program and the drugs
that such users purchase through the program. The department may use such
information solely to conduct epidemiological and health planning studies and
to provide general information to users about the drugs such users are taking,
the conditions for which such users are taking the drugs and other services of
the department or the city of New York related to such conditions.
   c.   No administrator of the prescription drug discount card program shall
provide the prescription drug discount card developed pursuant to this section
to any resident of the city of New York unless such administrator ensures that
a portion of any rebate payments received from drug manufacturers is
distributed to users of such program, including pharmacies participating in the
program.
   d.   Any duly licensed pharmacy willing to comply with the terms and
conditions of the prescription drug discount card program shall be permitted to
participate in the program.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/019.
§ 17-1004 Report.
Not later than sixty days after the end of each twelve-month period during
which the prescription drug discount card program has been in operation, the
department shall provide the city council with a report regarding such program.
Such report shall provide information regarding the operation of such program
during the reporting period, including, but not limited to (i) the number of
prescription drug discount card holders who used the prescription drug discount
card at least once, (ii) the total cost savings to all card holders generated
by the program, (iii) the average cost savings to a card holder per
prescription, (iv) the source and method of cost savings under the program, (v)
the major drug categories that are not discounted under the program and an
explanation as to why such drugs are not listed, (vi) the drugs for which
rebates are offered under the program, listed according to major drug category,
(vii) the number of pharmacies participating in the program, and (viii) to the
extent available, any costs incurred by pharmacies to participate in the
program.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/019.
§ 17-1005 Implementation.
The department may enter into contracts or agreements with third parties to
implement the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to,
developing and/or administering the prescription drug discount card program
established pursuant to section
17-1003 of this chapter and collecting information required by section
17-1004 of this chapter.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/019.
§ 17-1006 Rules.
The department may promulgate such rules as may be necessary to implement the
provisions of this chapter.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/019.
Chapter 11: Neighbor Notification of Pesticide Application
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/036.
§ 17-1101 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter only, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
   1.   "Abutting property" means any property which has any boundary or
boundary point in common with the property on which the pesticide is to be
applied.
   2.   "Agricultural commodity" means any plant or part thereof, or animal, or
animal product, produced by a person (including farmers, ranchers,
vineyardists, plant propagators, Christmas tree growers, aquaculturalists,
floriculturists, orchardists, foresters or other comparable persons) primarily
for sale, consumption, propagation or other use by man or animals.
   3.   "Agency" means any state agency; municipal corporation; public
authority; college, as that term is defined in the education law; railroad, as
that term is defined in the railroad law; or telegraph, telephone, telegraph
and telephone, pipeline, gas, electric, or gas and electric corporation, as
those terms are defined in the transportation corporations law, which applies
pesticides.
   4.   "Commercial lawn application" means the application of pesticide to
ground, trees or shrubs on public or private outdoor property. For the purposes
of this section, the following shall not be considered commercial lawn
application:
      i.   the application of pesticide for the purpose of producing an
agricultural commodity;
      ii.   residential application of pesticides;
      iii.   the application of pesticides around or near the foundation of a
building for the purpose of indoor pest control;
      iv.   the application of pesticides by or on behalf of agencies except
that agencies shall be subject to visual notification requirements pursuant to
section
33-1003 of the environmental conservation law where such application is within
one hundred feet of a dwelling, multiple dwelling, public building or public
park; and
      v.   the application of pesticides on golf courses or turf farms.
   5.   "Dwelling" means any building or structure or portion thereof which is
occupied in whole or in part as the home, residence or sleeping place for one
or two families.
   6.   "General use pesticide" means a pesticide which does not meet the state
criteria for a restricted pesticide as established under authority of section
33-0303 of the environmental conservation law.
   7.   "Multiple dwelling" means any dwelling which is to be occupied by or is
occupied as the residence or home of three or more families living
independently of each other.
   8.   "Pesticide" means:
      i.   any substance or mixture of substances intended for preventing,
destroying, repelling or mitigating any pest; and
      ii.   any substance or mixture of substances intended for use as a plant
regulator, defoliant or desiccant.
   9.   "Premises" means land and improvements or appurtenances or any part
thereof.
   10.   "Residential lawn application" means the application of general use
pesticides to ground, trees, or shrubs on property owned by or leased to the
individual making such application. For the purposes of this section, the
following shall not be considered residential lawn application:
      i.   the application of pesticides for the purpose of producing an
agricultural commodity;
      ii.   the application of pesticides around or near the foundation of a
building for the purpose of indoor pest control;
      iii.   the application of pesticides by or on behalf of agencies, except
that agencies shall be subject to visual notification requirements pursuant to
section
33-1003 of the environmental conservation law where such application is within
one hundred feet of a dwelling, multiple dwelling, public building or public
park; and
      iv.   the application of pesticides on golf courses or turf farms.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/036.
§ 17-1102 Notification requirements for commercial and residential lawn
applications.
   a.   (1) All retail establishments that sell general use pesticides for
commercial or residential lawn application shall display a sign meeting
standards, established by the New York state commissioner of environmental
conservation pursuant to subdivision one of section
33-1005 of the environmental conservation law, in a conspicuous place, and such
sign shall be placed as close as possible to the place where such pesticides
are displayed. (2) The signs required to be displayed pursuant to paragraph one
of this subdivision shall contain, at a minimum, pursuant to section
33-1005 of the environmental conservation law:
      i.   a warning notice directing consumers to follow directions on labels;
      ii.   a provision to inform the customer of the posting requirements set
forth in subdivision c of this section; and
      iii.   a recommendation that the customer notify neighbors prior to the
application of pesticides so that such neighbors may take precautions to avoid
pesticide exposure.
   b.   (1)   At least forty-eight hours prior to any commercial lawn
application of a pesticide, the person or business making such application
shall supply written notice, as defined in subdivision three of section
33-1005 of the environmental conservation law, to:
         i.   occupants of all dwellings on abutting property with a boundary
that is within one hundred fifty feet of the site of such application; and
         ii.   owners, owners' agents or other persons in a position of
authority for all other types of premises that are on abutting property with a
boundary that is within one hundred fifty feet of the site of such application.
Owners or owners' agents of multiple family dwellings shall supply such written
notice to the occupants of such multiple family dwellings and for all other
types of premises, owners, owners' agents or other persons in a position of
authority shall post such written notice in a manner specified by the New York
state commissioner of environmental conservation.
      (2)   The written notice required pursuant to paragraph one of this
subdivision shall contain, at a minimum, pursuant to section
33-1005 of the environmental conservation law:
         i.   the address of the premises where application is to be done;
         ii.   the name and telephone number and pesticide business
registration number or certified applicator number of the person providing the
application;
         iii.   the specific date of each pesticide application and two
alternative dates to the proposed date of application when, due to weather
conditions, the pesticide application on the proposed date is precluded;
         iv.   the product name or names and the United States environmental
protection agency registration number or numbers of the pesticide or pesticides
to be applied; and
         v.   a prominent statement that reads: "This notice is to inform you
of a pending pesticide application to neighboring property. You may wish to
take precautions to minimize pesticide exposure to yourself, family members,
pets or family possessions. Further information about the product or products
being applied, including any warnings that appear on the labels of such
pesticide or pesticides that are pertinent to the protection of humans, animals
or the environment, can be obtained by calling the National Pesticides
Telecommunications Network at 1-800-858-7378 or the New York State Department
of Health Center for Environmental Health Info line at 1-800-458-1158."
      (3)   The prior notification provisions of paragraph one of this
subdivision shall not apply to the following:
         i.   the application of anti-microbial pesticides and anti-microbial
products as defined by the federal insecticide, fungicide and rodenticide act
(FIFRA) in 7 U.S.C. §§ 136(mm) and 136q(h)(2);
         ii.   the use of an aerosol product with a directed spray, in
containers of eighteen fluid ounces or less, when used to protect individuals
from an imminent threat from stinging and biting insects, including venomous
spiders, bees, wasps and hornets. This section shall not exempt from
notification the use of any fogger product or aerosol product that discharges
to a wide area;
         iii.   the use of non-volatile insect or rodent bait in a tamper
resistant container; iv. the application of a pesticide classified by the
United States environmental protection agency as an exempt material under 40
CFR § 152.25;
         v.   the application of a pesticide which the United States
environmental protection agency has determined satisfies its reduced risk
criteria, including a biopesticide;
         vi.   the use of boric acid and disodium octaborate tetrahydrate;
         vii.   the use of horticultural soap and oils that do not contain
synthetic pesticides or synergists;
         viii.   the application of a granular pesticide, where granular
pesticide means any ground applied solid pesticide that is not a dust or
powder;
         ix.   the application of a pesticide by direct injection into a plant
or the ground; x. the spot application of a pesticide, where spot application
means the application of pesticide in a manually pressurized or non-pressurized
container of thirty-two fluid ounces or less to an area of ground less than
nine square feet;
         xi.   the application of a pesticide to the ground or turf of any
cemetery; and
         xii.   an emergency application of a pesticide when necessary to
protect against an imminent threat to human health, provided, however, that
prior to any such emergency application, the person providing such application
shall make a good faith effort to supply the written notice required pursuant
to this chapter. Upon making an emergency application, the person making such
application shall notify the New York state commissioner of health, using a
form developed by such commissioner for such purposes that shall include
minimally the name of the person making such application, the pesticide
business registration number or certified applicator number of the person
making such application, the location of such application, the date of such
application, the product name and United States environmental protection agency
registration number of the pesticide applied and the reason for such
application.
   c.   (1)   All persons performing residential lawn applications treating an
area more than one hundred square feet shall affix markers to be placed within
or along the perimeter of the area where pesticides will be applied. Markers
are to be placed so as to be clearly visible to persons immediately outside the
perimeter of such property. Such markers shall be posted at least twelve inches
above the ground and shall be at least four inches by five inches in size.
      (2)   The markers required pursuant to paragraph one of this subdivision
shall be in place on the day during which the pesticide is being applied and
shall instruct persons not to enter the property and not to remove the signs
for a period of at least twenty-four hours. Such instruction shall be printed
boldly in letters at least three-eighths of an inch in height.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/036.
§ 17-1103 Enforcement.
   a.   Pursuant to section
33-1004 of the environmental conservation law, the department and the
department of environmental protection shall have concurrent authority with the
state of New York to enforce the provisions of this chapter, provided that all
penalties, which shall be assessed after providing a hearing or opportunity to
be heard, shall be as specified in section
17-1104 of this chapter and shall be payable to and deposited with the city of
New York.
   b.   Pursuant to section
33-1004 of the environmental conservation law, the department of consumer and
worker protection shall have concurrent authority with the department, the
department of environmental protection and the state of New York to enforce the
provisions of subdivision a of section
17-1102 of this chapter, provided that all penalties, which shall be assessed
after providing a hearing or opportunity to be heard, shall be as specified in
section
17-1104 of this chapter and shall be payable to and deposited with New York
city.
   c.   A proceeding to recover any civil penalty authorized pursuant to
section
17-1104 shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation returnable
to the administrative tribunal established by the board of health pursuant to
section 558 of the charter of the city of New York where the department issues
such notice, the environmental control board established pursuant to section
1049-a of the charter of the city of New York where the department of
environmental protection issues such notice, or the adjudication division of
the department of consumer and worker protection established pursuant to
section
20-104(e) of the administrative code of the city of New York where that
department issues such notice. The notice of violation or copy thereof when
filled in and served shall constitute notice of the violation charged, and, if
sworn to or affirmed, shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained
therein. The administrative tribunal of the board of health, the environmental
control board and the tribunal of the department of consumer and worker
protection at the office of administrative trials and hearings shall have the
power to render decisions and orders and to impose the remedies and penalties
provided for in section
17-1104, in addition to any other remedies or penalties provided for the
enforcement of such provisions under any other law including, but not limited
to, civil or criminal actions or proceedings.
(Am. L.L. 2020/080, 8/28/2020, eff. 8/28/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/036,
L.L. 2008/035, and
L.L. 2020/080.
§ 17-1104 Civil and criminal penalties.
   a.   (1)   Any person providing a commercial lawn application who violates
any provision of subdivision b of section
17-1102 of this chapter or any rule promulgated pursuant thereto shall be
liable for a civil penalty not to exceed five thousand dollars for a first
violation, and not to exceed ten thousand dollars for a subsequent offense.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, an owner or
owner's agent of a multiple dwelling or owner, owner's agent or a person in a
position of authority for all other types of premises who violates any
provision of subdivision b of section
17-1102 of this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto
and any person who violates any provision of subdivision c of section
17-1102 of this chapter or any rule promulgated pursuant thereto shall, for a
first such violation, in lieu of a penalty, be issued a written warning and
shall also be issued educational materials pursuant to subdivision two of
section
33-1005 of the environmental conservation law. Such persons shall, however, be
liable for a civil penalty not to exceed one hundred dollars for a second
violation, and not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars for any subsequent
violation.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, any person
who violates the provisions of subdivision a of section
17-1102 of this chapter shall be issued a warning for the first violation and
shall be provided seven days to correct such violation. Such person shall,
however, be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed one hundred dollars for a
second violation and not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars for any subsequent
violation.
   b.   (1)   Any person providing a commercial lawn application who, having
the culpable mental states defined in subdivision one or subdivision two of
section 15.05 or in section 20.20 of the penal law, violates any provision of
subdivision b of section
17-1102 of this chapter, except an offense relating to the application of a
general use pesticide, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five thousand dollars for
each day during which such violation continues or by imprisonment for a term of
not more than one year, or by both such fine and imprisonment. If the
conviction is for a subsequent offense committed after a first conviction of
such person under this subdivision, punishment shall be by a fine not to exceed
ten thousand dollars for each day during which such violation continues or by
imprisonment for a term of not more than one year, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
      (2)   Any person providing a commercial lawn application who violates any
provision of subdivision b of section
17-1102 of this chapter relating to the use of a general use pesticide shall be
guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars. If the conviction is for a
subsequent offense committed after a first such conviction of such person under
this subdivision, punishment shall be by a fine not to exceed five thousand
dollars.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/036.
Chapter 12: Pesticide Use by City Agencies
§ 17-1201 Application.
This chapter shall apply to all pest control activities on property owned or
leased by the city, whether such activities are performed by city employees,
contractors, subcontractors or any person acting under the direction of such
city agency or contractor.
(Am. L.L. 2021/056, 5/23/2021, eff. 5/23/2021)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2021/056.
§ 17-1202 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter only, the following terms have the following
meanings:
   Anti-microbial pesticide. The term "anti-microbial pesticide" means:
      1.   disinfectants intended to destroy or irreversibly inactivate
infectious or other undesirable bacteria, pathogenic fungi, or viruses on
surfaces or inanimate objects;
      2.   sanitizers intended to reduce the number of living bacteria or
viable virus particles on inanimate surfaces, in water, or in air;
      3.   bacteriostats intended to inhibit the growth of bacteria in the
presence of moisture;
      4.   sterilizers intended to destroy viruses and all living bacteria,
fungi and their spores, on inanimate surfaces;
      5.   fungicides and fungistats intended to inhibit the growth of, or
destroy, fungi (including yeasts), pathogenic to humans or other animals on
inanimate surfaces; and
      6.   commodity preservatives and protectants intended to inhibit the
growth of, or destroy bacteria in or on raw materials (such as adhesives and
plastics) used in manufacturing, or manufactured products (such as fuel,
textiles, lubricants, and paints), but not those utilized in the pulp and paper
process or cooling towers.
   Biological pesticide. The term "biological pesticide" means a pesticide
which is a naturally occurring substance that controls pests and microorganisms
that control pests.
   City agency. The term "city agency" means a city, county, borough,
administration, department, division, bureau, board or commission, or a
corporation, institution or agency of government, the expenses of which are
paid in whole or in part from the city treasury.
   Contractor. The term "contractor" means any person or entity that enters
into a contract with a city agency, or any person or entity that enters into an
agreement with such person or entity to perform work or provide labor or
services related to such contract.
   Park or other property under the jurisdiction of the department of parks and
recreation. The term "park or other property under the jurisdiction of the
department of parks and recreation" means public parks, beaches, waters and
land under water, pools, boardwalks, marinas, playgrounds, recreation centers
and all other property under the jurisdiction, charge or control of the
department of parks and recreation.
   Pest. The term "pest" means:
      1.   any insect, rodent, fungus, or weed; or
      2.   any other form of terrestrial or aquatic plant or animal life or
virus, bacteria or other microorganism (except viruses, bacteria or other
microorganisms on or in living man or other living animals) which the
commissioner of environmental conservation declares to be a pest.
   Pesticide. The term "pesticide" means:
      1.   any substance or mixture of substances intended for preventing,
destroying, repelling, or mitigating any pest; or
      2.   any substance or mixture of substances intended for use as a plant
regulator, defoliant, or desiccant.
   Playground. The term "playground" means an outdoor area open to the public
where children play, which contains play equipment such as a sliding board,
swing, jungle gym, sandbox, or see-saw, or which is designated as a play area.
   Synthetic substance. The term "synthetic substance" means any substance,
other than those naturally occurring in a plant, animal or mineral, that is
formulated or manufactured by a chemical process.
(Am. L.L. 2021/056, 5/23/2021, eff. 5/23/2021)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2021/056.
§ 17-1203 Reduction of pesticide use.
   a.   Effective six months after the enactment of the local law that added
this section, no city agency or contractor shall apply to any property owned or
leased by the city any pesticide classified as Toxicity Category I by the
United States environmental protection agency as of April 1, 2005, provided
that for any pesticide classified as Toxicity Category I by the United States
environmental protection agency after April 1, 2005, no such agency or
contractor shall apply such pesticide after six months of its having been so
classified, except as provided for in sections
17-1205 or
17-1206 of this chapter.
   b.   Except as provided for in sections
17-1205 or
17-1206 of this chapter, no city agency or contractor shall apply to any
property owned or leased by the city:
      1.   any pesticide classified as a human carcinogen, likely to be
carcinogenic to humans, a known/likely carcinogen, a probable human carcinogen,
or a possible human carcinogen by the office of pesticide programs of the
United States environmental protection agency as of April 1, 2005;
      2.   any pesticide classified as a human carcinogen, likely to be
carcinogenic to humans, a known/likely carcinogen, a probable human carcinogen,
or a possible human carcinogen by the office of pesticides programs of the
United States environmental protection agency as of the effective date of this
clause.
   c.   Except as provided for in sections
17-1205 or
17-1206 of this chapter, no city agency or contractor shall apply to any
property owned or leased by the city:
      1.   any pesticide classified by the California office of environmental
health hazard assessment as a developmental toxin as of April 1, 2005;
      2.   any pesticide classified by the California office of environmental
health hazard assessment as a developmental toxin as of the effective date of
this clause; or
      3.   any pesticide containing active ingredients listed as known,
probably or possibly carcinogenic to humans by the international agency for
research on cancer of the world health organization as of the effective date of
this clause.
   d.   Effective eighteen months after the enactment of the local law that
added this subdivision, no city agency, contractor or any person acting under
the direction of such city agency or contractor shall apply to any playground,
or park or other property under the jurisdiction of the department of parks and
recreation any pesticide other than a biological pesticide except as provided
for in sections
17-1205 and
17-1206 of this chapter.
   e.   The commissioner may promulgate regulations designating additional
pesticides that pose risks to the public health similar to those posed by the
pesticides regulated under this section, and providing that the use of such
additional pesticides by city agencies and their contractors shall be subject
to limitations set forth in such regulations.
   f.   On June 1, 2022, and every June 1 thereafter, the department shall
submit to the City Council a report listing changes made to the lists of
pesticides named in subdivisions b and c since the date of the last report
submitted pursuant to this section. Such reports shall also include, for each
pesticide added to or removed from such classifications, whether and to what
extent such pesticide is used by city agencies or contractors in the city of
New York, as well as any efforts city agencies have undertaken to reduce or
eliminate the use of pesticides pursuant to paragraphs 11, 12, 13 and 14 in
section
17-1205.
(Am. L.L. 2021/056, 5/23/2021, eff. 5/23/2021)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2021/056.
§ 17-1204 Interagency pest management committee.
   a.   Effective three months after enactment of the local law that added this
section, an interagency pest management committee shall be formed, which shall
be headed by the commissioner, or a designee, and which shall include the
commissioners of sanitation, environmental protection, citywide administrative
services and parks and recreation, the chair of the New York city housing
authority and the chancellor of education, or their designees. Such committee
shall share information related to the pest control strategies and experience
of city agencies and shall meet on a semi-annual basis.
   b.   By January 1, 2007, the interagency pest management committee shall
develop a plan to further reduce pesticide use by city agencies, including
initiatives to implement integrated pest management, giving preference to
employing physical, mechanical, cultural, biological and educational tactics to
prevent conditions that promote pest infestations, which shall be updated on an
annual basis, as necessary. The plan, and any updates of such plan, shall be
submitted to the mayor and the speaker of the council within thirty days of
issuance.
§ 17-1205 Exemptions.
   a.   The restrictions established pursuant to section
17-1203 of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
      1.   pesticides otherwise lawfully used for the purpose of maintaining a
safe drinking water supply at drinking water treatment plants, wastewater
treatment plants, reservoirs, and related collection, distribution and
treatment facilities;
      2.   anti-microbial pesticides;
      3.   pesticides applied to professional sports playing fields, golf
courses or used to maintain water quality in swimming pools;
      4.   pesticides used for the purpose of maintaining heating, ventilation
and air conditioning systems, cooling towers and other industrial cooling and
heating systems;
      5.   pesticides used for the purpose of rodent control in containerized
baits or placed directly into rodent burrows or placed in areas inaccessible to
children or pets;
      6.   pesticides or classes of pesticides classified by the United States
environmental protection agency as not requiring regulation under the federal
insecticide, fungicide and rodenticide act, and therefore exempt from such
regulation when intended for use, and used only in the manner specified;
      7.   biological pesticides;
      8.   boric acid and disodium tetrahydrate, silica gels, diatomaceous
earth, and nonvolatile insect bait in tamper resistant containers;
      9.   synthetic substances listed as allowed on the United States
department of agriculture national list of allowed and prohibited substances;
      10.   non-synthetic substances, unless listed as prohibited on the United
States department of agriculture national list of allowed and prohibited
substances;
      11.   pesticides used to control invasive plant species listed on the New
York state invasive plant list in areas that the agency responsible for the
property maintains for purposes other than public access;
      12.   pesticides used to control harmful plant species, as defined by the
New York state department of environmental conservation, found growing on City
property maintained for purposes of public access;
      13.   pesticides used when the agency responsible for the property
determines alternative treatments to be a worker safety hazard related to
vehicular traffic; and
      14.   pesticides used to comply with a state or federal mandate or permit
requirement.
(Am. L.L. 2021/056, 5/23/2021, eff. 5/23/2021)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2021/056.
§ 17-1206 Waiver.
Any city agency, including the department, is authorized to apply to the
commissioner for a waiver of the restrictions established pursuant to section
17-1203 of this chapter. Such application shall be in a form and manner
prescribed by the commissioner and shall contain such information as the
commissioner deems reasonable and necessary to determine whether such waiver
should be granted. Upon submitting an application for a waiver, the agency
requesting the waiver shall notify by email the president of the borough in
which pesticides may be applied pursuant to such waiver, the council member in
whose district pesticides may be applied pursuant to such waiver, and the
community board for the community district in which pesticides may be applied
pursuant to such waiver, and publish notification of such waiver request in the
City Record. In determining whether to grant or deny a request for a waiver,
the commissioner shall consider whether the application of
17-1203 would be, in the absence of the waiver, unreasonable with respect to
(i) the magnitude of the infestation, (ii) the threat to public health, (iii)
the availability of effective alternatives and (iv) the likelihood of exposure
of humans to the pesticide. Such waiver may be issued with respect to one or
multiple applications and may be granted for a term deemed appropriate by the
commissioner, provided, however, that such term shall not exceed one year.
Within thirty days of granting a waiver, the department shall post the waiver
application in its entirety to the department's website, and the agency
receiving the waiver shall notify by email the president of the borough in
which pesticides will be applied pursuant to such waiver, the council member in
whose district pesticides will be applied pursuant to such waiver, and the
community board for the community district in which pesticides will be applied
pursuant to such waiver, and provide the pest management committee, as
established by section
17-1204 of this chapter, with a copy of such waiver.
(Am. L.L. 2021/056, 5/23/2021, eff. 5/23/2021)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2021/056.
§ 17-1207 Notification.
   a.   Any city agency or contractor applying pesticides on property owned or
leased by the city shall post a notice at publicly accessible locations on such
site at least twenty-four hours prior to any such application, in a form and
manner prescribed by the commissioner, provided, however, that applications
requiring immediate action for public health reasons, such as severe rodent
infestations, where mosquito larvae are present, or where populations of
infected mosquitoes are present shall require that notice be placed
concurrently with such application. Such notice shall include, but not be
limited to:
      (1)   Date of posting, proposed date of pesticide application and two
alternative dates to the proposed date of application when, due to weather
conditions, the pesticide application on the proposed date is precluded;
      (2)   Address of pesticide application and, if known, specific sites to
which the pesticide is to be applied;
      (3)   Pest to be controlled and method of pesticide application;
      (4)   Common trade names of the pesticide, if applicable;
      (5)   United States environmental protection agency registration number
of the pesticide, the active ingredient(s) contained in the pesticide and
information on how to obtain further information about the products applied,
such as by calling the National Pesticides Telecommunications Network at 1-800-
858-7378 or the New York State Department of Health Center for Environmental
Health Info line at 1-800-458-1158; and
      (6)   Name and telephone number of the city agency or contractor
responsible for the application.
   b.   The city agency or contractor responsible for posting the notice
required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall not remove such notice
for the longer of either three days subsequent to the last moment of pesticide
application or the number of days required on the pesticide product label.
   c.   The notification requirements established pursuant to this section
shall not apply to pesticides listed in section
17-1205 of this chapter.
§ 17-1208 Recordkeeping and reporting.
   a.   Each city agency that uses pesticides shall keep records, for a minimum
of three years or such longer time period required by statute, regulation, or
agency directive, of each pesticide application by such agency, or by a
contractor in the fulfillment of a contract with such agency, which shall
include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Date and location of the specific site of pesticide use;
      (2)   Pest to be controlled and the method of pesticide application;
      (3)   Name and quantity of the pesticide used, including common trade
names of such pesticide, if applicable;
      (4)   United States environmental protection agency registration number
of the pesticide and active ingredient(s) contained in the pesticide;
      (5)   Name and telephone number of the city agency or contractor
responsible for the application;
      (6)   Proof that notice required pursuant to section
17-1207 was provided;
      (7)   Any waiver that was granted pursuant to section
17-1206 of this chapter, if applicable.
   b.   Effective February 1, 2007, and every February first thereafter, each
city agency that is subject to the requirements of subdivision a of this
section shall submit a report to the commissioner, in a form and manner
prescribed by the commissioner, which shall contain the information required to
be maintained pursuant to that subdivision for review and analysis. Effective
May 1, 2008, and every May first thereafter, the commissioner shall submit a
report to the speaker of the council that includes the information reported by
each agency pursuant to this subdivision and a summary of such information.
Such summary report shall include, but not be limited to, a summary,
disaggregated by agency, of the number of times each pesticide was used, the
total amount of each pesticide used and the Toxicity Category for each
pesticide as determined by the United States environmental protection agency.
   c.   The department of parks and recreation shall submit a report to the
speaker of the New York City Council on February 1, 2007, indicating the
pesticides used on city owned golf courses, the frequency of application of
such pesticides and any integrated pest management program for such golf
courses.
§ 17-1209 Enforcement.
   a.   Every city contract to perform work or provide labor or services
related to property owned or leased by the city shall contain the following
provision: "To the extent that you apply pesticides to any property owned or
leased by the city, you, or any subcontractor you hire, shall comply with
chapter 12 of the administrative code."
   b.   Upon receiving information that a contractor is in violation of this
chapter, the city agency holding the contract shall review such information and
offer the contractor an opportunity to respond. If such city agency finds that
a violation has occurred, it shall take such action as may be appropriate and
provided for by law, rule or contract, including, but not limited to, imposing
sanctions, seeking compliance, recovering damages, and/or declaring the
contractor in default.
§ 17-1210 Rules.
The commissioner shall promulgate any rules as may be necessary for the
purposes of carrying out the provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 13: Availability of Information Regarding Day Care Services
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/013.
§ 17-1301 Definitions.
   a.   "Child care service" means any service which is permitted as a child
care service in accordance with article 47 of the New York city health code.
   b.   "Child care service permittee" means the person to whom a permit to
operate a child care service is issued by the commissioner.
   c.   "Permit" means an authorization to operate a child care service issued
by the commissioner in accordance with article 47 of the New York city health
code.
   d.   "Serious injury" means a serious impairment of physical condition,
including, but not limited to, the following: loss of consciousness;
concussion; bone fracture; protracted loss or impairment of function of any
bodily member or organ; a wound requiring extensive suturing; and serious
disfigurement.
   e.   "Summary child care service inspection report" is a report that
includes, at a minimum, the following information:
      (1)   the name of the child care service;
      (2)   the name of the child care service permittee;
      (3)   the child care service permit number and expiration date;
      (4)   the address of the child care service;
      (5)   the date of the most recent inspection;
      (6)   the maximum number of children authorized to be present at any one
time as specified in the child care service permit;
      (7)   any violations identified by the department during inspections
conducted over the past three years; and
      (8)   whether a permit has been ordered suspended or revoked in the past
twelve months; whether a child care service has, during the past three years,
been ordered closed because its continued operation represented a danger to the
health or safety of children; and the terms and conditions, if any, under which
such child care service has been allowed to reopen and is authorized to
operate.
   f.   "Violation" means a citation issued by the department which alleges
that a child care service has failed to comply with a provision of applicable
law, rule or regulation.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/013.
§ 17-1302 Access to summary child care service inspection reports.
Following each inspection of a child care service, the department shall post a
summary child care service inspection report on the department's website and
shall make summary child care service inspection reports available by calling
311.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/013.
§ 17-1303 Posting of information on-site.
Every child care service must post a sign in a conspicuous place near its
public entrance or entrances stating that the most recent summary child care
service inspection report may be accessed through the website of the department
or by calling 311. The sign, whose form and content shall be provided or
approved by the department, shall be printed in clear and legible type, in such
a manner as to be readily visible to parents or other persons entering the
child care service and shall provide instructions on how to gain access to the
summary child care service inspection reports through the department's website.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/013.
§ 17-1304 Denial of permit.
   a.   Every applicant for a new or renewal permit to operate a child care
service shall disclose whether a serious injury or the death of a child in its
care, or the care of any of its owners, directors, employees, volunteers or
agents, has occurred. Every such permit applicant shall further disclose any
civil or criminal court verdicts holding that the applicant, or any of its
owners, directors, employees, volunteers or agents, was responsible for such
serious injury or death of a child, or administrative agency decisions holding
or finding that there is credible evidence that the applicant, or any of its
owners, directors, employees, volunteers or agents, was responsible for such
serious injury or death of a child, and whether any legal proceeding involving
the serious injury or death of a child is pending against the applicant, or any
of its owners, directors, employees, volunteers or agents. The department shall
deny such a permit unless, on the basis of the application and other papers
submitted, including the information provided pursuant to this section, and on
the basis of department or city investigation, if any, it is satisfied that the
provisions of the New York city health code and other applicable law will be
met. The death of a child or the occurrence of more than one incident resulting
in a serious injury to a child or children in the care of an applicant or
permittee shall create a presumption in any proceeding brought by the
department to deny or revoke such a permit of the inability of the applicant or
permittee to comply with the provisions of said code or other applicable law.
Nothing herein shall otherwise limit the department's authority to deny the
issuance or renewal of a permit or to revoke a permit.
   b.   To the extent permissible by law, where the department has received
written notification that a person with responsibility for oversight and
direction of a child care service has a felony conviction at any time for a sex
offense, crime against a child, or a crime involving violence, or a felony
conviction within the past five years for a drug-related offense, the
department shall, when consistent with article twenty-three-A of the correction
law, deny the application for a permit to operate such child care service.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/013.
§ 17-1305 Notification of authorities.
The department shall report to an appropriate state agency any serious injury
or death of a child in child care services which has been reported to the
department in accordance with applicable law, rules and regulations. Such
report shall include the name of the child care service and the child care
service permittee of any child care service in which a serious injury or death
of a child has occurred.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/013.
§ 17-1306 Distribution of information to referral agencies.
   a.   Definitions.
      1.   "Child care program" means any program that provides child day care
as defined in section 390 of the New York state social services law, including
family day care home, group family day care home and school age child care as
defined in section 390 of the New York state social services law, or child care
services.
      2.   "Referral agency" means the administration for children's services,
the department of social services/human resources administration or any state-
funded child care resource and referral agency operating in New York city.
   b.   To the extent permissible under law, the department shall promptly make
available to referral agencies information regarding any child care program for
which the department is aware of a current suspension of its license,
registration or permit or that it has had its license, registration or permit
terminated.
   c.   The department shall request that referral agencies advise parents to
seek additional information regarding any program to which a referral is made
by consulting the department's website or by calling 311.
   d.   The department shall publish an informational pamphlet which shall, at
a minimum, do the following:
      1.   Describe the government authorities responsible for regulating child
care programs, along with contact information for persons to use if they have
questions or complaints about child care programs.
      2.   Describe key rules or regulations relating to child care programs,
including mandated staff and adult/child ratios, maximum capacity and health
and safety standards.
      3.   Describe the inspection process and the registration, licensing and
permitting processes for child care programs.
   4.   Advise parents seeking child care programs to ask child care program
providers to see the program's current license, registration or permit and not
to enroll a child in any program that does not have a current registration,
license or permit or has a current suspension of its registration, license or
permit. The informational pamphlet required by this section shall be translated
into all covered languages as defined in § 8-1002* of the administrative code
of the city of New York. Copies of the pamphlet shall be provided to all
referral agencies.
* Editor's note: Repealed. For current provisions, see
Title 21, Chapter 1, Subchapter 1.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/012.
§ 17-1307 Penalties.
   a.   Any child care service found in violation of section
17-1303 or any provision of any rule promulgated thereunder shall be subject to
a civil penalty of $500 for each such violation.
   b.   Any applicant for a new or renewal permit to operate a child care
service found in violation of section
17-1304, or of any provision of any rule promulgated thereunder, for failing to
disclose whether a serious injury or the death of a child in its care shall be
subject to a civil penalty of $1,000 for each such violation.
   c.   Any child care service that violates section
17-1303 or any rule promulgated thereunder shall not be subject to a civil
penalty for a first-time violation if such child care service proves to the
satisfaction of the department, within seven days of the issuance of the notice
of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation,
that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if
accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be
deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting
proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any
settlement offer made by the department to a child care service that has
received, for the first time, a notice of violation of section
17-1303 or any rules promulgated pursuant thereto. The department shall permit
such proof to be submitted electronically or in person. A child care service
may seek review, in the office of administrative trials and hearings, of the
determination that the child care service has not submitted proof of a cure
within 15 days of receiving written notification of such determination.
(L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 1/14/2022)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2010/022 and
L.L. 2021/080.
§ 17-1308 Guidance for owners of real property to create space for child care
programs.
   a.   Definition. As used in this section, the term "child care program"
means any program that meets the definition provided in subdivision d of
section 47.01 of the health code.
   b.   The department shall develop guidance for owners of real property
regarding facility requirements for a child care program. Such guidance shall
describe the facility requirements that must be satisfied in order to obtain a
permit from the department as set forth in article 47 of the health code. Such
guidance shall include, but not be limited to, requirements regarding (i)
minimum area, (ii) egress, (iii) plumbing installation, (iv) ventilation and
lighting and (v) fire safety. Such guidance shall assist owners of real
property in determining the extent to which such property complies with
applicable requirements described in such guidance. Such guidance shall
indicate that such real property may be eligible for a tax abatement, provided
that the requirements set forth in section 499-bbbbb of the real property tax
law, and in all applicable rules, have been satisfied.
   c.   Nothing in the guidance or in the owner's determination of the extent
to which its property complies with applicable requirements shall provide any
assurance that a child care program will receive a permit from the department.
   d.   The department shall maintain, and update as necessary, such guidance
on the department's website.
(L.L. 2022/105, 11/9/2022, eff. 5/8/2023)
§ 17-1309 Child care directory.
   a.   Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Child care program. The term "child care program" means any program that
meets the definition provided in subdivision d of section 47.01 of the health
code.
      Child day care. The term "child day care" means any program that meets
the definition provided in paragraph (a), (d), (e) or (f) of subdivision 1 of
section 390 of the social services law.
      Designated citywide language. The term "designated citywide language" has
the same meaning ascribed to such term in subdivision a of section
23-1101.
   b.   Directory requirements. 
      1.   By July 1, 2023, the department shall coordinate, as necessary, with
the department of information technology and telecommunications and any other
relevant agency or office to create and maintain a directory of all child care
programs located within the city. Such directory shall be publicly accessible
on a website or online portal. The directory shall be available in the
designated citywide languages and include, but not be limited to, the following
features:
         (a)   For each child care program:
            (i)   The name, address, telephone number and program type;
            (ii)   The age groups served by such child care program; and
            (iii)   The status of any permit or license required to operate
such child care program;
         (b)   A search function that allows a search of child care programs by
key words, name or location, including by borough and zip code; and
         (c)   A clear and conspicuous link to a webpage that provides
information on the child day cares located within the city, and a description
of the types of child day cares.
      2.   Notwithstanding the requirements of this section, the directory
shall not include the address or telephone number of a child care program
located in a domestic violence shelter as designated by the department of
social services.
(L.L. 2022/101, 11/9/2022, eff. 12/9/2022)
§ 17-1310 Report on child care inspector training.
No later than September 30, 2026, and by September 30 annually thereafter, the
commissioner shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and post
on the department’s website, a report on training provided during the prior
fiscal year to employees of the department who conduct inspections of child
care services and child day cares licensed or regulated pursuant to section 390
of the social services law. The report shall include, but need not be limited
to, the following:
   a.   The types of child care-related training required for employees of the
department who conduct inspections of child care services and child day cares
licensed or regulated pursuant to section 390 of the social services law,
including the subject matter and specific information covered, and the entity
that provided each type of training;
   b.   How often each type of training is required;
   c.   The percentage of child care inspectors who took the required trainings
during the reporting period;
   d.   A description of any additional training topics the department provided
during the reporting period, including any such topics that were based on
recommendations from child care inspectors and any other relevant sources; and
   e.   Any other information the commissioner deems relevant.
(L.L. 2025/130, 9/13/2025, eff. 9/13/2025)
§ 17-1311 Child care rights outreach campaign.
   a.   Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Designated citywide languages. The term “designated citywide languages”
has the same meaning as set forth in section
23-1101.
      Epinephrine auto-injector device. The term “epinephrine auto-injector
device” has the same meaning as set forth in section 3000-c of the public
health law.
      Home-based child care program. The term “home-based child care program”
means any child day care licensed or regulated pursuant to section 390 of the
social services law.
      Opioid antagonist. The term “opioid antagonist” has the same meaning as
set forth in section
17-2101.
   b.   Outreach campaign. Beginning November 1, 2026, the commissioner shall
conduct an annual outreach campaign to inform parents and legal guardians about
their rights in relation to the care of their children in a child care service
or home-based child care program. The campaign shall be designed to reach
parents and legal guardians with children enrolled in a child care service or
home-based child care program across the city. The commissioner shall make
campaign outreach materials available to child care services, home-based child
care programs, schools, libraries, recreation centers, facilities operated by
the New York city health and hospitals corporation that provide pediatric care,
community board offices, council member district offices, pediatric healthcare
providers in the city, and any other locations as determined by the
commissioner. Such campaign outreach materials shall be made available in all
designated citywide languages, and shall include, but need not be limited to,
the following:
      1.   Information on how to make complaints to the department and relevant
state agencies regarding a child care service or home-based child care program,
including relevant phone numbers and websites;
      2.   A statement of the right of a parent or legal guardian to have
unrestricted access to their child at all times and to inspect on demand during
hours of operation any area of a child care service or home-based child care
program where such child has access, unless such right is otherwise limited by
law or an order of protection;
      3.   A description of the information or notices that child care services
must post and display pursuant to
title 17 of the administrative code, article 47 of the health code, or chapter
3 of title 24 of the rules of the city of New York, including information
regarding their permit or license, how to access the most recent inspection
report, and the most recent child care performance summary card;
      4.   A description of the information or notices that home-based child
care programs must post and display, as known by the department based on
department services provided pursuant to contract with the New York state
office of children and family services;
      5.   A description of the information that child care services must
provide to parents and legal guardians and information that must be provided
upon request, pursuant to
title 17 of the administrative code and article 47 of the health code,
including policies and procedures relating to supervision, attendance,
admission, discharge, emergency and illness management, and a written policy
regarding behavior management of children;
      6.   A description of the information that home-based child care programs
must post and display, as known by the department based on department services
provided pursuant to contract with the New York state office of children and
family services; and
      7.   Information regarding how to ascertain whether a child care service
or home-based child care program has opioid antagonists and epinephrine auto-
injectors on site, and whether staff are trained to administer such.
   c.   The department shall require a child care service to distribute the
information provided in the outreach campaign pursuant to subdivision b of this
section to the parent or legal guardian of each child upon enrollment in the
child care service.
   d.   The department shall make the materials required pursuant to
subdivision b of this section available electronically on the child care
directory required pursuant to section
17-1309.
(L.L. 2025/129, 9/13/2025, eff. 1/13/2026)
§ 17-1312 Guidance relating to the child care program permitting process.
   a.   The department shall, in coordination with any other agency as it deems
necessary, provide guidance to an applicant for a permit for a child care
program pursuant to article 47 of the health code on the requirements for
obtaining such permit. Such guidance shall include a visual representation of
the process and include the following information: any required license,
approval, or permit from the department or any other agency and the order in
which each such license, approval, or permit must be obtained. The inadvertent
failure to include any such license, approval, or permit in guidance provided
pursuant to this subdivision shall not invalidate the requirement to obtain
such license, approval, or permit.
   b.   The commissioner shall post on the department’s website, and update as
necessary, the guidance required pursuant to subdivision a of this section and,
as relevant, include a description of any such update or other change made to
such guidance. Such guidance and updates shall be provided in the designated
citywide languages defined in section
23-1101 and also be posted on any other city website where the department makes
permitting information available. The department shall submit such guidance and
any subsequent updates to the mayor and the speaker of the council.
(L.L. 2026/069, 3/14/2025, eff. 6/12/2026)
Chapter 14: Limits on Volatile Organic Compound Emissions in Carpet and Carpet
Cushion
§ 17-1401 Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following terms have the following meanings:
   (1)   Carpet. A heavy fabric used to cover a floor and made from wool,
cotton, or other natural or synthetic fibers. Such term shall include carpet
backing.
   (2)   Carpet business. Any person engaged in the business of selling or
installing carpet or carpet cushion.
   (3)   Carpet adhesive. Any adhesive labeled for use in the installation of
carpet, vinyl backed carpet, or artificial grass.
   (4)   Carpet backing. Materials such as fabrics, yarns, or chemical
compounds at the underside of a carpet, used to reinforce the carpet's
construction.
   (5)   Carpet cushion. A padding made of hair, felt, jute, foam or sponge
rubber, or other natural or man-made materials, that is placed on the floor
before a carpet is laid.
   (6)   Emission factor. The mass of a compound emitted from a specific unit
area of product surface per unit of time.
   (7)   Owner. Any person having a legal or equitable interest in or control
of any building, premises or part thereof, including but not limited to the
record owner, a tenant or lessee.
   (8)   Person. Any natural person, agent, firm, partnership, corporation or
other legal entity.
   (9)   Total volatile organic compound or TVOC. Sum of the concentrations of
all identified and unidentified VOCs between and including n-pentane through n-
heptadecane (C5-C17) as measured by the gas chromatography/mass spectrometry
total ion current (GC/MS TIC) method and expressed as a toluene equivalent
value.
   (10)   Volatile organic compound or VOC. Carbon-containing compounds with
vapor pressures at standard conditions ranging between those for n-pentane
through n-heptadecane (C5-C17), excluding carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide,
carbonic acid, metallic carbides and carbonates and ammonium carbonate. For the
purposes of this chapter, formaldehyde and acetaldehyde are considered to be
VOCs.
§ 17-1402 Sale or installation of non-compliant carpet or carpet cushion
prohibited.
On and after July 1, 2013 it shall be unlawful for a carpet business to sell or
offer for sale carpet or carpet cushion designed for installation or use in the
interior of a building or for a carpet business or owner to install or lay or
to cause the installation or laying of carpet or carpet cushion in the interior
of any building, premises or part thereof in the city that is not compliant
with the standards set forth in section
17-1404.
§ 17-1403 Carpet adhesive.
Carpet adhesive used in the installation of carpet in the interior of any
building in the city shall comply with subpart 228-2 of part 228 of title 6 of
the official compilation of the codes, rules and regulations of the state of
New York.
§ 17-1404 Standard for testing.
Testing of materials, other than carpet adhesive, covered by this chapter shall
be in accordance with American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) D 5116-
10 (standard guide for small-scale environmental chamber determination of
organic emissions from indoor materials/products) or as otherwise specified in
the rules of the department. Carpet shall comply with the emission factor
limits in table I for a 14-day testing period. Carpet cushion shall comply with
the emission factor limits in table II for a 24-hour testing period.
§ 17-1405 Recordkeeping requirements for carpet businesses.
Carpet businesses shall not remove the original manufacturer's labels from
carpets or carpet cushions unless removal is necessary during installation.
Carpet businesses shall obtain documentation from the manufacturer, in a form
the department finds acceptable, that all carpet or carpet cushion sold,
offered for sale or installed within the city is compliant with the standards
set forth in section
17-1404 unless the manufacturer's label otherwise indicates that the carpet or
carpet cushion is compliant pursuant to section
17-1406. Such documentation shall be kept on file and available for inspection
by consumers and officers and employees of the department or the department of
consumer affairs within seventy-two hours of the request. If carpet or carpet
cushion is sold outside the city for installation in the city, such
documentation shall be available for inspection by consumers and the department
at the site upon installation.
§ 17-1406 Green label, green label plus and other certification programs.
   a.   Carpets and carpet cushions that have been certified by, and carry the
seal or symbol of, the following certification programs shall be deemed to
comply with the standards set forth in section
17-1404:
      i.   Carpet and Rug Institute (CRI) Green Label certification program,
version effective February 16, 2010 or such other version as may be specified
in the rules of the department;
      ii.   Carpet and Rug Institute (CRI) Green Label Plus certification
program, version effective February 16, 2010 or such other version as may be
specified in the rules of the department; and iii. other certification programs
as may be specified in the rules of the department.
   b.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision a, this section shall not
apply to any certification program if the emission factor allowed for any
individual VOC or for TVOC by the applicable version of such program exceeds
the standards set forth in section
17-1404.
§ 17-1407 Notice.
Notice of the requirements of this chapter shall be posted in a conspicuous
location at the premises of a carpet business within the city where carpet or
carpet cushion are sold or offered for sale to consumers or, provided in
written form to consumers at the time of sale within the city. If carpet or
carpet cushion is sold outside the city for installation in the city, such
notice shall be provided to the consumer prior to installation. The form and
wording of such notice shall be specified by the department of health and
mental hygiene.
§ 17-1408 Construction.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require the removal or
replacement of carpet or carpet cushion installed prior to July 1, 2013.
§ 17-1409 Enforcement and penalties.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the department and the
department of consumer and worker protection. Any person found to be in
violation of section
17-1402 or
17-1403 of this chapter or rules of the department promulgated pursuant thereto
shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than five hundred dollars for
each violation. Any person found to be in violation of section
17-1405 or
17-1407 of this chapter or rules of the department promulgated pursuant thereto
shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than two hundred fifty dollars
for each violation. Such civil penalties may be recovered in proceedings before
the environmental control board or any tribunal established within the office
of administrative trials and hearings or in an action in any court of
appropriate jurisdiction. Notices of violation returnable to such board or
tribunal may be served by officers and employees of the department and the
department of consumer and worker protection. In any proceeding it shall be an
affirmative defense that the respondent is a laborer in the employ of the
carpet business to do the physical work of installing the carpet and that he or
she has no ownership interest in or control of the business or in any
corporation, partnership or other legal entity that owns or controls the
business and that he or she has no managerial or supervisory responsibility.
(Am. L.L. 2020/080, 8/28/2020, eff. 8/28/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2020/080.
§ 17-1410 Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to antique or hand-made rugs or carpets made of
natural fibers such as wool, cotton or jute with no VOC containing carpet
cushion or carpet backing.
Table I
Carpet 14-Day VOC Emissions Test Criteria
Volatile Organic Compound Chemical Abstract Maximum Emission Factor (μg/m2/hr)
                          Service #
Volatile Organic Compound    Chemical Abstract Maximum Emission Factor (μg/m2/
                             Service #         hr)
Acetaldehyde                 75-07-0           130
Benzene                      71-43-2           55
Carbon disulfide             75-15-0           744
Carbon tetrachloride         56-23-5           37
Chlorobenzene                108-90-7          930
Chloroform                   67-66-3           279
Dichlorobenzene (1,4-)       106-46-7          744
Dichloroethylene (1,1)       75-35-4           65
Dimethylformamide (N,N-)     68-12-2           74
Dioxane (1,4-)               123-91-1          2790
Epichlorohydrin              106-89-8          2
Ethylbenzene                 100-41-4          1860
Ethylene glycol              107-21-1          372
Ethylene glycol monoethyl    110-80-5          65
ether
Ethylene glycol monoethyl    111-15-9          279
ether acetate
Ethylene glycol monomethyl   109-86-4          55
ether
Ethylene glycol monomethyl   110-49-6          83
ether acetate
Formaldehyde                 50-00-0           16.7
Hexane (n-)                  110-54-3          6510
Isophorone                   78-59-1           1860
Isopropanol                  67-63-0           6510
Methyl chloroform            71-55-6           930
Methylene chloride           75-09-2           372
Methyl t-butyl ether         1634-04-4         7440
Naphthalene                  91-20-3           8.2
Phenol                       108-95-2          186
Prophylene glycol monomethyl 107-98-2          6510
ether
Styrene                      100-42-5          410
Tetrachloroethylene          127-18-4          32
Toluene                      108-88-3          280
Trichloroethylene            79-01-6           558
Vinyl acetate                108-05-4          186
Xylenes, technical mixture   108-38-3
(m-, o-, p-xylene combined)  95-47-6           651
                             06-42-3
 
Table II
Carpet Cushion 24-Hour VOC Emissions Test Criteria
 
                                 24-hour Testing Period:
Volatile Organic Compound        Maximum Emission Factor
                                 (μg/m2 per hour)
Butylated hydroxytoluene         300
Formaldehyde                     50
4-Phenylcyclohexene (4PCH)       50
Total Volatile Organic Compounds 1,000
 
Chapter 15: Food Service Establishments
§ 17-1501 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
   Consultative inspection. The term "consultative inspection" means an
educational sanitary inspection of a food service establishment that shall not
result in fines or a grade.
   Critical violations. The term "critical violations" has the meaning it is
given in section 23-01 of title 24 of the rules of the city of New York.
   Food service establishment. The term "food service establishment" means any
establishment inspected pursuant to the restaurant grading program established
pursuant to subdivision a of section 81.51 of the health code of the city of
New York.
   Food service establishment inspector. The term "food service establishment
inspector" means any individual employed by the department who as part of his
or her duties conducts inspections of food service establishments pursuant to
subdivision a of section 81.51 of the health code of the city of New York.
   Food worker. The term "food worker" has the meaning it is given in section
81.03 of the health code of the city of New York.
   General violations. The term "general violations" has the meaning it is
given in section 23-01 of title 24 of the rules of the city of New York.
   Grade card. The term "grade card" has the meaning it is given in section 23-
01 of title 24 of the rules of the city of New York.
   Grade pending card. The term "grade pending card" has the meaning it is
given in section 23-01 of title 24 of the rules of the city of New York.
   Imminent health hazard or public health hazard. The term "imminent health
hazard or public health hazard" has the meaning it is given in section 81.03 of
the health code of the city of New York.
   Initial inspection. The term "initial inspection" means the first sanitary
inspection within an inspection cycle.
   Inspection cycle. The term "inspection cycle" means a series of related
inspections of food service establishments consisting of at least an initial
inspection and including, if triggered by the initial or any subsequent
inspections within that cycle, a reinspection and any compliance inspections
conducted by the department because of a previous inspection score in that
cycle.
   Notice of violation. The term "notice of violation" means a written notice
issued by a food service establishment inspector alleging that there was a
violation of law or regulation at the food service establishment on the day of
the food service establishment inspection.
   Sanitary inspection. The term "sanitary inspection" means any on-site review
by the department of a food service establishment's physical facilities, food
handling operations, equipment, sanitary condition, maintenance, and worker
hygiene practices. The term may include, but shall not be limited to include,
initial, reinspection, compliance and pre-permit inspections.
(Am. L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 1/14/2022; Am. L.L. 2023/014, 1/21/2023,
eff. 7/20/2023)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2021/080.
§ 17-1502 Food service establishment inspection code of conduct.
   a.   The commissioner shall develop a code of conduct pertaining to sanitary
inspections. The inspection code of conduct shall inform owners and operators
of food service establishments of their rights as they relate to sanitary
inspections.
   b.   The inspection code of conduct shall be in the form of a written
document, drafted in plain language. The department shall distribute the
inspection code of conduct to all food service establishment inspectors and
food service establishments. Food service establishment inspectors shall also
distribute the inspection code of conduct to food service establishment owners
or operators prior to the beginning of each inspection. The department shall
make the inspection code of conduct available on the department's website in
the designated citywide languages, as defined in section
23-1101.
   c.   The code of conduct shall include, but not be limited to, the following
requirements:
      (1)   the food service establishment inspector shall behave in a
professional and courteous manner;
      (2)   upon arriving at the food service establishment to perform a
sanitary inspection, the food service establishment inspector shall immediately
identify himself or herself to the staff of the food service establishment, and
note the type of inspection, in a manner that does not unreasonably interfere
with the dining experience of patrons;
      (3)   the food service establishment inspector shall be as unobtrusive as
possible during the inspection while conducting the inspection;
      (4)   the food service establishment inspector shall return any equipment
he or she moved back to its original location, and reassemble any equipment he
or she disassembled, during the course of the inspection;
      (5)   the food service establishment inspector shall have a sound
knowledge of all relevant health code provisions and any other applicable laws
and regulations.
      (6)   the food service establishment inspector shall meaningfully
communicate with the food service establishment owner or operator, and if
necessary, utilize language assistance services to facilitate meaningful
communication;
      (7)   the food service establishment inspector shall answer reasonable
questions relating to the inspection;
      (8)   the food service establishment inspector shall enforce agency rules
in a fair and impartial manner;
      (9)   the food service establishment inspector shall, upon finding a
violation, explain to the food service establishment owner or operator how to
remedy such violation.
      (10)   the food service establishment inspector must provide information
informing the food service establishment owner or operator how such owner or
operator may contest a notice of violation before the relevant local tribunal,
including information about the availability of language interpretation
services at the relevant tribunal; and
      (11)   the food service establishment inspector shall provide information
on how the food service establishment owner or operator may file a comment,
compliment, or complaint about an inspector, including information about filing
such comment, compliment, or complaint in a language other than English.
      d.   The commissioner shall regularly, but no less frequently than every
two years, review and update the inspection code of conduct, as necessary.
   e.   Nothing in this section or in the inspection code of conduct shall be
construed to create a cause of action or constitute a defense in any legal,
administrative, or other proceeding.
(Am. L.L. 2023/014, 1/21/2023, eff. 7/20/2023)
§ 17-1503 Food service establishment advisory board.
   a.   There shall be an advisory board to advise the commissioner concerning
matters related to the food service establishment sanitary inspection program
and its effect on the restaurant industry, food safety and public health.
   b.   Such advisory board shall consist of twenty members as follows:
      i.   Ten members shall be appointed by the mayor, provided that two such
members shall represent food service industry associations, two such members
shall have advanced specialized training in food safety, two such members shall
have advanced specialized training in nutrition, and four such members shall
operate food service establishments;
      ii.   Nine members shall be appointed by the speaker of the council,
provided that two such members shall represent food service industry
associations, two such members shall have advanced specialized training in food
safety, two such members shall have advanced specialized training in nutrition,
and three such members shall operate a food service establishment;
      iii.   The commissioner of the department of health and mental hygiene
shall serve ex officio.
   c.   At the invitation of the department, other individuals may participate
in the discussions of the board.
   d.   Each member, other than the member serving in an ex officio capacity,
shall serve for a term of two years, to commence upon the first meeting of the
advisory board. Any vacancies in the membership of the advisory board shall be
filled in the same manner as the original appointment. A person filling such
vacancy shall serve for the unexpired portion of the term of the succeeded
member.
   e.   No member of the advisory board shall be removed except for cause and
upon notice and hearing by the appropriate appointing official.
   f.   Members of the advisory board shall serve without compensation and
shall meet no less often than every three months.
   g.   The agendas for the first four meetings of the advisory board shall
include, but not be limited to:
      1.   a review of current health code violations for which points are
assigned, including those violations that do not bear directly on food safety
and public health;
      2.   a review of the current food safety inspector training curriculum;
      3.   a review of the effect of letter grading on public health and food
safety, including information on the top ten most commonly cited violations in
the previous year and any change in the incidences of illness from food borne
pathogens; and
      4.   a review of the relationship between the food service industry and
the department.
   h.   On January 1, 2015, and every year thereafter on January first, the
advisory board shall submit a report to the mayor, the commissioner, and the
speaker of the council. Such report shall include, but not be limited to:
      1.   an assessment of the restaurant inspection program and its effect on
the restaurant industry, public health and food safety, including information
on the top ten most commonly cited violations in the previous year and any
change in the incidences of illness from food borne pathogens; and
      2.   specific recommendations for changes and/or improvements to the
restaurant inspection program and actions, if any, taken by the department in
response to such recommendations.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2013/091.
§ 17-1504 Food service establishment consultative inspection program.
   a.   The department shall implement a consultative inspection program for
food service establishments.
   b.   Such consultative inspections shall be optional, and performed for
educational and informational purposes only. A consultative inspection shall
not result in a notice of violation being issued for general violations,
critical violations, imminent health hazards or public health hazards. A
consultative inspection shall not impact a food service establishment's
inspection cycle.
   c.   Upon completion of a consultative inspection, the inspector shall
review the results with the owner or operator of the food service
establishment, and advise the owner or operator of potential violations and how
to remedy such violations.
   d.   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the department from taking
appropriate action if a food service establishment fails to remedy a public
health hazard at the time of the consultative inspection.
   e.   The department may charge a fee which shall be set by rule promulgated
by the commissioner.
   f.   The department may schedule the consultative inspection based on
factors, set by rule promulgated by the commissioner, including but not limited
to demand, prioritization according to inspection history, and the inspection
cycle of the food service establishment.
   g.   Within the consultative inspection program for food service
establishments, the department shall develop a system for newly licensed food
service establishments whereby such establishments may schedule the
consultative inspection prior to their first initial inspections for a nominal
fee which shall be set by rule promulgated by the commissioner.
§ 17-1505 Food service establishment inspections ombuds office.
   a.   Office established. There is hereby established within the food safety
program of the department a food service establishment inspections ombuds
office.
   b.   Duties and responsibilities. The food service establishment inspections
ombuds office shall have, but not be limited by, the following duties and
responsibilities:
      1.   establishing a system to receive questions, comments, complaints,
and compliments with respect to any food service establishment inspection,
including but not limited to, the establishment, operation, and dissemination
of a central telephone hotline and website to receive such questions, comments,
complaints, and compliments;
      2.   investigating complaints received pursuant to paragraph one of this
subdivision and taking any action it deems appropriate regarding such
complaints, including but not limited to, withdrawing violations that concern
the physical layout and/or major fixtures within a food service establishment
where the department finds that such physical layout or fixture existed at the
time of a prior inspection but was not the subject of a violation and the
condition has not been altered since the time of such prior inspection, and
identifying egregious inspection errors that ought to be rectified by the
department in lieu of submission to the administrative tribunal;
      3.   issuing guidance letters providing informal advisory opinions on
matters pertaining to food service establishment inspections, including but not
limited to appropriate inspection methods and food handling techniques, either
upon request or the department's own initiative. Any such guidance letter
issued by the ombuds office shall be posted on the department's website upon
issuance and, to the greatest extent practicable, distributed to all food
service establishment operators;
      4.   monitoring inspection results for trends and inconsistencies,
including but not limited to, the compilation and analysis on a quarterly basis
of the type and number of violations issued by each inspector, the number of
inspections conducted, and the number of inspections and other enforcement-
related activities during which telephonic interpretation services were
provided; and
      5.   making recommendations to the commissioner regarding improvements to
the food service establishment inspection process.
   c.   Annual report. No later than July 1, 2014, and every July 1 thereafter,
the ombuds office shall submit to the commissioner an annual report regarding
its activities during the previous twelve months. The ombuds office shall
forward a copy of such report to the mayor and the speaker of the council. Such
report shall include, but not be limited to:
      1.   the number, nature, and resolution of questions, comments,
complaints, and compliments received by the ombuds office;
      2.   the number and nature of guidance letter requested;
      3.   a copy of each guidance letter issued;
      4.   an analysis of trends and inconsistencies across inspection results;
      5.   an analysis of the existing language access tools and policies,
including whether the ombuds office believes such tools and policies serve the
needs of food service establishment operators; and
      6.   recommendations for improvements to the food service establishment
inspection process in accordance with paragraph 5 of subdivision b of this
section.
(Am. L.L. 2023/014, 1/21/2023, eff. 7/20/2023)
§ 17-1506 Inspections for social adult day cares and senior centers; reporting.
   a.   For purposes of this section, the following terms have the following
meanings:
      Food service establishment. The term "food service establishment" has the
same meaning as such term is defined in section 81.03 of the New York City
health code.
      Senior center. The term "senior center" has the same meaning as such term
is defined in section
21-201.
      Social adult day care. The term "social adult day care" has the same
meaning as such term is defined in section
21-201.
   b.   Each senior center and social adult day care that is a food service
establishment shall be inspected by the department at least annually in
accordance with article 81 of the New York City health code.
   c.   Inspection results and any related information for each senior center
and social adult day care shall be posted and updated as necessary on the
department's website. Such inspection results shall show such senior center and
social adult day care's degree of compliance with the provisions of the New
York city health code, the state sanitary code and other applicable laws that
require such establishments to operate in a sanitary manner so as to protect
public health.
   d.   Beginning May 1, 2019, and by May 1 annually thereafter, the department
shall submit a report to the mayor and the speaker of the city council
regarding the department's activities with respect to inspections of social
adult day cares and senior centers that qualify as food service establishments.
The report shall include the total number and the name of each social adult day
care and senior center that qualify as a food service establishment,
disaggregated by council district; the total number of such social adult day
cares and senior centers inspected in the prior calendar year and information
summarizing the results of such inspections, including but not limited to the
number of violations cited, if any, and any required corrective action. The
report shall also include the 10 most frequently cited violations during the
prior calendar year for such social adult day cares and senior centers.
(L.L. 2018/141, 8/6/2018, eff. 2/2/2019)
§ 17-1507 Required healthy eating information.
   a.   Every food service establishment that sells food for consumption on its
premises shall display public information messaging created by the department
pursuant to subdivision b of this section in a conspicuous location within such
establishment.
   b.   The department shall create public information messaging on healthy
eating for all consumers, including, but not specific to, individuals with
diet-related conditions such as diabetes, heart disease and hypertension. Such
messaging shall include, but not be specific to, the risks of excessive sugar
and carbohydrate intake. The department shall make such messaging available to
food service establishments in each of the designated citywide languages as
defined in section
23-1101.
   c.   Any food service establishment that violates subdivision a of this
section, or any rules promulgated pursuant to this section, shall be liable for
a civil penalty of not more than $200, recoverable in a proceeding before any
tribunal established within the office of administrative trials and hearings or
within any agency of the city of New York designated to conduct such
proceedings.
   d.   Any food service establishment that violates subdivision a of this
section or any rules promulgated thereunder shall not be subject to a civil
penalty for a first-time violation if such food service establishment proves to
the satisfaction of the department, within seven days of the issuance of the
notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the
violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a
cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured,
shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of
presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of
any settlement offer made by the department to a food service establishment
that has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of this section or
any rules promulgated pursuant thereto. The department shall permit such proof
to be submitted electronically or in person. A food service establishment may
seek review, in the office of administrative trials and hearings, of the
determination that the food service establishment has not submitted proof of a
cure within 15 days of receiving written notification of such determination.
(L.L. 2019/138, 7/27/2019, eff. 7/27/2020 and 7/27/2021; Am. L.L. 2021/080, 7/
18/2021, eff. 1/14/2022; Am. L.L. 2023/151, 11/17/2023, eff. 11/17/2023)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2019/138 and
L.L. 2021/080.
§ 17-1508 Posting, signage and display violations.
   a.   A food service establishment shall post a grade card or grade pending
card in accordance with the requirements set forth in subdivision (b) of
section 81.51 of the health code of the city of New York.
   b.   A food service establishment that fails to display or conspicuously
display a grade card or grade pending card in violation of subdivision a of
this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of $500.
   c.   Except as provided by subdivision b of this section, a food service
establishment that violates this chapter,
chapter 1 of this title or any rule or provision of the health code of the city
of New York promulgated pursuant to either chapter, failing to post or
conspicuously post a sign, poster, image, card or other required information,
or by failing to display or conspicuously display any permit, license or
certification, shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100; except that such
food service establishment shall not be subject to a civil penalty for a first-
time violation if such food service establishment proves to the satisfaction of
the department, within 7 days of the issuance of the notice of violation and
prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the
violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if accepted by the
department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be deemed an
admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting proof that
the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any settlement offer
made by the department to a food service establishment that has received, for
the first time, a notice of violation of this section or any rules promulgated
pursuant thereto. The department shall permit such proof to be submitted
electronically or in person. A food service establishment may seek review, in
the office of administrative trials and hearings, of the determination that the
food service establishment has not submitted proof of a cure within 15 days of
receiving written notification of such determination.
   d.   Subdivision c of this section does not apply to any violation by a food
service establishment of this chapter, or
chapter 1 of this title, or any rule or provision of the health code of the
city of New York promulgated pursuant to either chapter, for failure to post a
sign, poster, image, card or other required information to the extent the
department determines that the posting of such sign, poster, image, card or
other required information is required in order to mitigate a risk of immediate
death or serious injury to the general public or patrons of such establishment.
(L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 1/14/2022)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2021/080.
§ 17-1509 Food protection.
   a.   A person who is charged with the management or supervision of the
operations of a food service establishment shall comply with the requirements
set forth in subdivision (a) of section 81.15 of the health code of the city of
New York regarding a food protection course and certification.
   b.   A food service establishment that violates subdivision a of this
section or any rule promulgated pursuant thereto shall be subject to a civil
penalty of $400.
(L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 1/14/2022)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2021/080.
§ 17-1510 Personal hygiene and other food protection.
   a.   Hair coverings. 
      1.   A food worker shall comply with the requirements set forth in
subdivision (b) of section 81.13 of the health code of the city of New York
regarding hair restraints.
      2.   A food service establishment that violates this subdivision or any
rule promulgated thereunder shall be subject to the following penalties: for
one or two such employees observed without hair coverings, $100; for three such
employees observed without hair coverings, $125; and for four or more such
employees observed without hair coverings, $150; except that there shall be a
civil penalty of $0 imposed upon a food service establishment for a first-time
violation of this subdivision or any rule or regulation issued thereunder. The
notice of violation for such first-time violation shall inform the food service
establishment of the provision of law or rule that the department believes the
food service establishment violated, describes the conditions or activity that
is the basis for the notice of violation, and advise the food service
establishment that the law authorizes civil penalties for such violation and
that subsequent violations may result in the imposition of such civil
penalties.
   b.   Eating and drinking. 
      1.   A food worker shall comply with the requirements of subdivision (h)
of section 81.13 of the health code of the city of New York regarding eating
and drinking.
      2.   A food service establishment that violates this subdivision or any
rule promulgated thereunder shall be subject to the following penalties: for
one or two such employees observed to be in violation of this subdivision,
$100; for three such employees observed to be in violation of this subdivision,
$125; and for four or more such employees observed to be in violation of this
subdivision, $150; except that there shall be a civil penalty of $0 imposed
upon a food service establishment for a first-time violation of this
subdivision or any rule or regulation issued thereunder. The notice of
violation for such first-time violation shall inform the food service
establishment of the provision of law or rule that the department believes the
food service establishment violated, describe the conditions or activity that
is the basis for the notice of violation, and advise the food service
establishment that the law authorizes civil penalties for such violation and
that subsequent violations may result in the imposition of such civil
penalties.
   c.   Storage of sanitizing cloths. 
      1.   A food service establishment shall store cloths used for the
sanitizing of food contact and non-food contact surfaces in accordance with the
requirements set forth in subdivision (c) of section 81.27 of the health code
of the city of New York.
      2.   A food service establishment that violates this subdivision or any
rule promulgated thereunder shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100; except
that there shall be a civil penalty of $0 imposed upon a food service
establishment for a first-time violation of this subdivision or any rule or
regulation issued thereunder. The notice of violation for such first-time
violation shall inform the food service establishment of the provision of law
or rule that the department believes the food service establishment violated,
describe the conditions or activity that is the basis for the notice of
violation, and advise the food service establishment that the law authorizes
civil penalties for such violation and that subsequent violations may result in
the imposition of such civil penalties.
(L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 1/14/2022)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2021/080.
§ 17-1511 Pests and garbage.
   a.   Food service establishments shall conduct daily inspections for pests,
as defined in subdivision (d) of section 151.01 of the health code of the city
of New York, in accordance with the requirements set forth in subdivision (b)
of section 81.23 of the health code of the city of New York.
   b.   Food service establishments shall comply with the requirements set
forth in subdivisions (a) and (c) of section 81.24 of the health code of the
city of New York pertaining to garbage and waste disposal.
   c.   A food service establishment that violates this section or any rule
promulgated pursuant to this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of
$100; except that such food service establishment shall not be subject to a
civil penalty for a first-time violation if such food service establishment
proves to the satisfaction of the department, within 7 days of the issuance of
the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the
violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a
cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured,
shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of
presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of
any settlement offer made by the department to a food service establishment
that has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of this section or
any rules promulgated pursuant thereto. The department shall permit such proof
to be submitted electronically or in person. A food service establishment may
seek review, in the office of administrative trials and hearings, of the
determination that the food service establishment has not submitted proof of a
cure within 15 days of receiving written notification of such determination.
(L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 1/14/2022)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2021/080.
§ 17-1512 Food packages.
   a.   A food service establishment shall comply with the requirements set
forth in subdivision (b) of section 81.07 of the health code of the city of New
York regarding food packaging.
   b.   A food service establishment that violates this section or any rule
promulgated thereunder shall be subject to a civil penalty of $200.
   c.   Notwithstanding subdivision b of this section, a food service
establishment that violates this section or any rule promulgated thereunder by
failing to discard or return to the package distributor, or to segregate from
other food packages, food packages that are dented but not swollen, leaking,
rusted or otherwise damaged, shall be subject to a civil penalty of $50; except
that there shall be a civil penalty of $0 imposed upon a food service
establishment for such a violation that occurs for the first time. The notice
of violation for such first-time violation shall inform the food service
establishment of the provision of law or rule that the department believes the
food service establishment violated, describe the conditions or activity that
is the basis for the notice of violation, and advise the food service
establishment that the law authorizes civil penalties for such violation and
that subsequent violations may result in the imposition of such civil
penalties.
(L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 1/14/2022)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2021/080.
§ 17-1513 Food contact surfaces.
   a.   A food service establishment shall comply with the requirements set
forth in paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of section 81.17 of the health code
of the city of New York pertaining to food contact surfaces.
   b.   A food service establishment that violates this section or any rule
promulgated pursuant thereto shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100;
except that such food service establishment shall not be subject to a civil
penalty for a first-time violation if such food service establishment proves to
the satisfaction of the department, within 7 days of the issuance of the notice
of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation,
that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a cure, if
accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured, shall be
deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of presenting
proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of any
settlement offer made by the department to a food service establishment that
has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of this section or any
rules promulgated pursuant thereto. The department shall permit such proof to
be submitted electronically or in person. A food service establishment may seek
review, in the office of administrative trials and hearings, of the
determination that the food service establishment has not submitted proof of a
cure within 15 days of receiving written notification of such determination.
(L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 1/14/2022)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2021/080.
§ 17-1514 Plumbing.
   a.   A food service establishment shall comply with the requirements set
forth in section subdivisions (a) and (b) of section 81.20 regarding potable
waste and disposal of sewage and liquid waste.
   b.   A food service establishment that violates this section or any rule
promulgated pursuant to this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of
$100; except that such food service establishment shall not be subject to a
civil penalty for a first-time violation if such food service establishment
proves to the satisfaction of the department, within seven days of the issuance
of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of
the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a
cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured,
shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of
presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of
any settlement offer made by the department to a food service establishment
that has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of this section or
any rules promulgated pursuant thereto. The department shall permit such proof
to be submitted electronically or in person. A food service establishment may
seek review, in the office of administrative trials and hearings, of the
determination that the food service establishment has not submitted proof of a
cure within 15 days of receiving written notification of such determination.
(L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 1/14/2022)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2021/080.
§ 17-1515 Lighting.
   a.   A food service establishment shall comply with the requirements set
forth in subdivision (a) of section 81.19 of the health code of the city of New
York regarding lighting.
   b.   A food service establishment that violates this section or any rule
promulgated pursuant to this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of
$100; except that such food service establishment shall not be subject to a
civil penalty for a first-time violation if such food service establishment
proves to the satisfaction of the department, within seven days of the issuance
of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of
the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a
cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured,
shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of
presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of
any settlement offer made by the department to a food service establishment
that has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of this section or
any rules promulgated pursuant thereto. The department shall permit such proof
to be submitted electronically or in person. A food service establishment may
seek review, in the office of administrative trials and hearings, of the
determination that the food service establishment has not submitted proof of
cure within 15 days of receiving written notification of such determination.
(L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 1/14/2022)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2021/080.
§ 17-1516 Non-food contact surfaces.
   a.   A food service establishment shall comply with the requirements set
forth in subdivision (e) of section 81.17 of the health code of the city of New
York regarding non-food contact surfaces.
   b.   A food service establishment that violates this section or any rule
promulgated pursuant to this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of
$100; except that such food service establishment shall not be subject to a
civil penalty for a first-time violation if such food service establishment
proves to the satisfaction of the department, within seven days of the issuance
of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of
the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a
cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured,
shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of
presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of
any settlement offer made by the department to a food service establishment
that has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of this section or
any rules promulgated pursuant thereto. The department shall permit such proof
to be submitted electronically or in person. A food service establishment may
seek review, in the office of administrative trials and hearings, of the
determination that the food service establishment has not submitted proof of a
cure within 15 days of receiving written notification of such determination.
(L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 1/14/2022)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2021/080.
§ 17-1517 Bulbs.
   a.   A food service establishment shall comply with the requirements set
forth in subdivision (b) of section 81.19 regarding light bulb shielding.
   b.   A food service establishment that violates this section or any rule
promulgated pursuant to this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of
$100; except that such food service establishment shall not be subject to a
civil penalty for a first-time violation if such food service establishment
proves to the satisfaction of the department, within seven days of the issuance
of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of
the violation, that the violation has been cured. The submission of proof of a
cure, if accepted by the department as proof that the violation has been cured,
shall be deemed an admission of liability for all purposes. The option of
presenting proof that the violation has been cured shall be offered as part of
any settlement offer made by the department to a food service establishment
that has received, for the first time, a notice of violation of this section or
any rules promulgated pursuant thereto. The department shall permit such proof
to be submitted electronically or in person. A food service establishment may
seek review, in the office of administrative trials and hearings, of the
determination that the food service establishment has not submitted proof of a
cure within 15 days of receiving written notification of such determination.
(L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 1/14/2022)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2021/080.
§ 17-1518 Rules.
The commissioner may promulgate rules as necessary to implement the provisions
of this chapter.
(L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 1/14/2022)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2021/080.
Chapter 16: Animal Abuse Registration Act
§ 17-1601 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   a.   "Animal abuse crime" shall mean any of the following:
      1.   animal fighting, as defined in section three hundred fifty-one of
the agriculture and markets law;
      2.   overdriving, torturing or injuring animals; failure to provide
proper sustenance, as defined in section three hundred fifty-three of the
agriculture and markets law;
      3.   aggravated cruelty to animals, as defined in section three hundred
fifty-three-a of the agriculture and markets law;
      4.   electrocution of fur-bearing animals, as defined in section three
hundred fifty-three-c of the agriculture and markets law;
      5.   abandonment of animals, as defined in section three hundred fifty-
five of the agriculture and markets law;
      6.   failure to provide proper food and drink to an impounded animal, as
defined in section three hundred fifty-six of the agriculture and markets law;
      7.   poisoning or attempting to poison animals, as defined in section
three hundred sixty of the agriculture and markets law;
      8.   interference with or injury to certain domestic animals, as defined
in section three hundred sixty-one of the agriculture and markets law;
      9.   harming a service animal in the first degree, as defined in section
242.15 of the penal code; or
      10.   an offense in any other jurisdiction which includes all of the
essential elements of any such crime provided for in paragraph one, two, three,
four, five, six, seven, eight, or nine of this subdivision.
   b.   "Animal shelter" shall mean any full service shelter, as defined in
subdivision d of section
17-802 of this code, or other facility that makes dogs and cats available for
adoption whether or not a fee for such adoption is charged.
   c.   "Animal rescue group" has the same meaning as such term is defined in
section
17-802 of chapter
eight of this title.
   d.   "Authorized entity" shall mean any of the following: a humane society
duly incorporated in the state of New York, a society for the prevention of
cruelty to animals duly incorporated in the state of New York, a dog or cat
protective associations duly incorporated in the state of New York, an animal
control officer, a pet shop, a veterinarian, an animal rescue, or an animal
shelter operating in the city of New York.
   e.   "Commissioner" shall mean the commissioner of the agency designated to
implement the provisions of this chapter pursuant to subdivision a of section
17-1602 of this chapter.
   f.   "Convicted of" shall mean an adjudication of guilt by any court of
competent jurisdiction, whether upon a verdict or plea of guilty or nolo
contendere.
   g.   "Department" shall mean the agency designated to implement the
provisions of this chapter pursuant to subdivision a of section
17-1602 of this chapter, notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of this
title.
   h.   "Registrant" shall mean a person required to register with the
department pursuant to this chapter.
   i.   "Pet shop" shall have the same meaning as such term is defined in
section
17-371 of this title.
(Am. L.L. 2015/006, 1/17/2015, eff. 1/17/2015 and 6/1/2015; Am. L.L. 2015/055,
6/2/2015, eff. 6/1/2015)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2014/004.
§ 17-1602 Creation of animal abuse registry.
   a.   The mayor or his designee shall designate an agency to implement the
provisions of this chapter and shall report such designation to the speaker of
the council.
   b.   The department shall create, manage and maintain an electronic registry
of individuals living in the city of New York who have been convicted of an
animal abuse crime and who have registered with the department pursuant to this
chapter.
   c.   The information maintained in the registry created pursuant to this
section shall only be made available to law enforcement agencies, district
attorneys or when otherwise required by law, and shall otherwise be kept
confidential, provided, however, that the department shall grant authorized
entities the password-protected ability to electronically query the registry
using a person's name, driver's license or non-driver photo ID card number, or
other identifying information determined by the commissioner, and to receive in
response to such query electronic notice of whether such person is prohibited
from owning an animal under section
17-1604 of this chapter.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2014/004.
§ 17-1603 Animal abuse registration requirements.
   a.   Any person eighteen years of age or older who resides in the city of
New York and has been convicted of an animal abuse crime on or after the
effective date of the local law that added this chapter shall personally appear
before the department at a location determined by the commissioner to register,
provided, however, no person shall be required to appear before the department
to register pending resolution of an appeal of such conviction.
      1.   Such person shall appear and register within five days following
such person's release from incarceration or if such person was not incarcerated
within five days from the date of such person's sentencing.
      2.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person convicted of an animal abuse
crime on or after the effective date of the local law that added this chapter
who establishes residency in the city of New York following such person's
release from incarceration or if such person was not incarcerated following
such person's sentencing, must, within five days of establishing such
residency, personally appear before the department at a location determined by
the commissioner to register.
   b.   The department shall photograph the registrant at the time of
registration.
   c.   Any person required to register pursuant to this chapter shall submit
to the department the following:
      1.   The registrant's name, all aliases used, date of birth, sex,
complexion, race or ethnicity, height, weight, eye color, number of any
driver's license or non-driver photo ID card, home address and/or expected
place of residence.
      2.   A description of the offense for which the registrant was convicted,
the date of conviction and the sentence imposed.
      3.   Any other documentation as the commissioner deems acceptable to
verify the information provided by the registrant.
   d.   Within twenty days of each one year anniversary of the registrant's
initial registration date for so long as such registrant remains on the animal
abuse registry pursuant to subdivision f of this section, such registrant shall
personally appear at a location designated by the commissioner. At such
appearance the department shall photograph the registrant and verify the
continuing accuracy of the information provided by the registrant pursuant to
subdivision c of this section.
   e.   Within five days of any change in any of the information provided by a
registrant pursuant to subdivision c of this section, such registrant shall
personally appear before the department to submit updated information for the
registry.
   f.   Each registrant shall remain on the animal abuse registry for five
years following his or her release from incarceration or the date sentencing
was rendered, whichever is later, provided, however, that registrants who are
convicted of any subsequent animal abuse crime shall remain on the animal abuse
registry for ten years following the date of their most recent conviction.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2014/004.
§ 17-1604 Prohibition on contact with animals.
   a.   A person who is registered or required to register pursuant to section
17-1603 shall not own, possess, reside with, have custody of, or intentionally
engage in any physical contact with any animal.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2014/004.
§ 17-1605 Prohibition of transfers of animals to animal abusers.
   a.   Prior to the exchange or transfer of ownership of any animal in the
care of an authorized entity operating in the city of New York, an employee or
volunteer of such entity shall consult the animal abuse registry to determine
whether the person seeking ownership of such animal is listed on the animal
abuse registry.
   b.   No entity required to consult the animal abuse registry shall exchange
or transfer the ownership of any animal to any person listed on the animal
abuse registry.
   c.   A pet shop that allows an animal shelter or animal rescue group to use
such pet shop's premises for the purpose of making animals available for
adoption shall be exempt from the requirements of subdivisions a and b of this
section with respect to such animals, provided such pet shop does not have an
ownership interest in any of the animals that are made available for adoption.
(Am. L.L. 2015/006, 1/17/2015, eff. 1/17/2015; Am. L.L. 2015/055, 6/2/2015,
eff. 6/1/2015)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2014/004.
§ 17-1606 Rules.
The commissioner may promulgate rules necessary for the implementation of this
chapter.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2014/004.
§ 17-1607 Penalties.
   a.   Any person found in violation of section
17-1603 or
17-1604 or any rules promulgated thereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by incarceration for not more than one year or a fine of up to one
thousand dollars, or both.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2014/004.
§ 17-1608 Applicability.
This law shall apply to all persons convicted of an animal abuse crime on or
after the effective date of this law.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2014/004.
Chapter 17: Pet Shops
§ 17-1701 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
   Animal abuse crime. The term “animal abuse crime” has the same meaning as
set forth in section
17-1601.
   Animal shelter. The term “animal shelter” has the same meaning as set forth
in section
17-802.
   Animal rescue group. The term “animal rescue group” has the same meaning as
set forth in section
17-802.
   Pet shop. The term “pet shop” has the same meaning as set forth in section
17-371.
(L.L. 2015/005, 1/17/2015, eff. 6/1/2015; Am. L.L. 2015/053, 6/2/2015, eff. 6/
1/2015; Am. L.L. 2024/132, 12/21/2024, retro. eff. 12/15/2024)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2015/005.
§ 17-1702 Sales of animals.
   a.   Animals shall not be sold or held for sale in a dwelling in which a
person lives or at any other location that is not licensed therefor.
   b.   It shall be unlawful for any pet shop to display, offer for sale,
deliver, barter, auction, give away, transfer, or sell any dog, cat, rabbit, or
guinea pig.
   c.   A pet shop that allows an animal shelter or animal rescue group to use
such pet shop’s premises for the purpose of making animals available for
adoption shall not be deemed to be engaged in any conduct otherwise prohibited
pursuant to this section with respect to such animals, provided such pet shop
does not have an ownership interest in such animals. A pet shop shall not be
deemed to be engaged in any conduct otherwise prohibited pursuant to this
section with respect to animals it surrenders to a non-profit shelter or animal
rescue group, so long as such pet shop does not derive a fee therefor.
(L.L. 2015/005, 1/17/2015, eff. 6/1/2015; Am. L.L. 2015/053, 6/2/2015, eff. 6/
1/2015; Am. L.L. 2023/054, 5/12/2023, eff. 6/11/2023; Am. L.L. 2023/151, 11/17/
2023, eff. 11/17/2023; Am. L.L. 2024/132, 12/21/2024, retro. eff. 12/15/2024)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2015/005.
§ 17-1703 Required information for the purchaser. [Repealed]
(L.L. 2015/005, 1/17/2015, eff. 6/1/2015; Am. L.L. 2015/053, 6/2/2015, eff. 6/
1/2015; Repealed L.L. 2024/132, 12/21/2024, retro. eff. 12/15/2024)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2015/005.
§ 17-1704 Recordkeeping. [Repealed]
(L.L. 2015/005, 1/17/2015, eff. 6/1/2015; Am. L.L. 2015/053, 6/2/2015, eff. 6/
1/2015; Repealed L.L. 2024/132, 12/21/2024, retro. eff. 12/15/2024)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2015/005.
§ 17-1705 Minimum standards of animal care. [Repealed]
(L.L. 2015/005, 1/17/2015, eff. 6/1/2015; Repealed L.L. 2024/132, 12/21/2024,
retro. eff. 12/15/2024)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2015/005.
§ 17-1706 Exemptions for animal shelters and rescue partners.
A pet shop that allows an animal shelter or animal rescue group to use such pet
shop's premises for the purpose of making animals available for adoption shall
be exempt from the provisions of this chapter with respect to such animals,
provided such pet shop does not have an ownership interest in such animals.
(L.L. 2015/005, 1/17/2015, eff. 6/1/2015; Am. L.L. 2015/053, 6/2/2015, eff. 6/
1/2015; Am. L.L. 2024/132, 12/21/2024, retro. eff. 12/15/2024)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2015/005.
§ 17-1707 Violations and fines.
Any person found in violation of any provision of this chapter or any provision
of any rule promulgated thereunder, shall be subject to a civil penalty of $500
per day for each such violation. Each violation in connection with the sale of
more than 1 animal shall be deemed a separate violation with respect to each
animal offered for sale. A notice of violation served pursuant to this section
shall be returnable at the environmental control board or any tribunal
established within the office of administrative trials and hearings as
designated by the commissioner.
(L.L. 2015/005, 1/17/2015, eff. 6/1/2015; Am. L.L. 2021/080, 7/18/2021, eff. 1/
14/2022; Am. L.L. 2024/132, 12/21/2024, retro. eff. 12/15/2024)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2015/005 and
L.L. 2021/080.
§ 17-1708 Forfeiture and seizure.
   a.   The commissioner or his or her designee may seize any animal offered
for sale in a pet shop where the sale of such animal is prohibited by section
17-1702 of this chapter.
   b.   Any animal offered for sale in violation of section
17-1702 of this chapter or seized pursuant to subdivision a of this section
shall be subject to forfeiture upon notice and hearing.
   c.   The commissioner shall provide for the appropriate disposition of each
animal seized pursuant to this section. Such disposition may include
impoundment at an animal shelter or animal rescue group.
   d.   The commissioner may impose upon the owner of a pet shop from which an
animal is seized pursuant to this section a fee representing expenses incurred
in connection with the cost of impounding such animal.
(L.L. 2015/005, 1/17/2015, eff. 6/1/2015; Am. L.L. 2015/053, 6/2/2015, eff. 6/
1/2015)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2015/005.
§ 17-1709 Rules.
The commissioner may promulgate such rules as are necessary to carry out the
provisions of this chapter and to ensure the health and safety of any animal in
a pet shop.
(L.L. 2015/005, 1/17/2015, eff. 6/1/2015)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2015/005.
Chapter 18: Police and Correctional Healthcare Evaluation and Sharing
§ 17-1801 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
   Arrestee. The term "arrestee" has the same meaning as set forth in
subdivision a of section
14-163.
   Correctional health services. The term "correctional health services" means
any health care entity designated by the city of New York as the agency or
agencies responsible for health services for incarcerated individuals in the
care and custody of the New York city department of correction. When the
responsibility is contractually shared with an outside provider, this term
shall also apply.
   Health care provider. The term "health care provider" means any person
licensed or certified under federal or New York state law to provide medical
services, including but not limited to doctors, nurses and emergency personnel.
   Health evaluation. The term "health evaluation" means any evaluation of an
incarcerated individual's health and mental health upon their admission to the
custody of the department of correction pursuant to minimum standards of
incarcerated individual care established by the board of correction.
   Incarcerated Individual. The term "Incarcerated Individual" means any person
in the custody of the New York city department of correction.
   Screened. The term "screened" means evaluated by a health care provider.
(L.L. 2016/124, 10/18/2016, eff. 4/18/2017; Am. L.L. 2019/190, 11/17/2019, eff.
3/16/2020; Am. 2021 N.Y. Laws Ch. 322, 8/2/2021, eff. 8/2/2021)
§ 17-1802 Arrestee health screening.
   Every arrestee held at the central booking area of a local criminal court
prior to their arraignment at such court shall be screened for medical or
mental health conditions that may require immediate attention. The department
or its designee shall oversee such screening.
(L.L. 2016/124, 10/18/2016, eff. 4/18/2017)
§ 17-1803 Health information from screening for incarcerated individuals.
   The department or its designee shall establish procedures to make available
reports received from the New York city police department pursuant to section
14-163 to any health care provider in a department of correction facility
conducting a health evaluation, at such time as a health evaluation is
conducted.
(L.L. 2016/124, 10/18/2016, eff. 4/18/2017; Am. L.L. 2019/190, 11/17/2019, eff.
3/16/2020)
§ 17-1804 Health information exchange for incarcerated individuals.
   The department or its designee shall establish procedures to obtain the pre-
arraignment screening record created pursuant to section
17-1802 and any medical records created and maintained by any hospital in
connection with treatment provided to an arrestee who subsequently enters the
custody of the department of correction, at the request of any health care
provider conducting a health evaluation of such incarcerated individual.
(L.L. 2016/124, 10/18/2016, eff. 4/18/2017; Am. L.L. 2019/190, 11/17/2019, eff.
3/16/2020; Am. 2021 N.Y. Laws Ch. 322, 8/2/2021, eff. 8/2/2021)
§ 17-1805 Communication from correctional health services.
   a.   Short title. This section shall be known as and may be cited as "The
Get Well and Get Out Act".
   b.   Information sharing with attorneys of individuals diagnosed with
serious mental illness in the custody of the department of correction. For each
incarcerated individual who is not sentenced and who is diagnosed with a
serious mental illness, correctional health services shall seek voluntary
consent from such individual to share medical information with the attorney of
record of such individual within 48 hours of their diagnosis, and provide such
information created or obtained pursuant to sections
17-1802 and
17-1804 to the attorney of record for any such individual within five calendar
days of obtaining consent from the individual. Correctional health services
shall make a good faith effort to ascertain such individual's attorney of
record, including but not limited to consulting the website maintained by the
New York state unified court system, speaking with the individual, contacting
the clerk of the court, or any other reasonable means necessary to identify
such individual's attorney.
   c.   Confidential medical condition letter. Within five business days prior
to any court date indicated by the New York city department of correction's
inmate information system, correctional health services shall provide a
confidential medical condition letter to the attorney of record for any
incarcerated individual to whom subdivision a of this section applies, as
permitted by law. Such letter shall include the following information for each
such individual:
      1.   The psychiatric diagnosis.
      2.   The type of mental health treatment available in the housing area in
which the individual is being housed, including the level of additional support
offered in the housing area that facilitates the treatment of the individual's
psychiatric condition.
      3.   The prescribed psychiatric medication regimen.
      4.   Their record of adherence to such medication regimen, including any
factors that may have contributed to their record of adherence.
      5.   A detailed description of their current condition, including but not
limited to any reduction in symptoms and any indication that the individual's
condition has improved or diagnosis changed.
      6.   Any relevant documentation related to referrals made by correctional
health services for the purpose of discharge planning, if available.
   d.   Notwithstanding the requirements of subdivision c, correctional health
services shall not be required to issue a new confidential medical condition
letter for a scheduled court appearance within one week of a prior scheduled
court appearance.
(L.L. 2019/190, 11/17/2019, eff. 3/16/2020)
§ 17-1806 Communication following a suicide attempt by, hospitalization of or
serious injury to an incarcerated individual.
   a.   Definition. For the purposes of this section, the term “serious injury”
means a physical injury that results in a substantial risk of death or
disfigurement, loss or impairment of a bodily organ, or post-concussion
syndrome, or any injury involving the fracture of a bone that correctional
health services determines is serious due to the severity of such injury or
risk of permanent harm presented by such injury.
   b.   Correctional health services shall notify the attorney of record of an
incarcerated individual, and an emergency contact designated by such
incarcerated individual pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision c, following a
suicide attempt by, hospitalization of, or serious injury to such incarcerated
individual, provided that the incarcerated individual has consented, pursuant
to subdivision c, to correctional health services providing such notification.
   c.   Correctional health services, as part of an intake screening for health
purposes performed for an incarcerated individual at the time of admittance to
a facility of the department of correction, shall:
      1.   Request consent from each such incarcerated individual for
correctional health services to provide, pursuant to subdivision b, a
notification following:
         (a)   A suicide attempt by such incarcerated individual;
         (b)   Hospitalization of such incarcerated individual; or
         (c)   Serious injury to such incarcerated individual;
      2.   Make a good faith effort to ascertain the attorney of record of an
incarcerated individual who provides such consent; and
      3.   Request each incarcerated individual who provides such consent to
designate no more than 1 natural person to serve as an emergency contact for
such individual, for purposes of providing a notification pursuant to
subdivision b.
   d.   Correctional health services shall provide a notification required
pursuant to subdivision b within 3 hours of correctional health services
confirming a suicide attempt by an incarcerated individual, becoming aware of a
hospitalization of an incarcerated individual, or making a determination that
an injury to an incarcerated individual is a serious injury, except that:
      1.   Where correctional health services confirms such suicide attempt,
becomes aware of such hospitalization, or makes such determination before 9:00
a.m. on any day, correctional health services shall provide such notification
no later than 12:00 p.m. on such day; or
      2.   Where correctional health services confirms such suicide attempt,
becomes aware of such hospitalization, or makes such determination after 5:00
p.m. on any day, correctional health services shall provide such notification
no later than 12:00 p.m. on the following day.
(L.L. 2025/083, 6/27/2025, eff. 9/25/2025)
Chapter 19: Force-Fed Products
§ 17-1901 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the following
meanings:
   Food service establishment. The term "food service establishment" means a
place where food is provided for individual portion service directly to the
consumer whether such food is provided free of charge or sold, and whether
consumption occurs on or off the premises or is provided from a pushcart, stand
or vehicle.
   Force-fed product. The term "force-fed product" means any product that is
the result of force-feeding a bird, including but not limited to a duck or a
goose, with the intent to fatten or enlarge the bird's liver.
   Force-feeding. The term "force-feeding" means the practice of forcing, by
any means, food or supplements into the throat, esophagus, crop or stomach of
an animal.
   Retail food establishment. The term "retail food establishment" means a
supermarket, grocery store, specialty food store or farmer's market.
(L.L. 2019/202, 11/25/2019, eff. 11/25/2022)
§ 17-1902 Prohibited conduct.
No retail food establishment or food service establishment, or agent thereof,
shall store, keep, maintain, offer for sale, or sell any force-fed product or
food containing a force-fed product. For purposes of this chapter, it shall be
a rebuttable presumption that an item in a retail food establishment or food
service establishment having the label "foie gras" or listed on a menu as "foie
gras" is a force-fed product. A party seeking to rebut such presumption shall
provide documentary evidence proving that the product they are storing,
keeping, maintaining, offering for sale, or selling is not a force-fed product
as defined in this chapter.
(L.L. 2019/202, 11/25/2019, eff. 11/25/2022)
§ 17-1903 Enforcement.
   a.   Any person who is found to violate any provision of this chapter shall
be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $500 and not more than $2,000
for each violation. Each such violation may be treated as a separate and
distinct offense, and in the case of a continuing violation, each day's
continuance thereof may be treated as a separate and distinct offense.
   b.   The department shall commence a proceeding to recover a civil penalty
in connection with a food service establishment by service of notice of
violation returnable at the office of administrative trials and hearings or
within any agency of the city designated to conduct such proceedings. The
department of consumer affairs shall commence a proceeding to recover a civil
penalty in connection with a retail food establishment by service of a notice
of violation returnable at the office of administrative trials and hearings or
within any agency of the city designated to conduct such proceedings.
(L.L. 2019/202, 11/25/2019, eff. 11/25/2022)
Chapter 20: Primary Care Services and Patient Navigation Program
§ 17-2001 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
   Department. The term "department" means the department of health and mental
hygiene or such other agency or entity as the mayor may designate.
   Epic care link. The term "epic care link" means a web based application that
connects organizations to their community affiliates and allows for referrals
into the city's public health care system.
   Patient navigator program. The term "patient navigator program" means a
program which assists patients in accessing primary care and specialty services
and in coordinating such care.
   Portable monitoring device. The term "portable monitoring device" means a
portable electronic device that measures patient vital signs, including, but
not limited to, a blood pressure monitor or glucometer.
   Primary care services. The term "primary care services" means medical
services for which participants shall have a primary care physician or primary
care practitioner, as such terms are defined in section 901 of the public
health law, to help develop, direct and coordinate their plan and course of
care and health management, including referrals for testing and specialty
services and management of chronic conditions and diseases.
   Telehealth device. The term "telehealth device" means a portable electronic
device, capable of audio and visual telecommunication between a patient and a
health care professional, including, but not limited to, a tablet device,
laptop, or similar wireless or cellular communication device.
   Telemedicine service. The term "telemedicine service" means a system that
allows health care professionals to evaluate, diagnose and treat patients using
telecommunications technology.
   Telepatient population. The term "telepatient population" means persons who
may benefit from telemedicine services, or for whom regular in-person access to
healthcare professionals is not reasonably feasible, including, but not limited
to, elderly persons, persons with disabilities, and incarcerated persons.
(L.L. 2021/107, 10/10/2021, eff. 10/10/2022; Am. L.L. 2023/059, 5/12/2023, eff.
5/12/2023)
§ 17-2002 Primary care services and patient navigation program.
   a.   The department shall, consistent with any applicable federal, state or
local laws, develop and manage a primary care services and patient navigation
program (PCSPNP). No individual shall be excluded from PCSPNP due to their
immigration status, employment status or a preexisting medical condition.
   b.   1.   PCSPNP shall offer individuals primary care services and
applicable patient navigator services.
      2.   Primary care services shall be offered by medical service providers,
which shall include facilities operated by the New York city health and
hospitals corporation and federally qualified health centers, as such term is
defined in section 1395x(aa) of title 42 of the United States code, and may
include other not-for-profit and private medical service providers. The
department shall ensure that providers offer culturally responsive care that
meets the primary language and cultural needs of those they serve.
      3.   The department shall ensure that primary care services are provided
in each community district and that at least one participating acute care
hospital providing specialty services is provided in each borough. In the event
that the department, after making significant efforts, is unable to ensure
primary care services in each district, the department shall issue a report to
the speaker of the city council and post such report on the department's
website listing any community districts in which the department failed to
ensure primary care services as well as any borough in which the department
failed to ensure an acute care hospital and the reasons for such failure. Such
report shall be issued within one year of the effective date of the local law
that added this section.
      4.   The department shall ensure that any provider that opts in to
participate in PCSPNP will have access to EPIC care link and training on its
use.
   c.   The department shall offer a telemedicine service providing access for
patients 24 hours per day, seven days per week.
   d.   PCSPNP participating providers shall be offered the ability to connect
to a regional health information organization for the electronic exchange of
clinical information.
   e.   PCSPNP may impose a sliding scale fee schedule based on an individual's
ability to pay for medical services provided but may not charge a participation
fee. Such sliding scale fee schedule may correspond with the schedule set by
federally qualified health centers, as such term is defined in section 1395x
(aa) of title 42 of the United States code.
   f.   The department shall maintain a website accessible to the public with
information about how providers and patients can opt in to PCSPNP.
   g.   The department may enter into contracts or agreements with third
parties to implement the provisions of this chapter, including administering
PCSPNP and managing communication with participants.
(L.L. 2021/107, 10/10/2021, eff. 10/10/2022)
§ 17-2003 Telemedicine accessibility plan.
   a.   The department shall develop a telemedicine accessibility plan to
improve the availability and accessibility of telemedicine services for the
telepatient population. Such plan shall include, but need not be limited to,
the following:
      1.   Procedures for providing or making available portable monitoring
devices to telepatient populations;
      2.   Procedures for providing or making available telehealth devices to
telepatient populations;
      3.   Outreach to telepatient populations to provide information on
telemedicine services;
      4.   Outreach to health care professionals to improve the availability
and accessibility of telemedicine services and implement best practices for
providing such services; and
      5.   The provision of language translation and interpretation services
for telepatient populations that require such services to safely and properly
use portable monitoring devices and telehealth devices.
   b.   No later than 1 year after the effective date of the local law that
added this section, and annually thereafter, the department shall submit to the
mayor and the speaker of the council a report on the telemedicine plan required
by this section, including the number and type of portable monitoring devices
and telehealth devices it has provided or made available, and the locations
where such devices were provided or made available.
(L.L. 2023/059, 5/12/2023, eff. 5/12/2023)
Chapter 21: Nightlife Opioid Antagonist Program
§ 17-2101 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
   Nightlife establishment. The term "nightlife establishment" means an
establishment in the city that is open to the public for entertainment or
leisure and serves alcohol or where alcohol is consumed on the premises. Such
term includes, but is not limited to, bars, entertainment venues, clubs and
restaurants.
   Opioid antagonist. The term "opioid antagonist" means naloxone, narcan or
any other medication approved by the New York state department of health and
the federal food and drug administration that, when administered, negates or
neutralizes in whole or in part the pharmacological effects of an opioid in the
human body.
(L.L. 2022/092, 10/12/2022, eff. 2/9/2023)
§ 17-2102 Nightlife opioid antagonist program.
The commissioner shall coordinate with the director of the office of nightlife
to establish a program whereby an employee of a nightlife establishment may
request an opioid antagonist from the department that is intended to be
administered to individuals on the premises of such establishment. Such program
shall be operated in compliance with existing federal, state and local laws,
rules and regulations relating to the distribution of an opioid antagonist.
(L.L. 2022/092, 10/12/2022, eff. 2/9/2023)
§ 17-2103 Terms and conditions.
   a.   An employee of a nightlife establishment may request up to 5 kits of an
opioid antagonist at one time.
   b.   To request an opioid antagonist, such employee shall provide the
following information to the department:
      1.   Name, mailing address, zip code and contact information of such
employee or establishment;
      2.   Number and type of opioid antagonist kits requested; and
      3.   Any other information the department determines is required to
provide an opioid antagonist to such employee.
   c.   The department shall not charge a fee for receiving an opioid
antagonist.
   d.   Such employee shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local
laws, rules and regulations, including the requirements of this chapter.
(L.L. 2022/092, 10/12/2022, eff. 2/9/2023)
§ 17-2104 Training and administration of an opioid antagonist.
The department shall offer a nightlife establishment resources and training for
employees on opioid overdose prevention and administration of an opioid
antagonist. An employee of a nightlife establishment who has received such
training, who has received training from another opioid overdose prevention
program approved pursuant to section 3309 of the public health law, or who is
otherwise in compliance with relevant federal, state and local laws, rules, and
regulations regarding the administration of opioid antagonists may administer
an opioid antagonist to a person such employee reasonably believes is
experiencing an opioid overdose.
(L.L. 2022/092, 10/12/2022, eff. 2/9/2023)
§ 17-2105 Disclaimer of liability for nightlife establishments and their
employees.
The administration of an opioid antagonist pursuant to this chapter shall be
considered first aid or emergency treatment for the purpose of any statute
relating to liability. A nightlife establishment or an employee of such
establishment, acting reasonably and in good faith in compliance with this
section and section 3309 of the public health law, shall not be subject to
criminal, civil or administrative liability solely by reason of such action.
Nothing contained in this chapter or in the administration or application
hereof shall be construed as creating any private right of action against a
nightlife establishment or an employee of such establishment for use of or
failure to use an opioid antagonist in the event of an overdose.
(L.L. 2022/092, 10/12/2022, eff. 2/9/2023)
§ 17-2106 Construction.
Nothing in this chapter prohibits any other program or policy to provide an
opioid antagonist to any person allowed to obtain and use an opioid antagonist
in accordance with federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations.
(L.L. 2022/092, 10/12/2022, eff. 2/9/2023)
§ 17-2107 Report.
   a.   No later than March 1, 2023, and annually thereafter, the department
shall submit a report to the mayor and the speaker of the council on the
program established by this chapter.
   b.   Such report shall include, but need not be limited to, the following
information for the previous calendar year:
      1.   The total number of opioid antagonist trainings offered by the
department to an employee of a nightlife establishment; and
      2.   The total number of opioid antagonist kits provided to an employee
of a nightlife establishment, disaggregated by zip code.
(L.L. 2022/092, 10/12/2022, eff. 2/9/2023)
Chapter 22: Interference with Reproductive or Gender-Affirming Health Care
§ 17-2201 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
   Gender-affirming health care. The term “gender-affirming health care” has
the same meaning as the term “gender-affirming care” as set forth in
subdivision a of section
10-184.1.
   Reproductive health care. The term “reproductive health care” has the same
meaning as the term “reproductive health care” as set forth in subdivision a of
section
17-199.2.1.
(L.L. 2025/072, 5/24/2025, eff. 5/24/2025)
§ 17-2202 Claim for interference with reproductive or gender-affirming health
care.
   a.   A person may bring a civil action for interference with reproductive or
gender-affirming health care when a civil action is commenced against such
person in any state, for which liability, in whole or in part, or any theory of
vicarious, joint, several, or conspiracy liability derived therefrom, is based
on the provision, receipt, assistance in receipt or provision of, or material
support for reproductive health care or gender-affirming health care that was
lawfully provided in the city.
   b.   A claim for interference with reproductive health care or gender-
affirming health care under subdivision a of this section may not be based upon
the commencement of any civil action that is founded in tort, contract, or
statute and for which a similar claim would exist under the laws of the state
of New York or of the city and which is:
      1.   Brought by the patient who received such health care, or the
patient’s authorized legal representative, for damages suffered by the patient
or damages derived from an individual's loss of consortium of the patient; or
      2.   Brought by a party with a contractual relationship with the person
that is the subject of the action.
   c.   A plaintiff who prevails on a claim alleging interference with
reproductive health care or gender-affirming health care under subdivision a of
this section shall be awarded statutory damages of $10,000. In addition, the
court, in issuing a final order in any action brought pursuant to this section,
may award costs of litigation to the prevailing party whenever the court
determines such an award is appropriate. This section does not limit or
abrogate any claim or cause of action such person has under common law or by
other law or rule.
(L.L. 2022/076, 8/12/2022, eff. 8/12/2022; Am. L.L. 2025/072, 5/24/2025, eff.
5/24/2025)
