**** Subchapter 9: Office of Community Mental Health ****
§ 3-190 Definitions.
For purposes of this subchapter, the following terms have the following
meanings:
   Designated citywide languages. The term “designated citywide languages” has
the same meaning set forth in subdivision a of section
23-1101.
   LGBTQI+. The term “LGBTQI+” means lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender,
queer, questioning, intersex, gender non-conforming, or non-binary.
   Office. The term “office” means the mayor’s office of community mental
health created pursuant to section 20-m of the New York city charter.
   Relevant agencies. The term “relevant agencies” means any agencies included
in the city’s database of support, crisis intervention, and information and
referral services for anyone seeking help for mental health or substance use
concerns.
   Relevant organization. The term “relevant organization” means an
organization that provides services, including, but not limited to, crisis,
housing, inpatient care, legal, outpatient care, and substance use services to
an individual with a mental health need or to persons caring for such an
individual.
(L.L. 2023/106, 7/23/2023, eff. 1/19/2024)
§ 3-191 Online database.
   a.   The office shall maintain on its website access to a publicly
accessible, searchable online database of mental health services that are
provided by any relevant agencies and relevant organizations in the city, to
the extent such agencies or organizations provide the city with information
about mental health services they offer. The office shall indicate on its
website that such database is searchable by program focus category, which may
include but need not be limited to caregivers, immigrants, undocumented
individuals, refugees, asylees, justice-involved individuals, LGBTQI+
individuals, homebound individuals, and children and adolescents. The office
shall indicate on its website that such database is searchable by service
subcategories, which may include but need not be limited to crisis, housing,
inpatient care, legal, outpatient care, and substance use services. The office
shall indicate on its website that, to the extent provided to the city for
inclusion in the database, such database information includes, but is not
limited to, the following information for each relevant agency and relevant
organization:
      1.   Address, office hours, and contact information;
      2.   Mental health services provided;
      3.   Payment information, including types of insurance accepted;
      4.   The languages in which services are provided;
      5.   Whether such services are provided in person or remotely;
      6.   Whether such services are provided via peers; and
      7.   Whether such services are accessible to persons with disabilities.
(L.L. 2023/106, 7/23/2023, eff. 1/19/2024)
§ 3-192. Outreach.
   a.   General requirements; accessibility. The office shall coordinate with
relevant agencies and relevant organizations to support the city’s efforts to
coordinate, facilitate, or conduct culturally appropriate outreach in the
designated citywide languages regarding mental health resources, including
access to the online database described in section
3-191.
   b.   Mental health resources for parents. The office, or another agency
designated by the mayor, shall conduct outreach and education activities to
raise awareness about city resources for addressing mental health challenges
faced by parents. Such resources shall relate to topics including, but not
limited to, perinatal mood and anxiety disorders. The materials for such
outreach and education activities shall reflect the most current information
regarding the availability of such resources. Such materials shall also include
information regarding state and federal mental health resources for parents.
(L.L. 2023/106, 7/23/2023, eff. 1/19/2024; Am. L.L. 2024/102, 10/26/2024, eff.
4/24/2025)
§ 3-193 Interactive map of mental health service providers.
The office, in consultation with relevant agencies, shall maintain, through its
website, access to a publicly accessible interactive map of the mental health
services included in the database described in section
3-191. The office shall indicate on its website that such map provides access
to the following information on each mental health service provider, to the
extent such information is provided to the city:
   1.   Address, office hours, and contact information;
   2.   Mental health services provided; and
   3.   Payment information.
(L.L. 2023/117, 8/13/2023, eff. 1/19/2024)
§ 3-194 Report on involuntary removals.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the term “involuntary
removal” means any removal of a person pursuant to subdivision (a) of section
9.41 of the mental hygiene law or subdivision (a) of section 9.58 of the mental
hygiene law.
   b.   On or before January 1, 2025, and annually thereafter, the office, in
coordination with the police department, the fire department, the department of
health and mental hygiene, and other relevant agencies, shall provide to the
speaker of the council and post on its website a report regarding involuntary
removals conducted during the preceding calendar year. The report must include,
to the extent such information is obtainable, but need not be limited to:
      1.   The number of involuntary removals conducted pursuant to subdivision
(a) of section 9.41 of the mental hygiene law;
      2.   The number of involuntary removals conducted pursuant to subdivision
(a) of section 9.58 of the mental hygiene law;
      3.   The number of 911 calls that resulted in the involuntary removal or
transportation of an individual;
      4.   Information, in the aggregate, regarding the zip codes from which
individuals subject to involuntary removal were removed, including whether an
individual was removed from a private dwelling or a public space, such as a
park or the public transportation system, or temporary emergency housing;
      5.   Demographic information, in the aggregate, of individuals subject to
involuntary removal, including age, race, ethnicity, disability status, and
whether such individuals were experiencing homelessness; and
      6.   Information, in the aggregate, regarding whether individuals subject
to involuntary removal were transported, and, where available, were admitted,
to a hospital, and if so, the names and addresses of each hospital to which
such individuals were transported or admitted.
   c.   No information that is otherwise required to be reported pursuant to
this section shall be reported in a manner that would violate any applicable
provision of federal, state, or local law relating to the privacy of
individuals subject to involuntary removal or information related to such
removal; interfere with law enforcement investigations; or otherwise conflict
with the interests of law enforcement.
   d.   The office shall include an explanation in the report required by this
section for the omission of any information required by subdivision b of this
section, and include steps the office or relevant agency plans to take to
obtain such information for future reports.
(L.L. 2023/116, 8/13/2023, eff. 1/19/2024)
§ 3-195 Community outreach regarding the availability of mental health
resources in response to violent and traumatic incidents.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the term “mental health
resources” means in-person, online, telephonic, or telehealth resources
including, but not limited to, suicide and crisis hotlines, and the online
services database as provided in section
3-101.
   b.   Upon receiving notice of a violent or traumatic incident from the
police department as required pursuant to section
14-119.1, the office, and any additional mayoral office or agency designated by
the mayor, shall conduct outreach to the local community in which such violent
or traumatic incident occurred regarding the availability of mental health
resources.
(L.L. 2025/018, 2/22/2025, eff. 2/22/2026)
§ 3-196 Mental health emergency response reporting.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      B-HEARD. The term “B-HEARD” means the behavioral health emergency
assistance response division program of the office, or any successor division
or program with the same or substantially similar functions.
      Involuntary removal. The term “involuntary removal” means any removal of
a person pursuant to section 9.41 of the mental hygiene law or subdivision (a)
of section 9.58 of the mental hygiene law.
      Mental health emergency call. The term “mental health emergency call”
means a call to the 911 emergency assistance system that, after the call is
complete, is classified, coded, or otherwise identified in the intergraph
computer aided dispatch system or the emergency medical service computer aided
dispatch system, or both, as an emotionally disturbed person or any
subcategories thereof, including any successor term or subcategory, as
determined by the fire department or police department.
      Use of force incident. The term “use of force incident” has the same
meaning as set forth in subdivision a of section
14-158.
   b.   Report. 
      1.   No later than June 1, 2027, and every 6 months thereafter, the
director of the office, in coordination with the police commissioner,
commissioner of information technology and telecommunications, fire
commissioner, commissioner of health and mental hygiene, and any other relevant
agency head, and in consultation with the New York city health and hospitals
corporation, shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and post
to the office’s website, a report regarding mental health emergency calls
received during the 6 month period ending 30 days before such report is due.
Such report shall include, but need not be limited to, the following, to the
extent such information is maintained by the relevant agencies:
         (a)   The total number of mental health emergency calls, disaggregated
by the 911 emergency assistance program dispatch code;
         (b)   The total number of mental health emergency calls identified as
eligible for B-HEARD;
         (c)   The total number of mental health emergency calls identified as
eligible for B-HEARD where B-HEARD is dispatched in response to such
emergencies;
         (d)   The total number of mental health emergency calls responded to
by entities other than B-HEARD, disaggregated by type of entity responding,
including, but not limited to, law enforcement and emergency medical services;
         (e)   The average response time between the mental health emergency
call and arrival on scene for each type of entity identified pursuant to
subparagraph (d) of this paragraph;
         (f)   The number of mental health emergency calls in response to which
additional responding units were requested, disaggregated by type of entity of
additional responder requested;
         (g)   The number of mental health emergency calls in response to which
assistance was accepted, disaggregated by type of assistance, including, but
not limited to, on-site treatment, transport to a hospital, or referral to a
community-based organization;
         (h)   The number of mental health emergency calls in response to which
assistance was refused, disaggregated by outcome, including, but not limited
to, involuntary removal, arrest, issuance of a summons, or the person being
left at the scene;
         (i)   The number of mental health emergency calls for which the
response involved a use of force incident;
         (j)   Aggregated demographic information about the subjects of the
mental health emergency calls, including their age in ranges to be determined
by the fire department and police department, race, ethnicity, disability
status, and whether they were experiencing homelessness, to the extent such
information is obtainable; and
         (k)   The aggregate locations reported in mental health emergency
calls disaggregated by: (i) patrol precinct, as specified by the police
department, (ii) emergency medical services zone, as specified by the fire
department, and (iii) borough.
      2.   The report required pursuant to paragraph 1 of this subdivision
shall include a data dictionary or other explanation of abbreviations, codes or
acronyms used.
      3.   No information that is required to be reported pursuant to paragraph
1 of this subdivision shall be reported in a manner that would violate any
applicable provision of federal, state, or local law relating to the privacy of
information.
      4.   The report required pursuant to paragraph 1 of this subdivision may
include data sourced from different data systems, and the report may therefore
reflect inconsistencies across categories of data.
(L.L. 2026/090, 5/16/2026, eff. 5/16/2026)
