Chapter 2: Department of Probation
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2010/029.
§ 9-201 Probation administrative fee.
   a.   In accordance with section 257-c of the executive law, any individual
currently serving or who shall be sentenced to a period of probation upon
conviction of any crime under article thirty-one of the vehicle and traffic law
shall pay to the department of probation an administrative fee of thirty
dollars per month.
   b.   The provisions of subdivision six of section 420.10 of the criminal
procedure law shall govern for purposes of collection of the administrative
fee.
   c.   The administrative fee authorized by this subdivision shall not
constitute, nor be imposed, as a condition of probation.
   d.   The department of probation shall waive all or part of the
administrative fee where, because of the indigence of the offender, the payment
of the administrative fee would work an unreasonable hardship on the person
convicted, his or her immediate family, or any other person who is dependent on
such person for financial support.
   e.   In the event of non-payment of any fees that have not been waived by
the department of probation, the city of New York may seek to enforce payment
in any manner permitted by law for enforcement of a debt.
   f.   Monies collected pursuant to this section shall be utilized for
probation services by the department of probation.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2010/029.
§ 9-202 Investigation fee.
   a.   In accordance with section 252-a of the family court act, when ordered
by the court to conduct an investigation pursuant to section six hundred fifty-
three of the family court act, the department of probation shall receive an
investigation fee of not less than fifty dollars and not more than five hundred
dollars from the parties in such proceeding for performing such investigation.
   b.   Such investigation fee shall be determined by the court based on the
party's ability to pay the fee, and the schedule for payment shall be fixed by
the court issuing the order for investigation, pursuant to the guidelines
issued by the director of the New York state division of probation and
correctional alternatives.
   c.   The court, in its discretion, may waive the investigation fee when the
parties lack sufficient means to pay the fee.
   d.   The court shall apportion the investigation fee between the parties
based upon the respective financial circumstances of the parties and the
equities of the case.
   e.   Fees pursuant to this section shall be paid directly to the department
of probation to be retained and utilized for local probation services.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2010/029.
§ 9-203 Probation recidivism and violations report.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have
the following meanings:
      Adjust. The term "adjust" has the same meaning as the process described
in section 308.1 of the New York family court act, or any successor statute.
      Department. The term "department" means the New York city department of
probation.
      Probationer. The term "probationer" means a person the department has
been ordered to supervise.
   b.   By January 30, 2026, and no later than June 30 and January 30
thereafter, the department shall provide to the council and publish on its
website a report regarding recidivism and probation violations. Such report
shall include the information required by paragraphs 2 through 6 of this
subdivision for every reporting period regarding probationers sentenced to
probation during such reporting period. Such report shall include the following
information for probationers who were under the supervision of the department
during the previous six months:
      1.   The number of probationers, the average monthly number of
probationers, and the number of probationers whose period of supervision began
during the reporting period;
      2.   The number and percentage of probationers who were: (a) arrested for
a non-criminal offense; (b) arrested for any crime; (c) arrested for a
misdemeanor; (d) arrested for a felony; disaggregated by whether such felony is
a violent felony offense as such term is defined by section 70.02 of the penal
law or any successor statute, or whether such probationers were felony drug
offenders or second felony drug offenders, as such terms are defined by section
70.70 of the penal law or any successor statute; (e) convicted of a non-
criminal offense, (f) convicted of a misdemeanor; or (g) convicted of a felony,
disaggregated by whether such felony is a violent felony offense as such term
is defined by section 70.02 of the penal law or any successor statute, or
whether such probationers were felony drug offenders or second felony drug
offenders, as such terms are defined by section 70.70 of the penal law or any
successor statute;
      3.   With respect to the probationers who were arrested for any non-
criminal offense, misdemeanor or felony during their probation, as reported in
paragraph 2 of this subdivision, the number of arrests that resulted in
sentences of incarceration other than time served, disaggregated by such
category of arrest;
      4.   The number and percentage of probationers who were arrested within
the following periods of time from the date of their sentence: (a) 1 month, (b)
3 months, (c) 6 months, (d) 1 year, (e) 2 years, and (f) 3 years;
      5.   The number and percentage of probationers who: (a) were in full
compliance with the terms of their probation, (b) violated the terms of their
probation, in total and disaggregated by whether such violation was based on an
arrest or another ground, or (c) violated the terms of their probation, and
there was filed a related declaration of delinquency, petition of violation, or
similar court filing, in total and disaggregated by whether such declaration
was based on an arrest, a violation of the technical terms of probation, or
absconding;
      6.   The number and percentage of probationers whose period of probation
was successfully completed during the reporting period, and the mean and median
length of their period of probation; and
      7.   The number of cases opened for adjustment during the reporting
period that were monitored by the department, and the number and percentage of
such cases in which those being monitored violated the terms of their
monitoring.
   c.   The information required by subdivision b of this section shall be
reported in total and disaggregated by the following criteria:
      1.   The age of the probationer, where applicable, in the following
categories at a minimum: (a) up to age 15, (b) 16 - 18, (c) 18 - 24, and (d) 25
and older. For the purposes of subdivision b of this section, such age shall be
calculated by using the probationer’s age at the end of the reporting period,
and for the purposes of subdivision c of this section such age shall be
calculated by using the probationer’s age at the time at which their period of
supervision began;
      2.   Whether the underlying case for which the probationer was ordered to
be monitored by the department was classified by state law, or by equivalent
laws of another state, as a: (a) juvenile delinquency, (b) juvenile offender,
(c) youthful offender, or (d) adult criminal case;
      3.   For those probationers for whom the underlying case for which the
probationer was ordered to be monitored was an adult criminal case, or the
equivalent in another state, whether such case was a misdemeanor or felony;
      4.   For probationers who committed a technical violation of their
probation resulting in a related declaration of delinquency, petition of
violation, or similar court filing, the specific probation conditions violated,
disaggregated by the age ranges specified in paragraph 1 of this subdivision;
and
      5.   The risk level of the probationer, as described in section 351.6 of
title 9 of the compilation of codes, rules and regulations of the state of New
York, or any successor regulation.
   d.   The information required by subdivisions b and c of this section shall
be compared to previous reporting periods, and shall be stored permanently and
shall be accessible from the department's website.
(L.L. 2016/090, 8/3/2016, eff. 8/3/2016; Am. L.L. 2025/042, 4/11/2025, eff. 4/
11/2025)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2016/090.
§ 9-204 Probation programming report.
The department of probation shall evaluate the effectiveness of each program
operated by the department. By January 30, 2026, and no later than June 30 and
January 30 thereafter, the department shall submit a summary of each evaluation
to the mayor and the council, and post such summary to the department’s
website. This summary shall include criteria determined by the department,
which shall include, but not be limited to, information related to the
following for each such program: (i) the amount of funding received; (ii) the
number of individuals served; (iii) a brief description of the services
provided, including a program’s length, requirements, and target populations,
where applicable; and (iv) recidivism and compliance rates, if applicable,
provided that such summary may calculate recidivism without using data for
participants who only participated in such programming for a minimal period of
time, where such period of time is identified in such summary.
(L.L. 2016/089, 8/3/2016, eff. 8/3/2016; Am. L.L. 2025/042, 4/11/2025, eff. 4/
11/2025)
§ 9-205 Persons not to be detained.
   a.   For the purposes of this section, all terms shall have the same
meanings as set forth in section
9-131, except that the term "department" means department of probation.
   b.   The department may only honor a civil immigration detainer by holding a
person if:
      1.   federal immigration authorities present the department with a
judicial warrant for the detention of the person who is the subject of such
civil immigration detainer at the time such civil immigration detainer is
presented; and
      2.   a search of state and federal databases, or any similar or successor
databases, accessed through the New York state division of criminal justice
services e-JusticeNY computer application, or any similar or successor computer
application maintained by the city or state of New York, indicates, or the
department has been informed by a court or any other governmental entity, that
such person:
         (a)   has been convicted of a violent or serious crime, or
         (b)   is identified as a possible match in the terrorist screening
database.
   c.   No conferral of authority. Nothing in this section shall be construed
to confer any authority on any entity to hold persons on civil immigration
detainers beyond the authority, if any, that existed prior to the enactment of
this section.
   d.   No conflict with existing law. This section supersedes all conflicting
policies, rules, procedures and practices of the city. Nothing in this section
shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any power, duty or obligation
in conflict with any applicable law.
   e.   No private right of action. Nothing contained in this section or in the
administration or application hereof shall be construed as creating any private
right of action on the part of any persons or entity against the city or the
department, or any official or employee thereof.
   f.   Reporting. No later than September 1, 2018, and no later than September
1 of each year thereafter, the department shall post a report on its website
that includes the following information for the preceding 12-month period
ending June 30:
      1.   the number of civil immigration detainers received from federal
immigration authorities;
      2.   the number of persons held pursuant to civil immigration detainers;
      3.   the number of persons transferred to the custody of federal
immigration authorities pursuant to civil immigration detainers;
      4.   the number of persons for whom civil immigration detainers were not
honored; and
      5.   the number of requests from federal immigration authorities
concerning a person's incarceration status, release dates, court appearance
dates, scheduled appointment dates or times, or any other information related
to such person, and the number of responses honoring such requests,
disaggregated by:
         i.   the number of responses to federal immigration authorities
concerning a person with no convictions for a violent or serious crime,
disaggregated by the number of such responses that included incarceration
status, release dates, court appearance dates, scheduled appointment dates or
times, or other types of information, and whether the department facilitated
the transfer of such persons to the custody of federal immigration authorities;
         ii.   the number of responses to federal immigration authorities
concerning a person with at least one conviction for a violent or serious
crime, disaggregated by the number of such responses that included
incarceration status, release dates, court appearance dates, scheduled
appointment dates or times, or other types of information, and whether the
department facilitated the transfer of such persons to the custody of federal
immigration authorities; and
         iii.   the number of responses to federal immigration authorities
concerning a person with no convictions for a violent or serious crime who were
identified as a possible match in the terrorist screening database,
disaggregated by the number of such responses that included incarceration
status, release dates, court appearance dates, scheduled appointment dates or
times, or other types of information, and whether the department facilitated
the transfer of such persons to the custody of federal immigration authorities.
   g.   Publication of policy required. The department shall publish on its
website its policy regarding requests for information from federal immigration
authorities.
(L.L. 2017/226, 12/1/2017, eff. 12/1/2017 and 3/1/2018)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2017/226.
§ 9-206 Marijuana testing
   a.   The department of probation shall not require individuals on probation
to submit to marijuana testing unless a determination is made, based on an
individual's history and personal circumstances, that abstinence from marijuana
is necessary to otherwise lead an otherwise law-abiding life.
(L.L. 2019/090, 5/10/2019, eff. 5/10/2019)
§ 9-207 Local conditional release commission.
There is hereby established a local conditional release commission. Such
commission shall have the powers, duties, and composition as set forth in
article 12 of the correction law or any successor statute.
(L.L. 2020/060, 6/29/2020, eff. 6/29/2020)
§ 9-208 Youth probation report.
   a.   Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Adjust. The term “adjust” means the process described in section 308.1 of
the family court act, or any successor statute.
      Juvenile delinquent. The term “juvenile delinquent” has the same meaning
as described in section 301.2 of the family court act, or any successor
statute.
   b.   Within 60 days of June 30, 2025, and no later than 60 days after the
end of each quarter thereafter, the department of probation shall submit to the
speaker of the council and post on the department of probation’s website a
report on the number of cases in the previous quarter in the following
categories:
      1.   Juvenile delinquents under 16 years of age at the time of arrest
whose intake cases originated in family court;
      2.   Juvenile delinquents under 16 years of age at the time of arrest
whose intake cases were transferred to family court from the youth part of
criminal court;
      3.   Youth 16 and 17 years of age at the time of arrest whose intake
cases originated in family court; and
      4.   Youth 16 and 17 years of age at the time of arrest whose cases were
transferred from the youth part of criminal court to family court.
   c.   The data provided pursuant to subdivision b of this section shall be
further disaggregated by the following factors:
      1.   The number of youth screened for adjustment in family court, and
further disaggregated by age at the time of arrest, gender, race, the most
serious offense, and age at time of intake;
      2.   The number of individuals whose cases have been adjusted, and
further disaggregated by age at time of arrest, gender, race, the most serious
offense, and age at time of intake;
      3.   The average number of days from an individual’s arrest to adjustment
intake interview;
      4.   The reasons stated for not adjusting an individual, further
disaggregated by, gender, race, the most serious offense, and age at the time
of arrest;
      5.   The number of individuals who successfully complete adjustment and
have their cases diverted;
      6.   The number of individuals who are referred from the department of
probation to the law department for failure to follow conditions of adjustment;
      7.   The number of individuals receiving probation services;
      8.   The number of individuals detained, disaggregated by age at time of
arrest, gender, race, the most serious offense, risk level score, and age at
the time of risk assessment interview; and
      9.   The number and percent of dispositional recommendations for
placement, disaggregated by age, gender, and race.
(L.L. 2024/112, 11/22/2024, eff. 11/22/2024)
