Chapter 31: Department of Sanitation
Section 751. Department; commissioner.
There shall be a department of sanitation the head of which shall be the
commissioner of sanitation.
Section 752. Deputies.
The commissioner may appoint three deputies.
Section 753. Powers and duties of the commissioner.
   a.   Except as otherwise provided by law, the commissioner shall have charge
and control of and be responsible for all those functions and operations of the
city relating to the cleanliness of the streets and the disposal of waste,
including, without limitation, the following:
      (1)   the sweeping, cleaning, sprinkling, flushing, washing and sanding
of the streets;
      (2)   the removal and disposition of ashes, street sweepings, garbage,
refuse, rubbish and waste;
      (3)   the removal of ice and snow from the streets;
      (4)   the removal of encumbrances from the streets and the storage or
disposal of such encumbrances;
      (5)   plans, design, construction, operation, alteration, repair,
maintenance, replacement, enlargement and regulation of the use of
incinerators, landfills and other plants, facilities and equipment necessary
for or useful for performing the functions and exercising the powers and duties
enumerated in this section;
      (6)   the manner in which garbage, refuse, rubbish or waste may be set
out for collection, including, to the extent practicable, ensuring that
garbage, refuse, rubbish, or waste are not placed directly on the street or
sidewalk; and
      (7)   upon designation by the mayor, the cleaning of any other city-owned
property.
   b.   The commissioner may adopt regulations specifying the kind of ashes,
garbage, refuse, rubbish or other material or substance that will be collected
by the city, from whom it will be taken, the manner in which it shall be
arranged or sorted, the time when it will be collected and the place at which
it shall be deposited for collection, and may prescribe civil penalties for
violations thereof.
   c.   Such regulations shall be enforced by order of the commissioner. Such
order shall be addressed to the owner or owners, lessees or premises affected
thereby. It shall not be necessary to designate such owner or owners, lessees
or occupants by name in such order, however, the premises shall be designated
in the address so that the same may be readily identified. Service of any such
order may be made by delivery of a copy thereof to the owner or any one of
several owners, to a lessee or any one of several lessees, or to any person of
suitable age or discretion in charge of the premises, or if no person be found
in charge of the premises, then by affixing a copy of such order prominently
upon the premises. If such order is not complied with within the time specified
therein, the commissioner shall prosecute the person or corporation liable
therefor for the penalty prescribed by the regulation violated in furtherance
of which such order shall have been issued and served.
   d.   The commissioner may adopt regulations controlling the use of sidewalks
and gutters by abutting owners and occupants for the disposition of sweepings,
garbage, refuse or rubbish, and may provide that the violation thereof shall be
punishable by civil penalty, fine or imprisonment. Such regulations shall be
submitted to the council and when approved by it shall be published and
enforced in like manner as local laws.
   e.   Except as otherwise authorized by section 16-1020 of the administrative
code, the commissioner shall have the powers and duties set forth in this
subdivision.
      1.   The commissioner, in the performance of his or her powers and duties
pursuant to paragraph 2 of this subdivision and title 16-B of the
administrative code, shall be authorized to receive complaints, conduct
investigations, hold public and private hearings, administer oaths, take
testimony, serve subpoenas, receive evidence, issue orders, and mediate
disputes.
      2.   The commissioner shall have the power and duty to regulate the
conduct of businesses authorized to collect commercial waste in commercial
waste zones pursuant to title 16-B of the administrative code and any other
applicable law, including but not limited to, the power and duty to establish
and enforce:
         (a)   environmental, safety and health standards;
         (b)   standards for service;
         (c)   requirements regarding contracts for commercial waste removal;
         (d)   requirements regarding billing forms and procedures;
         (e)   requirements regarding the maintenance and inspection of
records;
         (f)   requirements regarding the maintenance of appropriate insurance;
and
         (g)   requirements established in furtherance of the goals of reducing
waste and promoting sustainability, safety and efficiency in the commercial
waste zone system.
      3.   The commissioner shall have the power and duty to establish programs
for the education of the public and commercial establishments regarding the
commercial waste zone system established pursuant to title 16-B of the
administrative code.
   f.   Each inspector or other employee of the department who issues notices
of violation shall, for provisions of law that are enforced exclusively by the
department, have access at the time that a violation is issued to equipment
allowing such person: (1) to determine if such violation is a first-time
violation of the applicable provision of law, and (2) if permitted by law, to
issue a warning for such violation and to record that such a warning has been
issued.
   g.   Upon designation by the mayor, the department of sanitation shall have
the authority to enforce any laws, rules and regulations in force in the city
as they relate to the cleanliness of streets, sidewalks, and the exterior of
city-owned real property. Such authority shall be in addition to and not in
place of the authority of any other agency responsible for such enforcement.
(Am. L.L. 2019/199, 11/20/2019, eff. 11/20/2019; Am. L.L. 2021/159, 12/24/2021,
eff. 6/22/2022; Am. L.L. 2023/068, 5/29/2023, eff. 6/28/2023; Am. L.L. 2024/
117, 12/3/2024, eff. 12/3/2024)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Administrative Code
Appendix A at L.L. 1996/059 and L.L. 2019/199.
Section 754. Duties and obligations of property owner with respect to keeping
vacant lots clean.
Notwithstanding any provision of law, the owner of any property at such owner's
own cost shall keep any vacant lot or lots on such property in a clean and
sanitary manner and free of debris and other litter. The department of
sanitation shall be responsible for the enforcement of this section and may
issue rules and regulations in furtherance of such authority. In the event that
an owner of property fails to comply with the provisions of this section, or
the rules and regulations of such department, the department may provide for
the cleaning of a vacant lot at the expense of the property owner in the manner
to be provided by local law.
Section 755. Definition.
When used in this chapter "street" includes street, avenue, road, alley, lane,
highway, parkway, boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert and crosswalk, and
every class of public road, square and place, except a wharf, pier, bulkhead or
slip by law committed to the custody and control of any other agency.
