Chapter 10: Small Businesses
§ 22-1001 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
   Commissioner. The term "commissioner" means the commissioner of small
business services.
   Department. The term "department" means the department of small business
services.
   Local CDFI. The term “local CDFI” means a financial institution that: (i) is
certified as a community development financial institution by the federal
department of the treasury; (ii) is authorized to do business in the state of
New York; (iii) provides services to persons or businesses in the city; and
(iv) has agreed to provide the department with information relating to services
it provides, in order to be included on the department’s website in accordance
with subparagraph (a) of paragraph 4 of subdivision a of section
22-1002.
   Microbusiness. The term "microbusiness" means a business that employs no
less than one employee and no more than nine employees.
(L.L. 2017/208, 11/17/2017, eff. 11/17/2017; Am. L.L. 2019/151, 8/23/2019, eff.
8/23/2019; Am. L.L. 2023/133, 10/15/2023, eff. 4/12/2024)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2019/151.
§ 22-1002 Online business supports.
Editor's note: this section has been amended by L.L._2026/036,_1/17/2026,_eff.
7/16/2026.
   a.   The commissioner shall post on the city's website online business tools
and resources, including but not limited to:
      1.   Tools provided by the department, which may include accounting,
recordkeeping and bookkeeping resources;
      2.   A searchable and interactive guide to aid current or prospective
business owners in understanding city laws and rules applicable to such
business, including the applicable licenses, permits, and certifications the
owner must obtain. Such guide shall encompass provisions in the administrative
code and the rules of the city of New York, including licensing, permitting,
and operational requirements, that are applicable to the particular type of
business. The guide shall include zoning information and a brief description of
applicable regulations and requirements, written in plain language that is
likely to be understood by business owners; and
      3.   (a)   An online portal, created in coordination with the
commissioner of information technology and telecommunications, to assist with
procedures and requirements to establish and operate a small business in the
city. Such portal shall have a mobile-friendly responsive design and shall
facilitate the processes and procedures for establishing and operating a small
business in the city.
         (b)   The portal required by this paragraph shall be accessible from
the department’s website in English and in each of the designated citywide
languages as defined in section
23-1101. The portal shall make available all city applications and related
information, including applications for permits and licenses, needed to open
and operate a small business in the city, and provide for the submission of
such applications directly from the portal. The portal shall enable a person to
check the status of an application, including for a permit or license issued by
the city, that was submitted by such person or is associated with such person’s
small business. The portal shall also allow a person to settle or pay
outstanding balances on notices of violation, or include a prominent link to a
website that provides such capability.
         (c)   No later than February 1, 2025, and by no later than February 1
of each year thereafter, the commissioner shall submit to the mayor and the
speaker of the council a report on any updates to the portal implemented during
the preceding calendar year. Such report shall also include the number of
questions or complaints the department received about the portal during the
preceding calendar year, and the average time taken to respond to such
questions or complaints;
      4.   Information on loans and grants for small businesses which shall
include, but need not be limited to:
         (a)   Guidance on selecting a lender, including information about
local CDFIs, which shall include, but need not be limited to, a directory of
local CDFIs, and for each such local CDFI, a description of services provided
by such local CDFI, the neighborhood or area of the city in which such local
CDFI operates or provides services, and the types of loans offered by such
local CDFI;
         (b)   Information on specialized services that may be offered by banks
for small businesses, such as a dedicated banking team, merchant services,
business loans, or lines of credit;
         (c)   Information on typical fees, interest rates, monthly charges, or
balance requirements;
         (d)   Potential advantages and disadvantages of having accounts at
multiple banks; and
         (e)   Information about federal deposit insurance corporation
insurance coverage or other protections provided for small businesses deposits;
and
      5.   Such other tools and resources as the commissioner may deem
appropriate.
   b.   Within 30 days after the effective date of a change to a law or rule
referenced in the guide or portal described in subdivision a of this section,
the agency having primary jurisdiction over such law or rule shall inform the
department of such change.
      1.   Within 30 days of being informed of such change, the department
shall update the guide accordingly.
      2.   No later than January 1, 2025, and no later than January 1 of every
third year thereafter, the commissioner, in coordination with the commissioner
of information technology and communications, shall review the effectiveness of
the portal in facilitating assistance with respect to the establishment and
operation of small businesses in the city, and implement any updates or
modifications to the portal deemed necessary and appropriate. Such review shall
include a survey of small businesses.
   c.   This section shall not be construed to create a private right of action
to enforce its provisions or against the city for any action taken to comply
with this section. Inadvertent failure of an agency or the department to comply
with this section shall not prohibit the enforcement of or be a defense to any
violation of any law or rule.
(L.L. 2017/208, 11/17/2017, eff. 11/17/2017; Am. L.L. 2019/154, 8/23/2019, eff.
12/21/2019; Am. L.L. 2022/094, 10/18/2022, eff. 11/1/2023; Am. L.L. 2023/133,
10/15/2023, eff. 4/12/2024; Am. L.L. 2023/137, 10/15/2023, eff. 4/12/2024)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2022/094.
§ 22-1003 Business services including training and education to small
businesses.
   a.   The department shall provide business services including training and
education to small businesses regarding the following subjects:
      1.   Business operations, including the establishment and use of
technological or other systems to deliver goods or services to customers
efficiently, reduce costs, and maximize profits;
      2.   Marketing, including identifying market opportunities, preparing and
executing marketing plans, developing pricing strategies, locating contract
opportunities, negotiating contracts, utilizing public relations and
advertising techniques, engaging in e-commerce, and retail merchandizing;
      3.   Compliance obligations, including education about regulatory
requirements and assistance in understanding laws and rules applicable to small
businesses; and
      4.   Such other training and education as the commissioner may deem
appropriate.
   b.   The department shall conduct outreach to the small business community
in order to advertise such training and education.
   c.   No later than January 1, 2020, and on or before January 1 annually
thereafter, the department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the
council and post on the department's website an annual report regarding
training and education offered to small businesses during the preceding fiscal
year pursuant to this section. Such report shall include, but need not be
limited to:
      1.   The total number of business services including training and
education offered disaggregated by borough and whether such training and
education was offered in multiple languages;
      2.   A general description of each business services including training
and education offered; and
      3.   The total number of people who participated in each business
services including training and education disaggregated by borough.
(L.L. 2019/156, 8/23/2019, eff. 8/23/2019)
§ 22-1004 State of storefront businesses assessment.
a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have
the following meanings:
      Storefront business. The term "storefront business" means a "ground floor
commercial premises" as such term is defined in §
11-3001.*
* Editor's note: Renumbered as section
11-3101 by L.L. 2022/095.
      Storefront business assessment. The term "storefront business assessment"
means an analysis of a community district's storefront business environment,
including, but not limited to, the following factors:
         (i)   district demographics;
         (ii)   number of storefront businesses;
         (iii)   types of goods or services provided by storefront businesses
and consumer spending by each type;
         (iv)   number of vacant storefront properties;
         (v)   physical conditions of storefront businesses, including interior
and exterior conditions of businesses, both occupied by commercial tenants and
vacant;
         (vi)   built environment of the community district;
         (vii)   challenges facing commercial tenants of storefront businesses;
         (viii)   storefront business involvement with community based
organizations; and
         (viii)*   opportunities for promoting various types of commercial uses
and improving the built environment within the community district.
* Editor's note: As numbered in L.L. 2019/152.
   b.   Beginning October 1, 2019 and no less frequently than once every three
years thereafter, the department shall commence a storefront business
assessment in at least twenty community districts in the city. As part of such
assessment, the department shall distribute to and collect from storefront
business owners in the district, a survey that shall include, but not be
limited to, the following requests for information:
      1.   the business owners' demographic information;
      2.   the business owners' access to, and the accessibility of,
information made publicly available by the department and other agencies to
support storefront businesses;
      3.   business entity type and whether each storefront business is part of
a franchise or chain;
      4.   number of owners and number of employees of each storefront
business; and
      5.   number of years each storefront business has been located at its
current location.
   Such assessment shall include input by at least one community based
organization serving the district's storefront business community, or if no
organization is available, a record of outreach to at least three organizations
requesting their participation.
   c.   By September 1, 2019, and every three years thereafter, the department
shall submit to the Council a list of the community districts for which
storefront assessments shall be commenced and the criteria for such selections.
At the completion of each assessment, the department shall make the results of
such assessment including all disaggregated non-identifying survey data,
available on its website.
   d.   The department, in consultation with the departments of city planning
and finance, shall produce a report containing information related to
storefront businesses citywide, which shall be disaggregated by community
district, and include but need not be limited to the following factors: (i) the
number of storefront businesses; (ii) the types of economic activity being
conducted at such storefronts; (iii) data relating to numbers of employees at
such storefronts; (iv) data relating to annual sales and sales tax data at such
storefronts; (v) the number of vacant storefront businesses; and (vi)
demographics. The department shall post such report on its website no later
than 24 months after the local law that added this section takes effect and
shall update such report annually.
(L.L. 2019/152, 8/23/2019, eff. 8/23/2019; renumbered L.L. 2020/090, 9/27/2020,
eff. 1/25/2021)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2020/090.
§ 22-1005 Personal liability provisions in commercial leases.
A provision in a commercial lease or other rental agreement involving real
property located within the city, or relating to such a lease or other rental
agreement, that provides for one or more natural persons who are not the tenant
under such agreement to become, upon the occurrence of a default or other
event, wholly or partially personally liable for payment of rent, utility
expenses or taxes owed by the tenant under such agreement, or fees and charges
relating to routine building maintenance owed by the tenant under such
agreement, shall not be enforceable against such natural persons if the
conditions of paragraph 1 and 2 are satisfied:
   1.   The tenant satisfies the conditions of subparagraph (a), (b) or (c):
      (a)   The tenant was required to cease serving patrons food or beverage
for on-premises consumption or to cease operation under executive order number
202.3 issued by the governor on March 16, 2020;
      (b)   The tenant was a non-essential retail establishment subject to in-
person limitations under guidance issued by the New York state department of
economic development pursuant to executive order number 202.6 issued by the
governor on March 18, 2020; or
      (c)   The tenant was required to close to members of the public under
executive order number 202.7 issued by the governor on March 19, 2020.
   2.   The default or other event causing such natural persons to become
wholly or partially personally liable for such obligation occurred between
March 7, 2020 and June 30, 2021, inclusive.
(L.L. 2020/055, 5/26/2020, eff. 5/26/2020; Am. L.L. 2020/098, 9/28/2020, eff.
9/28/2020; Am. L.L. 2021/050, 4/25/2021, retro. eff. 3/31/2021)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2020/098 and
L.L. 2021/050.
§ 22-1006 Small business legal services.
   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms have
the following meanings:
      Covered legal matter. The term "covered legal matter" means a legal
matter related to a commercial lease, including but not limited to drafting and
negotiation of lease terms, terminating a lease, and addressing other lease-
related issues.
      Covered proceeding. The term "covered proceeding" means any proceeding in
any court of competent jurisdiction against a covered small business tenant to:
         (i)   Evict such tenant, including a summary proceeding to seek
possession for the non-payment of rent or a holdover; or
         (ii)   Terminate such tenancy; or
         (iii)   Establish a breach of the terms of such tenant's commercial
lease.
      Covered small business tenant. The term "covered small business tenant"
means a business that is:
         (i)   A lessee or sublessee in a commercial tenancy located in the
city;
         (ii)   Small, in accordance with the size standards set forth in
section 121.201 of title 13 of the code of federal regulations;
         (iii)   Not a franchisee, as such term is defined in section 681 of
the general business law; and
         (iv)   Owned and operated by one or more persons, all of whom are
income-eligible individuals.
      Designated organization. The term "designated organization" means a
person or entity licensed to provide legal services in New York and designated
by the commissioner pursuant to this section, provided, however, that the
commissioner may give preference to not-for-profit organizations when
designating an organization pursuant to this section.
      In-court legal representation. The term "in-court legal representation"
means ongoing legal representation provided by a designated organization to a
covered small business tenant in connection with a covered proceeding, and all
legal advice, advocacy, and assistance associated with such representation. In-
court legal representation includes, but is not limited to, the filing of a
notice of appearance on behalf of the covered small business tenant in a
covered proceeding.
      Income-eligible individual. The term "income-eligible individual" means
an individual whose annual gross household income is no more than 500 percent
of the federal poverty guidelines.
      Legal services. The term "legal services" means out-of-court legal
assistance and in-court legal representation.
      Out-of-court legal assistance. The term "out-of-court legal assistance"
means the provision of individualized legal assistance or counseling regarding
a covered legal matter provided by a designated organization to a covered small
business tenant, but does not include any representation in a legal action or
proceeding to enforce the terms of a lease or the filing of any papers or in-
court appearance or representation by such designated organization.
   b.   Provision of legal services to covered small business tenants. 
      1.   Subject to appropriation, the commissioner shall provide, at no cost
to a covered small business tenant, out-of-court legal assistance and may
provide, at no cost to a covered small business tenant, in-court legal
representation.
      2.   Any legal services performed by a designated organization pursuant
to this section shall not supplant, replace, or satisfy any obligations or
responsibilities of such designated organization pursuant to any other program,
agreement, or contract.
      3.   Nothing in this section or the administration or application thereof
shall be construed to create a private right of action on the part of any
person or entity against the city or the department, or any official or
employee thereof.
   c.   Reporting. On or before October 1, 2022, and on or before October 1
every two years thereafter, the commissioner shall submit to the mayor and the
speaker of the council a report on the operation of the provision of legal
services provided pursuant to subdivision b of this section during the previous
two fiscal years. Such report shall include, but need not be limited to:
      1.   The number of small businesses that received such legal services in
the previous fiscal year, disaggregated by the following characteristics of
such businesses:
         (a)   Borough and postal code;
         (b)   Number of persons employed by business;
         (c)   Net income of business; and
         (d)   Type of business as categorized by section 121.201 of subpart A
of part 121 of title 13 of the code of federal regulations;
      2.   A description of the aggregate performance outcomes of designated
organizations, information on the geographic areas for which such organizations
provided legal services, and identification of the types of covered legal
matters handled by designated organizations.
   d.   Rules. To the extent the commissioner provides in-court legal
representation pursuant to subdivision b of this section, the commissioner
shall promulgate rules to implement the provision of such representation. Such
rules shall include factors to be considered in providing such representation,
including but not limited to, the procedural posture of such covered
proceeding, the current operational capacity of the covered small business
tenant, and compliance with applicable laws and rules by such tenant or person
commencing the covered proceeding.
(L.L. 2020/090, 9/27/2020, eff. 1/25/2021)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2020/090.
§ 22-1007 Report on workforce1 career centers.
   a.   Definition. For purposes of this section, the term “workforce1 career
center” means a program established by the department to provide job assistance
and training opportunities to adults seeking employment.
   b.   No later than January 31, 2024, and no later than January 31 of each
year thereafter, the department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of
the council a report on the performance of workforce1 career centers during the
prior fiscal year. Such report shall include a list of all workforce1 career
centers in the city and for each such center, during the prior fiscal year: (i)
the number of new registrants; (ii) the number of registrants who obtained
employment utilizing the services of such center; and (iii) the number of
registrants who received job training, disaggregated by industry.
(L.L. 2023/128, 10/15/2023, eff. 10/15/2023)
§ 22-1008 Provision of regulatory education assistance.
   a.   No later than January 1, 2027 and annually thereafter, the department
shall coordinate with any other agency to develop and deliver services to
educate small businesses within each borough regarding regulatory requirements.
Such services shall include but not be limited to outreach and education
specific to similarly situated small businesses within each borough, and may
include other appropriate assistance as determined by the department.
   b.   Any services developed pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall
be made available as appropriate on the portal created pursuant to subdivision
a of section
22-1002. Such services may also be provided as part of a business education
event organized and conducted pursuant to section
20-706.2.
   c.   The department shall include information on the services for small
businesses provided pursuant to subdivision a of this section in the annual
report required by subdivision c of section
22-1003. Such information shall include:
      1.   The total number of services offered regarding regulatory
requirements, disaggregated by borough;
      2.   The primary sector or industry of businesses to which the services
were provided pursuant to subdivision a of this section, if practicable;
      3.   Any other agency with which the department coordinated to develop
and deliver such services; and
      4.   A list and short description of the services offered and the
languages in which each such service was offered.
(L.L. 2025/165, 11/28/2025, eff. 5/27/2026)
