Chapter 56: Department of Small Business Services
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Administrative Code
Appendix A at L.L. 1991/061.
Section 1300. Department; commissioner.
There shall be a department of small business services, the head of which shall
be the commissioner of small business services. The commissioner may appoint
deputies within available appropriations.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Administrative Code
Appendix A at L.L. 1991/061.
Section 1301. Powers and duties of the commissioner.
Except as otherwise provided by law, the commissioner shall have charge and
control of and be responsible for all functions and operations of the city
relating to business and economic development, the enhancement of economic
development and financial opportunity for minority and women owned business
enterprises, and ensuring equal employment opportunity by city contractors.
Such powers and functions shall include, without limitation, the following:
   1.   With respect to business and economic development generally the
commissioner shall have the power and duty:
      a.   to establish business, industrial and commercial policies, programs
and projects which affect the business, industrial, commercial or economic
well-being, development, growth and expansion of the economic life of the city;
      b.   to serve as liaison for the city with local development
corporations, other not-for-profit corporations and all other entities involved
in economic development within the city. In furtherance of this function, the
department shall include in any contract with a contracted entity, as defined
by section 22-821 of the administrative code, under which such contracted
entity is engaged in providing or administering economic development benefits
on behalf of the city and expending city capital appropriations in connection
therewith, the provisions required by subchapter 2 of chapter 8 of title 22 of
the administrative code.
      b-1.   [Repealed.]
      b-2.   By August 1, 2017, and by August 1 every year thereafter, the
entity under contract with the department to provide or administer economic
development benefits on behalf of the city shall assess and evaluate each
business entity to which it provided assistance in the form of a loan, grant or
tax benefit in excess of one hundred fifty thousand dollars, or sale or lease
of city-owned land for a project expected, in accordance with information
provided by the applicant for the sale or lease, to retain or create not less
than twenty-five jobs, to determine whether they met minority and women-owned
business goals, if any, pursuant to the contract. The findings of such
assessments shall be submitted to the department on or before November 1, 2017,
and on November 1 every year thereafter. By January 30, 2018, and by January 1
every year thereafter, the department shall submit such assessment and
evaluation to the mayor and the speaker of the council, which shall include,
but not be limited to: (i) a list of all recipients of such economic
development benefits; (ii) the minority and women-owned business goals for
these recipients; (iii) whether the recipient conducted a good faith effort to
identify and utilize minority and women-owned businesses to achieve such goals;
and (iv) if minority and women-owned business contracting goals were not met by
a recipient, a description of the reasons the goals were not met.
      c.   to study, organize, promote, coordinate and carry out within or
without the city, activities, projects and programs designed to encourage,
stimulate and foster the well-being, development, growth and expansion of
business, industry and commerce in the city, and the enhancement and protection
of the economic life of the city;
      d.   to assist, encourage and promote broadened employee ownership,
particularly through the use of employee stock ownership plans and producer
cooperatives, by conducting research, outreach and public informational
programs pertaining to employee ownership and employee stock ownership plans;
by providing technical assistance to employee groups exploring an employee
buyout, where such an action might be instrumental in retaining a business
within the city of New York; and by ensuring that firms applying for financial
assistance from any entity involved with economic development in the city of
New York shall be correctly advised as to the potential advantages of forming
an employee stock ownership plan;
      e.   to serve as a clearinghouse in connection with efforts to devise
solutions for problems affecting business, industry and commerce in the city;
      f.   to promote and encourage the expansion and development of markets
for city products;
      g.   to promote and encourage the location and development of new
business and industry in the city, as well as the maintenance and expansion of
existing business and industry, and for this purpose to cooperate with public
and private agencies, organizations and individuals;
      h.   to promote, coordinate and implement activities, projects and
programs designed to attract foreign direct investment and promote overseas
sales by firms in the city and to otherwise encourage, stimulate and foster the
well-being, development, growth, and expansion of international business,
commerce, and trade in the city;
      i.   to administer and promote the development of foreign trade zones
within the city;
      j.   to study conditions affecting business, industry and commerce in the
city, and to collect and disseminate such information, make such studies and
carry on such educational activities as may be necessary or useful in relation
to the promotion and development of business, industry and commerce in the
city;
      k.   to maintain a business information service in order to assist
business and industry in the city, and to encourage business and industry
outside of the city to patronize the business and industrial establishments of
the city;
      l.   to make, from time to time, recommendations to the mayor concerning
steps deemed advisable for the promotion and advancement of business and
industrial prosperity in the city and the elimination of restrictions, burdens
and handicapping factors having an adverse effect on business, industry and
commerce in the city;
      m.   to publicize the economic advantages and other factors which make
the city a desirable location for business and industry;
      n.   to collect information and compile and distribute literature and
publicity material dealing with the facilities, advantages and attractions of
the city and the historic and scenic points and places of interest therein;
      o.   to plan and conduct publicity and information programs designed to
attract tourists, vacationers, visitors and other interested persons to the
city, and to encourage, coordinate and cooperate with the efforts of public and
private agencies, organizations and groups to publicize the advantages and
attractions of the city for such purposes;
      p.   to encourage and cooperate with the efforts of public and private
agencies, organizations and groups in publicizing the business, industrial and
commercial advantages of the city;
      q.   to cooperate with and assist any corporation, organization, agency
or instrumentality, whether public or private, the objects of which include, or
which is authorized to act for, the advancement of the business and industrial
prosperity and economic welfare of the city, or the furnishing of assistance in
the location of new business and industry therein, or the rehabilitation or
expansion of existing business and industry therein, or the creation of job
opportunities or additional employment therein, so as to provide support for
any action, efforts or activities for the accomplishment of any such purposes
in the city on the part of any such corporation, organization, agency or
instrumentality; and
      r.   to issue permits for the taking of motion pictures, and for the
taking of photographs and for the use or operation of television cameras and/or
any other transmitting television equipment in or about city property, or in or
about any street, park, marginal street, pier, wharf, dock, bridge or tunnel
within the jurisdiction of any city department or agency or involving the use
of any city owned or maintained facilities or equipment.
   2.   The commissioner shall have the power and duty to exercise the
functions of the city relating to the development, redevelopment, construction,
reconstruction, operation, maintenance, management, administration and
regulation of public markets, wharf property, water front property and airports
within the city of New York including, without limitation, the following:
      a.   to have exclusive charge and control of the public markets of the
city, to fix fees for services, licenses and privileges in connection
therewith, to rent space therein and to enter into leases therefor, and to
regulate all facilities in use as public markets for the public health, safety
and welfare;
      b.   to have exclusive charge and control of the wharf property and water
front owned by the city and of the building, rebuilding, repairing, altering,
maintaining, strengthening, protecting, cleaning, dredging, and deepening of
such wharf property and water front property; provided, that the commissioner
may, subject to the approval of the mayor, designate parcels of wharf property
and water front property to be managed pursuant to this paragraph and leased or
permitted pursuant to paragraphs g and h of this subdivision by the
commissioner of citywide administrative services. Any such designation shall be
made in writing and may be withdrawn by the commissioner subject to the
approval of the mayor;
      c.   to have the exclusive power to enforce with respect to public
markets, water front property and any structures on water front property under
its jurisdiction, the labor law and such other laws, rules and regulations as
may govern the dredging, filling, removal, construction, alteration,
maintenance, use, occupancy, safety, sanitary conditions, mechanical equipment
and inspection of structures in the city, and the issuance of permits and
certificates of completion in reference thereto, and to establish and amend
fees to be charged for the issuance of such permits or certificates of
completion, which fees shall be established by the rules of the commissioner;
      d.   to have exclusive power to regulate water front property and the
following structures on any water front property: wharves, piers, docks,
bulkheads, structures wholly or partly therein, and such other structures used
in conjunction with and in furtherance of water front commerce and/or
navigation;
      e.   to have exclusive power to regulate the use of marginal streets so
that they may be used to the best advantage in connection with wharf property
and to regulate by license or otherwise the transfer of goods and merchandise
upon, over or under all such marginal streets;
      f.   to lease, subject to the approval of the council, any wharf property
belonging to the city primarily for purposes of water front commerce or in
furtherance of navigation. Such leases may be sold at public auction duly
advertised in the City Record for at least ten days prior thereto, and if not
so sold the terms of any lease must be approved by the council by a three-
fourths vote after a public hearing, notice of which shall be published in the
City Record for the six days of publication of the City Record immediately
prior thereto. All such leases shall be for such terms and shall contain such
conditions as may be provided by law. The council shall act within forty-five
days of the filing of the proposed terms and conditions of any such lease with
the council. Failure of the council to act on a lease within such forty-five
day period shall be deemed an approval of such lease. All votes of the council
pursuant to this subdivision shall be filed by the council with the mayor and
shall be final unless disapproved by the mayor within five days of such filing
except that there shall be no right of mayoral disapproval if a three-fourths
vote of the council is required pursuant to this subdivision. Any such mayoral
disapproval shall be filed by the mayor with the council and shall be subject
to override by a two-thirds vote of the council within ten days of such filing;
      g.   to lease, pursuant to review and approval pursuant to sections
one hundred ninety-seven-c and
one hundred ninety-seven-d, any wharf property belonging to the city for
purposes other than water front commerce or in furtherance of navigation,
including, without limitation, commercial, industrial, residential or
recreational purposes. All such leases shall be for such terms and shall
contain such conditions as may be provided by law. No such lease may be
authorized by the commissioner until a public hearing has been held with
respect thereto after the publication of notice in the City Record at least
thirty days in advance of such hearing;
      h.   to grant temporary permits terminable at will for a period not
exceeding three years for the purposes of water front commerce or in
furtherance of navigation and not exceeding one year for other purposes to use
and occupy any wharf property belonging to the city;
      i.   to set aside by order any wharf property belonging to the city,
which has not been leased, for general wharfage purposes or for the use of any
special kind of commerce, or of any class of vessel, or of any agency, and to
revoke or modify such order as to any such wharf property at any time;
      j.   to regulate the charges for wharfage, cranage and dockage of all
vessels or floating structures using any wharf property set aside under
paragraph i of this subdivision, provided that the rates which it shall be
lawful to charge for wharfage, cranage and dockage from any vessel or floating
structure which makes use of any other wharf property within the port of New
York shall be fixed by rules of the commissioner;
      k.   to sell buildings, structures and other improvements on market
property and wharf property to a person leasing such property pursuant to
paragraphs a, f and g of this subdivision; provided, however, that any such
sale of improvements shall be subject to the procedure for review and approval
applicable to the lease related to the improvements;
      l.   to manage and promote the economic development of all airports,
airplane landing sites, seaplane bases, heliports and helistops owned by the
city, and to lease such property, subject to review and approval pursuant to
sections
one hundred ninety-seven-c and
one hundred ninety-seven-d. No such lease may be authorized by the commissioner
until a public hearing has been held with respect thereto after the publication
of notice in the City Record at least thirty days in advance of such hearing;
      m.   except as provided in section
487, to have charge and control of the regulation for the health and safety of
the general public of all airports, airplane landing sites, seaplane bases,
heliports, helistops, marginal streets and parking facilities appurtenant
thereto owned by the city;
      n.   except as provided in section
487, to establish, amend and enforce rules for the proper care and use of all
public markets, wharf property, water front property and all airports, airplane
landing sites, seaplane bases, heliports and helistops owned by the city and
placed in his or her charge or over which he or she shall have power of
regulation, and to issue such orders as may be necessary for such enforcement.
The violation of or the failure to comply with any such order or rule shall be
triable in criminal court and punishable, upon conviction, by not more than
thirty days imprisonment or by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars nor
more than five thousand dollars, or both;
      o.   except as provided in section
487, to have the exclusive power to regulate all privately owned airports,
airplane landing sites, seaplane bases, heliports and helistops and the
operation out of and into such bases as well as the control of ground effect
craft and aircraft operations to or from other sites within the city not so
designated as airports, heliports, helistops, airplane landing sites or
seaplane bases;
      p.   to promote and encourage the expansion and development of the city
as a center for intrastate, interstate and international overland freight
transportation; and
      q.   to administer and enforce the provisions of the zoning resolution of
the city of New York in respect to the following structures on any water front
property: wharves, piers, docks, bulkheads, structures wholly or partly
thereon, and such other structures used in conjunction with and in furtherance
of water front commerce and/or navigation in the same manner and in accordance
with the same procedure as is prescribed therein.
   3.   With respect to energy matters, the commissioner shall have the power
and duty:
      a.   to plan, formulate, coordinate and advance energy policy for the
city;
      b.   to analyze the energy and fuel needs of the city with respect to all
kinds of energy, to prepare intermediate and long-range plans, goals and
programs designed to meet such needs, and to establish priorities among them;
      c.   to develop, implement and manage energy-related programs for
economic development and other purposes, including, without limitation, the
administration of the public utility service established by section 22-301 of
the administrative code, and to exercise all of the functions, powers and
duties of such public utility service; and
      d.   to perform such other responsibilities with respect to energy
matters, including responsibilities delegated elsewhere by the charter, as the
mayor shall direct.
   4.   For purposes of subdivision three of this section, "energy" shall
include work or heat that is, or may be, produced from any fuel or source,
including but not limited to electrical, fossil, geothermal, wind, hydro, solid
waste, tidal, solar and nuclear.
   5.   The commissioner shall have the power and duty to:
      a.   advise and assist the mayor in developing policies designed to meet
the job training and employment needs of the economically disadvantaged and
unemployed residents of the city of New York, as well as the labor needs of
private industry;
      b.   provide job training and employment services for economically
disadvantaged and unemployed residents of the city of New York;
      c.   disburse available city, state and federal funds for job training
and employment programs throughout the city, and, when practical, to coordinate
such funds with available funding from the private sector;
      d.   maintain, operate and control such programs as may be necessary or
required to achieve the objectives of the department;
      e.   promote cooperation among business, labor and community
organizations in response to labor market conditions; and
      f.   promote public awareness of resources available for the economically
disadvantaged and unemployed, and to refer the public to appropriate job
training and employment services.
(Am. L.L. 2016/003, 1/5/2016, eff. 1/5/2016; Am. L.L. 2016/109, 9/28/2016, eff.
9/28/2016; Am. L.L. 2017/222, 12/1/2017, eff. 1/15/2018)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Administrative Code
Appendix A at L.L. 1991/061, L.L. 1996/059, L.L. 2003/052, L.L. 2008/026, L.L.
2013/102, and L.L. 2013/148.
Section 1302. Waterfront plans.
   a.   No marginal street, bulkhead line, pierhead line or other similar line
demarcating the extent of waterfront development may be delineated, established
or changed by the commissioner except in accordance with sections
one hundred ninety-eight and
one hundred ninety-nine of this charter. Any existing waterfront plan
containing such lines shall be continued in effect and may similarly be changed
only in accordance with sections
one hundred ninety-eight and
one hundred ninety-nine. The commissioner may apply to the city planning
commission to incorporate such existing plans for the water front or any
portion thereof into the city map pursuant to the procedure for review and
approval of a change to the city map. Any plans for the water front or portions
thereof so incorporated shall thereafter be discontinued as separate plans.
   b.   No wharf, pier, bulkhead, basin, dock, slip, marginal street or other
structure shall be laid out, built, or rebuilt in the port of New York in the
area subject to the jurisdiction of the commissioner except in accordance with
such plans as changed from time to time, provided, that the commissioner, with
the approval of the council, may from time to time change the width or location
of any of the piers laid down on such plans and build or rebuild temporary
wharf structures or license or permit the building or rebuilding thereof as may
be provided by law.
   c.   The commissioner may widen, open, construct, abandon or close any
marginal street or avenue included in such plans and shall maintain the widened
portion of such street or avenue, or the new street or avenue as a marginal
street, and such new street, or such a widened street to the extent of the
portion so widened, shall not be a public street. Before acting under this
subdivision, the commissioner shall make a report to the city planning
commission including a map showing any proposed change and such other
information as the chair of the city planning commission shall require. If the
city planning commission makes a finding that the proposed change is in
accordance with the water front plan or approves the change, the commissioner
may proceed with it, but if the city planning commission makes a finding that
it is not in accordance with such plan and disapproves the change, then the
commissioner shall not proceed unless the council by a two-thirds vote
authorizes the commissioner to proceed. The city planning commission shall act
on such change within six weeks from the time when it is filed in the office of
the commission and if it does not act within such six weeks period the
commissioner may proceed with the change.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Administrative Code
Appendix A at L.L. 1991/061.
Section 1303. Waterfront management advisory board.
   a.   There shall be a waterfront management advisory board, which shall
consist of one member from within the office of the mayor as designated by the
mayor; the commissioner of small business services; the chairperson of the city
planning commission; the commissioner of environmental protection; the
commissioner of parks and recreation; the commissioner of housing preservation
and development; two city council members to be designated by the speaker of
the city council; nine members to be appointed by the mayor and nine members to
be appointed by the speaker, provided that the mayor and the speaker each
appoint at least one member from each borough. Appointed members shall include
representatives of various organizations, industries and advocates interested
in the industrial, commercial, residential, recreational or other use or
development of the waterfront. The mayor, after consultation with the speaker,
shall designate from among the ex officio members a chairperson. The mayor may
designate additional members of the mayor's office or any mayoral agency as
non-voting members of the board.
   b.   Appointed members of the board shall not hold any other public office
or employment and shall be appointed for terms of three years without
compensation, except that of the members first appointed, three mayoral and
three speaker appointees shall be appointed for terms of one year, three
mayoral and three speaker appointees shall be appointed for terms of two years
and three mayoral and three speaker appointees shall be appointed for terms of
three years. No appointed member may be removed other than for cause to be
determined after a hearing before the office of administrative trials and
hearings.
   c.   In the event of a vacancy on the board during the term of office of an
appointed member, the officer that appointed such member shall appoint a
successor to serve the balance of the unexpired term.
   d.   The ex officio and council members of the board may designate a
representative who shall be counted as a member for the purpose of determining
the existence of a quorum and who may vote on behalf of such member. The
designation of a representative shall be made by a written notice of the ex
officio or council member served upon the chairperson prior to the designee
participating in any meeting of the board, but such designation may be
rescinded or revised by the member at any time. The commissioner of small
business services may designate as his or her representative the president of
the economic development corporation or the designee of the president.
   e.   The board shall (i) hold at least one meeting every quarter; (ii)
consult with and, upon request of the mayor or any city agency, advise the
mayor or such agency on any matter relating to the industrial, commercial,
residential, recreational or other use or development of wharves, waterfront
property and waterfront infrastructure in the city, and on other matters as may
be requested by the chairperson; (iii) create any committees or subcommittees
consisting of at least one board member or their designated representative as
the board deems appropriate to carry out the board's responsibilities, provided
that there shall be a committee on recreational uses of the waterfront; (iv)
invite, at the discretion of the chairperson, representatives of federal,
state, or multi-state agencies, authorities or other instrumentalities to
participate as non-voting members; (v) assist, upon request of the director of
city planning, and provide advice in the drafting of the comprehensive
waterfront plan pursuant to section 205 of the charter; (vi) prepare and submit
reports to the mayor and speaker, when deemed appropriate by the chairperson,
on any issue relating to the industrial, commercial, residential, recreational
or other use or development of wharves, waterfront property and waterfront
infrastructure in the city; and (vii) by January 31 of each year, issue a
report to the mayor and speaker, and post on the website of the city, that
describes each meeting held by the board and any other activities undertaken by
the board for the immediately preceding year.
(Am. L.L. 2016/096, 8/31/2016, eff. 12/29/2016)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Administrative Code
Appendix A at L.L. 1991/061 and L.L. 2016/096.
Section 1304. Division of economic and financial opportunity.
There shall be a division of economic and financial opportunity within the
department.
   a.   The purpose of the division shall be to enhance the ability of minority
and women owned business enterprises and emerging business enterprises to
compete for city contracts, to enhance city agencies' awareness of such
business enterprises, and to ensure their meaningful participation in city
procurement.
   b.   The commissioner shall administer, coordinate, and enforce a citywide
program established by local law for the identification, recruitment,
certification and participation in city procurement of minority and women owned
business enterprises and emerging business enterprises.
   c.   The commissioner shall be authorized to promulgate rules necessary to
implement the purposes of such local law. The commissioner shall consult with
the procurement policy board in drafting and adopting such rules. Such rules
shall define sanctions, consistent with local law, which are appropriate to
remedy violations or penalize contractors for failure to comply with the
provisions of local law or with any program or rule established pursuant to
local law.
   d.   The commissioner shall monitor the implementation of all financial,
technical, managerial, and bonding assistance programs operated by city
agencies to enhance participation by minority and women owned business
enterprises and emerging business enterprises in city procurement.
   e.   The commissioner shall have the following powers and duties to
implement the purposes of this section:
      1.   to direct and assist agencies in their efforts to increase
participation by minority and women owned business enterprises and emerging
business enterprises as contractors and subcontractors in city procurement;
      2.   to develop standardized forms and reporting documents;
      3.   to conduct, coordinate and facilitate technical assistance and
educational programs;
      4.   to periodically review the compliance of city agencies with the
provisions of local law for the identification, recruitment, certification and
participation in city procurement of minority and women owned business
enterprises and emerging business enterprises;
      5.   reserved;
      6.   a.   to establish and operate, on behalf of the city, a centralized
program for the certification of minority owned business enterprises, women
owned business enterprises and emerging business enterprises for the purposes
of establishing the eligibility of such businesses for participation in the
programs and processes established pursuant to local law to ensure their
meaningful participation in city procurement.
         b.   For the purposes of such certification, "minority owned business
enterprise" and "women owned business enterprise" shall mean business
enterprises authorized to do business in this state, including sole
proprietorships, partnerships and corporations, in which (i) at least fifty-one
percent of the ownership interest is held by United States citizens or lawful
permanent residents who are either minority group members or women; (ii) the
ownership interest of such individuals is real, substantial and continuing; and
(iii) such individuals have and exercise the authority to control independently
the day to day business decisions of the enterprise;
         c.   For the purposes of such certification, "emerging business
enterprise" shall mean a business enterprise authorized to do business in this
state, including sole proprietorships, partnerships and corporations, in which
(i) at least fifty-one percent of the ownership interest is held by United
States citizens or lawful permanent resident; (ii) the ownership interest of
such individuals is real, substantial and continuing; (iii) such individuals
have and exercise the authority to control independently the day to day
business decisions of the enterprise; and (iv) such individuals have
demonstrated, in accordance with regulations promulgated by the commissioner,
that they are socially and economically disadvantaged. An individual who is
"socially and economically disadvantaged" shall mean an individual who has
experienced social disadvantage in American society as a result of causes not
common to individuals who are not socially disadvantaged, and whose ability to
compete in the free enterprise system has been impaired due to diminished
capital and credit opportunities as compared to others in the same business
area who are not socially disadvantaged. An individual's race, national origin,
or gender by itself, shall not qualify the individual as "socially
disadvantaged." In drafting such regulations, the commissioner shall consider
criteria developed for federal programs established to promote opportunities
for businesses owned by individuals who are socially and economically
disadvantaged, including criteria for determining initial and continued
eligibility in relation to the net worth of individuals claiming to be
economically disadvantaged, provided that the net worth of an individual
claiming disadvantage pursuant to this section must be less than one million
dollars. In determining such net worth, the department shall exclude the
ownership interest in the business enterprise and the equity in the primary
personal residence.
         d.   To be eligible for certification, a business enterprise shall
have a real and substantial business presence in the market for the city of New
York, as defined by the commissioner pursuant to local law.
         e.   The commissioner of small business services may provide by rule
criteria and procedures for firms certified as minority owned businesses and
women owned businesses by other governmental entities to be recognized as
certified business enterprises by the city of New York.
      7.   to conduct site visits at business enterprises seeking
certification, the basis for which shall be provided by rule, to verify that
such business enterprises are eligible for certification;
      8.   to audit such certified business enterprises and periodically review
and in appropriate cases recertify their eligibility for participation in
programs established pursuant to local law;
      9.   to direct and assist city agencies in their efforts to increase
participation by minority owned business enterprises, women owned business
enterprises and emerging business enterprises in any city-operated financial,
technical, and management assistance program;
      10.   to assist all business enterprises certified pursuant to this
section in becoming prequalified for all categories of procurement for which
they may be eligible and for which contracting agencies utilize
prequalification in the procurement process;
      11.   to prepare, periodically update, and post on the website of the
division a directory of such city certified business enterprises for use by
city agencies and contractors, which shall include information for each such
business enterprise, as applicable, including but not limited to: (i)
identification of the market sector in which the business enterprise operates;
(ii) the bonding capacity of the business enterprise; (iii) the contract price
and specific tasks performed by the business enterprise for its last three
contracts; (iv) the union affiliation, if any, of the certified business
enterprise; and (v) the renewal date for certification;
      12.   to develop a clearinghouse of information on programs and services
available to such business enterprises; and
      13.   to provide such assistance to business enterprises interested in
being certified as is needed to ensure that such businesses benefit from city
technical, managerial, and financial assistance, and other business development
programs.
   f.   Responsibilities of the city agencies. The head of each city agency
shall:
      1.   establish and implement reasonable measures and procedures to secure
the meaningful participation of city certified business enterprises in the
agency's (1) procurement of goods, services and construction and (2) financial,
technical and managerial assistance programs for such business enterprises;
      2.   monitor all city contracts under the agency's jurisdiction for
compliance with programs and policies established pursuant to local law, and
refer and recommend appropriate matters to the division of economic and
financial opportunity and the law department;
      3.   designate a deputy commissioner or other executive officer to advise
the commissioner concerning the activities of the agency in carrying out its
responsibilities pursuant to local law;
      4.   cooperate with and furnish to the division such information and
assistance as may be required in the performance of the division's functions
under this section and local law and the rules promulgated thereunder;
      5.   make available to prospective bidders a current copy of the
directory of city certified businesses; and
      6.   periodically report to the division on activities undertaken to
promote and increase participation by city-certified businesses in its
procurement and any financial, technical, or management assistance program
which it administers.
   g.   Small and locally-based business enterprises. In addition to the
purposes provided in this section, the division of economic and financial
opportunity, or such other bureau or division of the department as the
commissioner may designate, shall administer any programs for small or locally-
based business enterprise programs as may be established by law. The division
of economic and financial opportunity or such other bureau or division shall,
pursuant to applicable local laws, certify such enterprises as are eligible to
participate in such programs, periodically review and recertify their
eligibility, audit business enterprises that participate in such programs, and
publish a directory of participating enterprises.
(Am. L.L. 2020/058, 6/29/2020, eff. 8/28/2020; Am. L.L. 2023/069, 5/29/2023,
eff. 6/28/2023)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Administrative Code
Appendix A at L.L. 1991/061, L.L. 2005/129, and L.L. 2006/012.
Section 1305. Division of labor services.
There shall be a division of labor services within the department.
   a.   The commissioner shall administer the provisions of this section and
enforce a citywide program to ensure that city contractors and subcontractors
take appropriate action to ensure that women and minority group members are
afforded equal employment opportunity, and that all persons are protected from
discrimination prohibited under the provisions of federal, state and local laws
and executive orders with regard to recruitment, employment, job assignment,
promotion, upgrading, demotion, transfer, layoff, termination, rates of pay and
other forms of compensation. The commissioner may request and shall receive
from any contracting agency of the city such assistance as may be necessary to
carry out the provisions of this section. "Minority group member" shall mean a
United States citizen or lawful permanent resident who is a member of a racial
or language minority group in New York city protected by the voting rights act
of 1965, as amended, or such other groups as may be covered by rule of the
agency.
   b.   The commissioner shall promulgate such rules as are necessary to
implement the purposes of this section. The commissioner shall consult with the
procurement policy board in drafting and adopting such rules.
   c.   The commissioner shall have the following powers and duties:
      1.   to implement, monitor compliance with, and enforce this section and
programs established pursuant to local, state and federal law and executive
order requiring contractors to provide equal employment opportunity;
      2.   to implement, monitor compliance with, and enforce on-the-job
training requirements on construction projects;
      3.   to monitor compliance by contractors with state and federal
prevailing wage requirements;
      4.   to advise and assist contractors, subcontractors and labor unions
with respect to their obligations to provide equal employment opportunity;
      5.   to establish appropriate advisory committees;
      6.   to serve as a city liaison to federal, state and local agencies
responsible for contractors' and subcontractors' compliance with equal
employment opportunity; and
      7.   such other powers and duties as may be conferred on the division by
law or executive order for the purpose of ensuring that persons or businesses
which benefit from doing business with the city provide equal employment
opportunity.
   d.   The commissioner shall develop appropriate language for inclusion in
city contracts regarding the subject matter of this section. Such contract
language shall be reviewed by the corporation counsel. Such contract language
shall require that a contractor:
      1.   shall not discriminate against any individual in violation of any
federal, state or local law;
      2.   shall inform any employee representatives authorized to bargain
collectively for its employees of the contractor's obligations pursuant to this
section, and negotiate with such representatives to obtain their cooperation in
the implementation of such obligations;
      3.   shall require that any subcontractor it employs in the performance
of the contract comply with the requirements of this section.
   e.   1.   The commissioner shall require employment reports to be submitted
in such form and containing such information as the commissioner may prescribe,
by contractors to whom agencies propose to award city contracts and their
proposed subcontractors, when such contracts or subcontracts have a value above
a monetary threshold that the commissioner shall by rule establish. The
commissioner may by rule provide for appropriate exemptions from such
requirements.
      2.   An employment report shall include, but not be limited to,
employment practices, policies and procedures, including those related to
preventing and addressing sexual harassment, statistics and collective
bargaining agreements. The contracting agency shall transmit the employment
report to the commissioner after the selection of a proposed contractor or
subcontractor. The commissioner shall review all employment reports to
determine whether such contractors and subcontractors are in compliance with
the equal employment opportunity requirement of local, state and federal law
and executive orders.
      3.   Except as provided in paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 of this subdivision, a
contracting agency may award the contract or approve a subcontractor upon
receiving the approval of the division, or after a number of days to be
specified by rule have passed since it submitted the employment report of the
proposed contractor to the division, whichever is sooner.
      4.   If the commissioner notifies the contracting agency that a proposed
contractor or subcontractor has failed to submit a complete employment report,
the commissioner shall require the contracting agency not to award the contract
or approve the subcontractor until after a complete employment report has been
submitted to the division for its review.
      5.   If the commissioner notifies the contracting agency that the
division has reason to believe that the contractor or subcontractor is not in
substantial compliance with the requirements of this section, the commissioner
may require the contracting agency not to award the contract or approve the
subcontractor until the contractor has agreed to take appropriate action to
come into compliance with such requirements.
      6.   The commissioner may by rule provide for circumstances when a
contract or subcontract may be awarded without the prior approval of the
division, which shall include but not be limited to requirements contracts
which may be awarded prior to the approval of an employment report, subject to
the condition that a purchase shall not be made under the contract until the
division has approved the employment report, emergency contracts, and contracts
with contractors or subcontractors for which the division has previously
approved an employment report.
      7.   The time schedules for actions required to be taken pursuant to this
section shall be defined by rule of the procurement policy board in accordance
with the provisions of section
three hundred eleven.
   f.   Periodic review. The commissioner may require contractors or
subcontractors to file periodic employment reports after the award of a
contract in such form and with such frequency as the commissioner may direct by
rule to determine whether such contractors or subcontractors are in compliance
with applicable legal requirements and the provisions of this section.
   g.   Responsibilities of city agencies. The head of each city, county,
borough or other office, position, administration, board, department, division,
commission, bureau, corporation, authority, or other agency of government,
where the majority of board members are appointed directly or indirectly by the
mayor or serve by virtue of being city officers, or the expenses of which are
paid in whole or in part from the city treasury, including the board of
education, city and community colleges, the financial services corporation, the
health and hospitals corporation, the public development corporation, school
boards, and the city housing authority, shall:
      1.   assist the division in monitoring compliance with the equal
employment opportunity requirements of contracts under its jurisdiction and
refer and recommend matters to the division with respect to non-compliance with
the provisions of this section;
      2.   designate a deputy commissioner or other executive officer to advise
the commissioner concerning the activities and progress of the agency in
carrying out its responsibilities pursuant to this section; and
      3.   in accordance with the provisions of section
three hundred thirty-five, impose remedies and sanctions for failure to comply
with the requirements included in city contracts pursuant to this section.
   h.   Enforcement, remedies and sanctions. Upon receiving a complaint or at
its own instance, the commissioner may conduct such investigation as may be
necessary to determine whether contractors and subcontractors are in compliance
with the equal employment opportunity requirements of federal, state and local
laws and executive orders. If the commissioner has reason to believe that a
contractor or subcontractor is not in compliance with the provisions of this
section, the commissioner shall seek the contractor's or subcontractor's
agreement to adopt and adhere to an employment program designed to ensure equal
employment opportunity, including but not limited to measures designed to
remedy underutilization of minorities and women in the contractor's or
subcontractor's workforce, and may, in addition, recommend to the contracting
agency that payments to the contractor be suspended pending a determination of
the contractor's or subcontractor's compliance with such requirements. If the
contractor or subcontractor does not agree to adopt or does not adhere to such
a program, the commissioner shall make a determination as to whether the
contractor or subcontractor is in compliance with the provisions of this
section, and shall notify the head of the contracting agency of such
determination and any sanctions, including withholding of payment, imposition
of an employment program, or other sanction or remedy provided by law or by
contract, which the executive director believes should be imposed. The head of
the contracting agency shall impose such sanction unless he or she notifies the
commissioner in writing that the agency head does not agree with the
recommendation, in which case the commissioner and the head of the contracting
agency shall jointly determine any sanction to be imposed. If the agency head
and the commissioner do not agree on the sanction to be imposed, the matter
shall be referred to the mayor, who shall determine any sanction to be imposed.
   i.   Confidentiality. To the extent permitted by law and consistent with the
proper discharge of the division's responsibilities under this section all
information provided by a contractor to the division shall be confidential.
   j.   This section shall not apply:
      1.   to contracts for financial or other assistance between the city and
a government or governmental agency;
      2.   to contracts, resolutions, indentures, declarations of trust, or
other instruments authorizing or relating to the authorization, issuance,
award, and sale of bonds, certificates of indebtedness, notes or other fiscal
obligations of the city, or consisting thereof, except as otherwise provided by
law or executive order; or
      3.   to employment by the city of its officers and employees which is
subject to equal employment opportunity requirements of applicable law.
(Am. L.L. 2018/102, 5/9/2018, eff. 7/8/2018; Am. L.L. 2020/058, 6/29/2020, eff.
8/28/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Administrative Code
Appendix A at L.L. 1991/061.
Section 1306. The New York city public utility service.
The commissioner or his or her designee shall serve as the director of the
public utility service established by section 22-301 of the administrative
code.
Section 1307. Dedicated small business advocates.
   a.   There shall be in the department small business advocates dedicated to
helping business owners obtain appropriate services from the department and
other city, state and federal agencies. The duties of such dedicated small
business advocates shall include, but need not be limited to:
      1.   receiving requests for assistance from small businesses with respect
to their interactions with the city, including, but not limited to, agency
inspections, rules, adjudications of violations, technical assistance programs,
workforce development programs, language access, and customer service;
      2.   taking appropriate action to resolve requests for assistance,
including referring such requests to appropriate city, state and federal
agencies; and
      3.   identifying opportunities for policy and program development to
assist the small business sector and improve interactions between small
businesses and city agencies.
   b.   The department shall conduct outreach and education targeted to small
business owners and the general public related to the duties of such dedicated
small business advocates and their role as a central point of contact for
businesses seeking assistance from city agencies. Information indicating how to
contact the small business advocates established pursuant to subdivision a of
this section shall be prominently posted on the websites of relevant agencies.
For purposes of this subdivision, relevant agencies shall include the
department of buildings, the department of consumer and worker protection, the
department of health and mental hygiene, the department of environmental
protection, the department of sanitation, the bureau of fire prevention of the
fire department and the department of small business services.
   c.   The department shall provide an initial written report to the council
not later than April1, 2017, and a second report not later than April1, 2018,
each documenting requests for assistance received by the small businesses
advocates in the immediately preceding calendar year. Each report shall
include, but need not be limited to: (i) the total number of requests for
assistance received by the small business advocates during the reporting
period; (ii) a general description of the type of each such request; and (iii)
a general description of the actions taken by the small business advocates, if
any, in response to each such request.
(L.L. 2015/066, 6/29/2015, eff. 9/27/2015; Am. L.L. 2020/080, 8/28/2020, eff.
8/28/2020)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Administrative Code
Appendix A at L.L. 2020/080.
Section 1308. Youth workforce development.
   a.   For the purposes of this section:
      Disconnected youth. The term "disconnected youth" means youth between the
ages of 18 and 24 years, who are neither attending school nor employed.
   b.   The department shall administer a workforce development program for
disconnected youth. The commissioner shall administer the provisions of this
section to develop programs in consultation with the department of youth and
community development to:
      1.   Identify obstacles impacting disconnected youth who seek the
department's youth workforce development services, including but not limited
to, issues related to transportation, child care, housing, health care and
substance abuse, criminal justice, and language and cultural barriers;
      2.   Ensure that disconnected youth are connected with city agencies or
community based organizations that will enable them to address those obstacles;
      3.   Develop and implement or connect disconnected youth with education
programs that will encourage disconnected youth to explore opportunities to
pursue a college degree or a technical or vocational career education;
      4.   Develop and implement a job training program, based on career
progression, that offers sector based training for high growth industries
including, but not limited to, construction, transportation, technology,
industrial/manufacturing, and health care;
      5.   Connect disconnected youth with financial literacy education
resources offered through the city's agencies and community based
organizations;
      6.   Provide entrepreneurial skills training;
      7.   Connect disconnected youth with on-going follow-up services, such as
adult mentoring, work-related peer support groups, additional education or
career pathway development training, for at least 12 months after they complete
the job training program and/or are connected to employment opportunities;
      8.   Provide information regarding the complete array of services offered
by the department; and
      9.   Make available labor market and employment information about New
York city's high demand industry sectors or occupations obtained from state or
federal government agencies, as appropriate.
   c.   The department, with the assistance of the department of youth and
community development, shall coordinate with the appropriate agencies,
including but not limited to, the human resources administration, the
department of education, the mayor's office, and community based organizations,
to implement the provisions of this section.
(L.L. 2017/113, 7/22/2017, eff. 7/22/2017)
Section 1309. Mentoring program.
   a.   As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
      1.   The term "mentoring program" means a program established pursuant to
this section:
         (i)   to provide mentee businesses with the opportunity for up to four
years, to compete for and, where awarded, to perform certain contracts
designated for inclusion in the mentoring program, with the assistance of a
competitively selected mentor firm that has extensive management and mentoring
experience, with the mentor providing the mentee business with advice and
assistance in competing for and managing contracts; and
         (ii)   to provide to a mentee business that the mentoring program
agency has determined has successfully completed the program under subparagraph
(i) of this paragraph, for up to four additional years: (A) additional
opportunities to compete with other designated mentee businesses in the program
for certain contracts to be designated for inclusion under this subparagraph
and, where awarded, to perform such contracts, with the further assistance of a
competitively selected mentor firm that has extensive management and mentoring
experience, with the mentor providing the mentee with advice and technical
assistance in competing for and managing contracts; and (B) assistance, as
determined by the mentoring program agency, for such a mentee business to
obtain bonding for contracts that are competitively awarded pursuant to any
other provision of law.
      2.   The term "mentoring program agency" means an agency that has
established a mentoring program pursuant to this section.
      3.   The term "mentoring program contract" means a contract designated by
the mentoring program agency, in an estimated amount of not more than one
million five hundred thousand dollars for contracts under subparagraph (i) of
paragraph one of this subdivision and five million dollars for contracts under
subparagraph (ii) of such paragraph, for which bids or proposals are to be
invited and accepted only from businesses that are enrolled in a mentoring
program and have been selected by the mentoring program to compete for the
contract.
      4.   The term "small business" means a business that: is independently
owned and operated; and has annual revenues that do not exceed an average of
five million dollars for the three preceding fiscal years, as calculated at the
end of each fiscal year, or such lesser amount as established by the mentoring
program agency pursuant to this section.
   b.   Any agency may establish a mentoring program for small businesses in
the construction trades.
   c.   Notwithstanding any other law, including section two thousand five
hundred four of the insurance law, except as otherwise provided in subdivision
g of this section, a mentoring program agency shall have the authority to:
      1.   Determine the criteria pursuant to which a small business shall be
eligible for and selected as a mentee business participating in the components
of its mentoring program, as set forth in subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of
paragraph one of subdivision a of this section, the number of mentee businesses
to participate in each such component of such a program, the criteria for the
competitive selection of the firms that will provide mentoring services, and
the assignment of a mentor to a specific mentee business;
      2.   Designate which eligible contracts shall be mentoring program
contracts;
      3.   Establish standards for qualifying mentee businesses to compete for
a mentoring program contract, consistent with subdivision d of this section;
      4.   Determine when bids or proposals for a mentoring program contract
should be restricted to mentee businesses that, prior to the receipt of bids or
proposals, have been qualified for such competition;
      5.   Competitively select, designate, and contract with one or more
experienced firms that, under the general supervision of the mentoring program
agency, will provide mentoring services to the mentee businesses, and assign
such mentors to one or more designated mentee businesses;
      6.   Assist mentee businesses that have been awarded mentoring program
contracts to obtain any surety bond or contract of insurance required of them
in connection with such contract only; and
      7.   Provide mentee businesses technical assistance in obtaining bid,
payment, and performance bonding for contracts that are not mentoring program
contracts, for which such businesses are otherwise qualified.
   d.   If the total number of qualified mentee businesses that respond to a
competition and are considered capable of meeting the specifications and terms
of the invitation to compete is less than three, or if the mentoring program
agency determines that acceptance of the best offer will result in the payment
of an unreasonable price, the agency shall reject all offers and withdraw the
designation of the contract as a mentoring program contract. If the agency
withdraws the designation of such contract as a mentoring program contract, the
mentee businesses, if any, that made offers shall be notified.
   e.   A mentor shall provide construction management services to a mentoring
program agency in relation to a mentoring program contract and services and
assistance to a mentee business, as designated by the mentoring program agency,
including but not limited to the following:
      1.   providing business training in the skills necessary to operate a
successful business and to compete for and perform a contract;
      2.   providing technical assistance to the mentee business to assess the
outcome if the mentee business competes for but is not awarded a contract;
      3.   if the mentoring program contract is awarded to the mentee business,
providing guidance, advice, and technical assistance to the mentee business in
the performance of the contract; and
      4.   providing other technical assistance to the mentee business to
facilitate learning, training, and resolution of other issues that may arise.
   f.   Except as provided in subdivision g of this section, any mentoring
program agency may promulgate rules implementing the provisions of this
section.
   g.   1.   Notwithstanding any other subdivision of this section, the mayor
may authorize any office of the mayor or any department the head of which is
appointed by the mayor to promulgate rules implementing the provisions of
subparagraphs one, three, five, six and seven of paragraph one of subdivision c
of this section; authorizing such office or department to exercise any power
set forth under subparagraphs one, three, five, six and seven of paragraph one
of subdivision c of this section; authorizing such office or department and the
mentoring program agency to jointly manage the performance of any mentoring
program contract, with the assistance of the mentor firm providing services
pursuant to subdivision e of this section; or combining two or more mentoring
programs, which may include the program established under section
twelve hundred six of this charter, into a single centralized mentoring
program, provided that no provision of this subdivision shall limit the
authority of a mentoring program agency to exercise the authority set forth in
subparagraph two or four of paragraph one of subdivision c or subdivision d of
this section or otherwise limit an agency's authority to establish the
specifications for a contract or to award a contract, and provided further that
if the program established pursuant to section
twelve hundred six of this charter is centralized pursuant to this subdivision,
any such rules promulgated pursuant to this paragraph shall apply to such
program.
      2.   If the mayor authorizes an office or department to promulgate rules
combining two or more mentoring programs into a single centralized mentoring
program pursuant to paragraph one of this subdivision:
         (i)   such office or department shall by rule establish a goal for the
aggregate value of mentoring program contracts awarded by mentoring program
agencies participating in such centralized program, which, to the extent
consistent with the budget adopted pursuant to
chapter ten of this charter, shall be calculated as follows:
            (A)   for the first full fiscal year following the establishment of
such centralized program, fifteen million dollars in contract value; and
            (B)   for each year of such centralized program following the first
full fiscal year of the centralized program, a goal that is twenty-five percent
greater than the goal established pursuant to this subparagraph for the
preceding year, provided that such annual goal shall not exceed one hundred
fifty million dollars in aggregate contract value;
         (ii)   all mentees participating in a mentoring program that is
combined into such centralized program shall be deemed selected for
participation in such centralized program;
         (iii)   all mentees participating in a mentoring program established
pursuant to section
twelve hundred six of this charter that are small businesses shall be deemed
selected for participation in such centralized program, provided that such
program established pursuant to section
twelve hundred six of this charter is designated as combined into the
centralized mentoring program by a rule promulgated pursuant to paragraph one
of this subdivision; and
         (iv)   all mentoring program contracts and contracts let pursuant to
section
twelve hundred six of this charter for which an invitation to compete is
released prior to the effective date of rules promulgated pursuant to paragraph
one of this subdivision shall not be subject to such rules.
   h.   Commencing on October first, two thousand twenty-four, the department
shall submit an annual report to the governor, the temporary president of the
senate, and the speaker of the assembly that contains the following information
for the preceding city fiscal year:
      1.   the total number and total dollar value of mentoring program
contracts from each mentoring program established under this section;
      2.   a brief description of (i) each project, (ii) agency compliance with
mentoring program contract designation procedures, (iii) the type of assistance
provided to obtain any surety bond or contract of insurance, and (iv) the type
of technical assistance provided in obtaining a bid, payment, or performance
bonding for mentoring program contracts from each mentoring program established
under this section;
      3.   mentoring program participation rates;
      4.   the participation rate of and total dollar value of monies paid to
businesses certified as minority or women-owned business enterprises or
emerging business enterprises pursuant to section thirteen hundred four of this
chapter or those certified as disadvantaged business enterprises pursuant to
part twenty-six of title forty-nine of the code of federal regulations or any
successor provisions; and
      5.   the degree to which a centralized mentoring program, established
pursuant to subdivision g of this section, has achieved a goal established
pursuant to such subdivision.
(2023 N.Y. Laws Ch. 604, 10/25/2023, eff. 2/22/2024)
Editor's note: Pursuant to 2023 N.Y. Laws Ch. 604, § 7, this section expires on
February 22, 2034.
Section 1309.1. Division of street vendor services.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Department. The term “department” means the department of small business
services.
      Food vendor. The term “food vendor” has the same meaning as set forth in
section 17-306 of the administrative code.
      General vendor. The term “general vendor” has the same meaning as set
forth in section 20-452 of the administrative code.
      Street vendor. The term “street vendor” means general vendor and food
vendor.
   b.   Responsibilities of the division. 
      1.   There shall be a division of street vendor services within the
department. Such division shall:
         (a)   Serve as a clearinghouse for the provision of services and
resources for entrepreneurs interested in street vending opportunities;
         (b)   Publish on the department’s website a list of such services and
resources that street vendors may utilize;
         (c)   Connect street vendors to the department’s programs;
         (d)   Offer business education and conduct outreach in the designated
citywide languages, as such term is defined in section 23-1101, to street
vendors on entrepreneurship and compliance with all applicable local laws,
rules, and regulations, including but not limited to such laws, rules, and
regulations concerning legal vending locations and time, place, and manner
restrictions applicable to vending; and
         (e)   Adjust department programs to facilitate access for street
vendors.
      2.   The education offered pursuant to subparagraph (d) of paragraph 1 of
this subdivision shall be directed toward vendors in areas with a high density
of street vendors and toward vendors in any areas identified by the office of
street vendor enforcement as featuring a high level of complaints about street
vendor activity.
   c.   Reporting. No later than 180 days after the effective date of the local
law that added this section and annually thereafter, the commissioner shall
submit to the speaker of the council and to the mayor, and the commissioner
shall publish on the department's website, a report on (i) the number of food
vendors and general vendors to which the division of street vendor services
provided assistance during the previous year, and (ii) the types of assistance
provided to food vendors and general vendors by such division during the
previous year, disaggregated by percentage.
(L.L. 2026/053, 1/29/2026, eff. 7/28/2026)
